963
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
Avian Influenza Pandemic: Preparedness
*
within the Financial Sector
RAKESH MOHAN
I would like to welcome all of you to India for the disrupting the normal functioning of the financial system.
IMF Seminar on “Preparedness within the Financial Such disruptions require immediate interventions from the
Sector for an Avian Influenza Pandemic”, which has been Government and the regulatory authorities. Thus, the
a source of concern not only for health experts but also scope of business continuity plans that the central banks
and other institutions develop go beyond the avian flu.
for policy makers in Governments and Central Banks
alike. It is important to undertake activities that are Preparedness with effective business continuity plans is
desirable not only for dealing with the issue of avian flu
preventive in nature, so that the probability of an
undesirable event is minimised. The Fund’s efforts to but would also be helpful in case of other contingencies
of any nature.
bring countries that are vulnerable to the pandemic on a
common platform by organising such seminars are highly
In these introductory remarks, I will try to be brief
commendable. It is worth noting that if some thing does
since the programme has a panel of experts dwelling on
not happen, people generally remain unaware about how
several aspects of avian flu. I, therefore, thought that the
much effort went into making sure that it does not happen.
best thing that I can do today is to provide a brief
As I understand, the focus of these IMF seminars is on
overview on the issue mainly from the perspective of the
business continuity planning for a human influenza
financial system. While highlighting the gravity of the
pandemic and issues relevant to central banks, supervisory
avian flu pandemic and challenges for the financial
agencies and regulated financial institutions. At this stage,
system, I would also dwell briefly on our preparedness
the avian flu is not a current problem for India. However,
for the avian flu epidemic.
it always has the potential of becoming a severe
pandemic, however small the probability may be, in case
I. GRAVITY OF THE AVIAN FLU PANDEMIC
preventive measures are not taken in time. It is, therefore,
important to raise awareness among the concerned
The outbreak of any contagious pandemic on a large
authorities. It is toward this end that the IMF is sensitising
scale has always had significant economic impact on the
different countries towards preparing for any potential
affected economies. The outbreak of SARS in 2003
outbreak of avian flu.
proved that even a disease with a relatively small health
impact can have adverse economic implications. The
At the outset, let me make emphasize that, as I
severity of a pandemic can be seen from a historical
understand it, the major part of the subject matter
perspective. According to the World Health Organisation
discussed in this seminar is not specific to avian flu but
(WHO), the Spanish Flu of 1918 was the deadliest in
it could apply to all types of major disruptions in the
which one-fourth of world’s population got sick and 40
conduct of normal business. The important point to note
million people died (2 per cent of global population)
is that though we may believe that the possibility of
(WHO, 2003).
occurrence of a widespread avian flu pandemic is low,
the issues that are discussed in such seminars are still In the early 20th century, science was sufficiently
useful from the point of view of preparedness for any sophisticated to anticipate that influenza, which had twice
reached pandemic proportions in the late 19th century,
unforeseen eventualities that have the potential of
Introductory remarks by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the IMF Seminar on “Preparedness
*
within the Financial Sector for an Avian Influenza Pandemic” at Mumbai on July 24, 2006. Assistance of Rajiv Ranjan and
Rajeev Jain is gratefully acknowledged.
963
C M Y K
963964
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
would recur, but was largely powerless to blunt the There is substantial uncertainty about the potential
devastating impact of the 1918 (H1N1) pandemic. Since economic impact of a pandemic of any given severity. It
then, scientific progress has contributed significantly in is estimated that a modest pandemic lasting over one year
making possible defences against the disease in terms of might cause a loss as high as 3 per cent of Asian GDP
increased knowledge of influenza viruses that has enabled and 0.5 per cent of world GDP. This is presently
new capacity to design and manufacture vaccines and equivalent to about US$ 150-200 billion in GDP (WHO,
antiviral drugs to forestall infections. Yet the world is 2006). In addition to high morbidity and mortality, the
vulnerable to the pandemic, perhaps even more than in pandemic may cause massive social, political and
1918, when the pace and frequency of global travel was economic disruption. According to an estimate, the cost
considerably lower than it is today. Earlier experience to the poultry industry has already exceeded US$ 10
shows that once the pandemic starts spreading, it will do billion across Southeast Asia (United Nations, 2006).
so very fast giving no time to prepare. Vaccines, antiviral Financial costs of a human pandemic are impossible to
and antibiotics would be in short supply and are likely to predict. The World Bank estimates that a severe avian
be unequally distributed. Widespread illness may result flu pandemic among humans could cost the global
in sudden and potentially significant shortages of economy about 3.1 per cent of world gross domestic
personnel. The effect would be relatively prolonged when product, around US$ 1.25 trillion on a world GDP of
compared to other natural disasters. US$ 40 trillion (World Bank, 2006).
Until recently the highly pathogenic avian influenza
H5N1 virus had been concentrated in East Asia,
II. AVIAN FLU AS A MAJOR PUBLIC ISSUE
particularly in Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia and China. 
Given the severity of the possible threat of pandemic,
However, in the last 6 to 9 months, the virus has gone
the avian flu is regarded by some observers as a major
global, spreading to over 40 more countries (Brahambhatt,
public issue and is considered by them to be one of the
2006). As on July 14, 2006, the cumulative number of
major risks to global growth prospects and the financial
confirmed human cases of death on account of avian
system. Therefore, the need to prepare for a pandemic is
influenza (H5N1) stood at 132 in 10 countries as reported
in WHO Fact Sheet. According to WHO, “If the human- becoming an important focus for governments and
to-human transmission is not contained quickly the international organisations, including the International
modern means of transportation will rapidly seed a Monetary Fund (IMF). At the Beijing International
pandemic”. Experts estimate that the next pandemic may Conference, US$ 1.9 billion was pledged to support
cause more than 1 billion cases and up to 7.4 million
efforts at all levels to help fight avian flu and prepare for
deaths. During the current H5N1 outbreaks more than
a possible human flu pandemic (IMF, 2006). The World
150 million birds have been destroyed or died and the
Bank, the World Health Organisation, the Food and
direct economic costs to affected countries amount to US$
Agriculture Organisation, and the World Organisation for
8-12 billion (WHO, 2006).
Animal Health are taking the lead in preparing a global
According to an estimate by the Asian Development coordinated response strategy on the possibility of an
Bank, the economic impact of SARS was around US$ avian flu crisis, and helping members improve
18 billion in East Asia, which comes to around 0.6 per
surveillance and control capacity and to develop national
cent of their total GDP (ADB, 2003). The recent outbreak action plans that focus primarily on human and animal
of the avian influenza (H5N1), popularly known as avian
health. We all know that the Fund can play an important
flu, which started in late 2003, has raised concerns about
role in encouraging its members to prepare for a possible
a new global pandemic as experts fear that the H5N1
pandemic, in facilitating cooperation across the
virus strain will mutate just enough to allow it to pass
membership, and advising members on appropriate
easily from person to person, potentially causing a
macroeconomic policies and helping to support them
catastrophic pandemic as humans lack immunity to it.
with balance of payments financing where this is needed.
According to experts, the avian flu is far more lethal than
The Fund has already indicated that its near-term efforts
SARS. While SARS had a mortality rate of around 15
will focus primarily on helping members prepare their
percent, avian flu, which has now spread from Asia to
economic and financial systems to limit the possible
Europe, can kill up to a third of the infected people.
disruptions that may be caused by a pandemic.
964
C M Y K
964965
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
In the recently held G-8 Summit at St. Petersburg illness, social and economic consequences of a pandemic.
(July 16-17, 2006), understanding the gravity of the A worrisome scenario cannot be ruled out if absenteeism
possible pandemic, the member countries felt that disease and increased uncertainty about operational risks harm
can be dramatically more contagious as the world the functioning of financial markets or financial
becomes ever more interconnected. Airlines now carry institutions. Broadly speaking, financial system effects
an estimated 1.6 billion passengers every year. Trade, might be on account of reduced capacity of markets and
commerce and financial markets are increasingly institutions due to absenteeism.
interrelated. The SARS outbreak of 2003 vividly
These challenges have necessitated preparedness
demonstrated how much the world has changed in terms
within the financial sector so as to minimise the
of its vulnerability to economic and social disruptions
adversities associated with a potential pandemic, the
when disease outbreaks occur. Though it is difficult to
severity of which is still uncertain. A severe pandemic
predict the timing and severity of the pandemic but, for
will not only put substantial pressure on the fiscal balance
the first time in history, the world has the advantage of
of Governments, due to increased spending on health,
advance warning about a potential pandemic. This
public safety, social welfare, and subsidies to businesses
advantage must be fully exploited to enhance global
and lost revenues, but it will also pose challenges for the
preparedness. Similarly, recognising the risk of avian flu,
monetary authorities. For financing the increased need
the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in its Annual
for social spending, financial markets are expected to be
Report 2005-06 (BIS, 2006) reveals that business
thin at best and recourse to central bank borrowing may
continuity planning has received additional priority in
be inevitable for most of countries.
view of the need for increased preparations for a possible
It would be prudent to assume that a severe pandemic
avian flu pandemic, which would primarily affect human
may lead to a surge in demand for liquidity and low risk
resource availability (including dependencies on external
assets. Such risk aversion on the part of economic agents
services). The Financial Stability Forum, which promotes
would lead to at least temporary declines in asset prices
international financial stability, in its 15th Meeting at
and widening of credit spreads, for both corporations and
Sydney (March 17, 2006) warned, “…the uncertainties
emerging markets. Although these effects are likely to be
relating to the timing, severity and impact of a pandemic
temporary, asset price declines could put the balance
are substantial, financial authorities need to consider well
sheets of some financial institutions under stress and they
in advance the potential impacts of a pandemic on
may face challenges in meeting regulatory norms. Banking
financial systems, to make business continuity plans for
stability may not be an issue of immediate concern
their own institutions, to review business continuity plans
because deterioration in asset quality is not expected to
elsewhere in the financial sector and to improve channels
appear quickly and we can perceive them as second order
for communication and coordination, both within and
impact. According to the IMF, a severe pandemic may
across borders” (Financial Stability Forum, 2006).
also lead to a significant but temporary reduction in net
capital flows to emerging markets. Such a pandemic can
III. CHALLENGES FOR THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM
disrupt market operations as well in the case of a
breakdown in the trading infrastructure. In short, we can
Though the possible impact of avian flu would be
contemplate the likely challenges for central banks in the
covered in detail in this seminar, I would like to briefly
context of (i) financing the larger borrowing needs of the
touch upon the risks and challenges which a severe
respective governments, (ii) inflation, (iii) liquidity
pandemic could pose to a domestic as well as the global
management, (iv) payment and settlement systems, etc.
financial system. Some of these challenges are expected
keeping in mind that disruptions in one jurisdiction could
to be similar to the strains on the financial system that
have spill-over effect in other jurisdictions.
might be expected from any slowdown in growth
irrespective of the source. Others will be particular to If required, central banks may have to prepare
the conditions of a flu pandemic, such as uncertain labour themselves to act as lenders of last resort. In many
supply, increased operational risks, potentially unstable countries, in order to restore macroeconomic stability and
infrastructure and restrictions on travel, etc. International fiscal sustainability, central banks may have to adjust
attention has focused on the need for all countries to be monetary policy to prevent a sustained increase in
better prepared, in order to reduce the potential death, inflation, withdrawing fiscal stimulus, particularly in
965
C M Y K
965966
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
countries facing debt sustainability issues, as well as becomes severe. Critical functions and priority would have
ensuring external viability, including through a rebuilding to be identified in advance - market operations, reserve
of international reserves and greater exchange rate management, clearing and settlement and banking
flexibility. Similarly, a financial institution’s risk supervision. There should be preparedness for high
assessment and management plans may have to be absentee rate and back-up arrangements for key staff. The
expanded to cover the possibility of widespread economic need for providing computers and internet connections to
disruptions and their impact on loan and other asset staff at home would arise in order to facilitate “work from
performance. home” arrangements. Problem of insufficient public
network bandwidth may arise. There is a need to finalise
In addition to the direct impact of avian flu on
the bare minimum banking services that must continue
agricultural output, the indirect effects could severely
operations in a worst-case scenario (Phone, internet
disrupt domestic economies, as tourism falls, trade and
banking, ATM, payment related service, access to safe
transport restrictions arise, consumer spending drops, and
deposit boxes). The payment system and currency issue
business confidence and investment deteriorate. As a
are important from the point of view of the central banks.
result, the retail sector and services exports could be
severely affected and balance of payment pressures might
Countries, which are most vulnerable to Avian flu
arise in tourism-dependent economies.
pandemic, may like to initiate their own business
continuity plans by ensuring the continuity of critical
Many institutions in various countries have instituted
financial infrastructure and functions of individual
business continuity plans (BCPs) in order to face major
institutions. Many countries have already started
disruption to the operations and services of their financial
strengthening such efforts. Preparedness is highest among
system. BCPs are intended to mitigate this risk, by
countries like Singapore and Hong Kong that experienced
ensuring the continuity of critical financial infrastructure
the SARS outbreak. Similarly, adequate preparation is
and functions of individual institutions. In some quarters,
unavoidable for countries that have recently dealt with
apprehensions are being expressed that such BCP using
avian flu outbreaks and have large, complex financial
a single back up may not prove to be much effective in
systems. They are already testing their Business
the event of severe pandemic. Although BCPs could be
Continuity Plans (BCP) and creating awareness among
desirable for every country irrespective of its size to deal
their staff. Several Committees / task forces have been
with contingencies like avian pandemic but its micro-
set up to look into issues like business, legal, human
structure may differ from country to country.
resources, payment system, currency management,
Another important implication of the avian flu
communications, health/hygiene and security. Several large
pandemic could be for the insurance sector. As
global financial institutions also have advanced
emphasized by the Financial Stability Forum, a flood of
preparations, as do providers of payment services, mainly
claims might strain the capacity of the global insurance
by establishing alternative sites, and recovery task forces.
and reinsurance sectors. Insurers are exposed to the effects
They have a senior crisis management team in place to
of a pandemic through a number of business lines,
plan for the contingency. In fact, the IMF has rightly
including such risks as business interruption, health,
emphasized that financial institutions must have BCPs that
disability, medical malpractice, workers’ compensation,
do not focus only on a single, short-lived event (IMF,
and life insurance. Estimates of the impact of a global
2006). In fact, I would say that actions at country level
flu pandemic on the insurance industry vary widely.
may not be sufficient and regional and global
Standard and Poor’s recently suggested a mild pandemic
coordination, therefore, will remain essential as well.
might produce $15-20 billion in worldwide losses, while
Coordination efforts already made by various regions and
losses from a more severe event might total up to $200
regional organisations of the world, as well as the support
billion (Standard and Poor’s, 2005).
provided by the UN system are praiseworthy.
During the crisis itself, authorities will have a number
IV. POSSIBLE PREPAREDNESS ON AVIAN FLU
of potential roles to play. One major job for authorities
Given these possible risks and challenges, it is felt is acting as a focal point for communication in a variety
of areas like (i) receiving information from market
that there should be clear command and communication
structure for crisis management in case this pandemic participants on the extent of disruption and on the business
966
C M Y K
966967
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
continuity measures taken that may affect other Executive Director, Financial Market Committee to
participants, (ii) acting as a point of liaison between monitor the developments in financial markets, and (b)
financial markets and the wider government emergency assuring availability of rupee and forex liquidity. Thus, it
response, and perhaps also with utilities and
was communicated that the Reserve Bank was keeping
telecommunications providers, (iii) providing information in touch with major settlement banks and the stock
to the market and to the public on the functioning of
exchanges to ensure that payment obligations on the
markets and systems (both financial and non-financial). exchanges were met and gave assurance of selling dollars
Cross-border communication, in fact, becomes even
through agent banks in order to augment supply or
more important than before because of the global nature
intervene directly to meet any demand - supply
of the event.
imbalances. Subsequent to the flashing of the press
release, the market witnessed a quick recovery and, in fact,
Because of this central role, it would be better if
no Reserve Bank liquidity or forex facilities announced
communication methods are robust enough to take care
had to be used. In view of developments in stock
of potential disruption to staffing and physical
exchanges after May 18, 2006 crash, the Reserve Bank
infrastructure and are equipped with multiple
was in constant touch with major settlement banks and
communication channels available. If there are disruptions
both the major stock exchanges to ensure that the payment
to trading and communications infrastructure, ad hoc
obligations on the exchanges were met smoothly.
solutions may be needed in order to allow smooth process
of necessary transactions and maintaining critical
Similarly, in the aftermath of the train bomb blasts
operations.
in Mumbai on July 11, 2006, the Reserve Bank made all
arrangements to ensure uninterrupted continuation of
In this context, I would like to cite some instances in
our country where the central bank, other regulatory normal services rendered by it and also the critical
payment systems. Subsequent to the experience of the
authorities and government have jointly handled the
contingencies successfully. For instance, there was the potential run on a bank in 2003, the Reserve Bank has
developed standard instructions for dealing with any such
beginning of a panic run on a bank in 2003 led by a
baseless rumour at one particular place of the country. eventuality that could affect business continuity and
The Reserve Bank immediately clarified that the Bank normalcy in operations. Hence it is important to act fast
had sufficient liquidity and arranged to provide adequate whenever some potential threat is identified. These
cash to that Bank to meet the demands of its customers episodes clearly point out that there is need for proper
and helped that bank to keep its branches open at the coordination among all regulators so that in the event of
affected places even on holidays to restore customer contingency, proper coordinated response could be
confidence. If such measure were not taken in time, then
initiated. Therefore, I would stress again that the scope
there could have been a possible spill-over to other banks of business continuity plans for central banks goes beyond
as other bank customers could have accessed the ATM
the avian flu.
of this affected bank which could have created further
panic.
V. A VIAN FLU: THE INDIAN CASE
Other interesting illustrations of ensuring business
continuity in the Indian context are perhaps the stock
If seen in the Indian perspective, the first case of
market episodes of May 17, 2004 and more recently on
bird flu in Maharashtra was announced on February 18,
May 18, 2006. On May 17, 2004, in the wake of change
2006 as a sample of an affected poultry farm from
of Government, stock markets in India witnessed a record
Navapur was tested positive for highly pathogenic H5N1
fall in price, which triggered the index-based circuit
viral strain. First case of H5N1 infection in birds was
breaker twice during the day. The index-based circuit
reported in India in February 2006. Initially, the virus
breaker triggered a stoppage of trades in the stock
infected 52 poultry farms in northern part of Maharashtra
exchange for around two hours. Seeing the possibility of
and such reports put authorities in other states on high
a spill-over in money, G-Sec and forex markets, the
alert as such a contagious disease could be source of
Reserve Bank intervened on that day and two separate
concern for the Indian economy in general and poultry
press releases were issued by the Reserve Bank indicating,
industry in particular. India is the fifth largest producer
(a) constitution of an internal Task Force under the
of eggs and the livestock and poultry sector is one of the
967
C M Y K
967968
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
fastest growing sectors in India. It may be noted that after the onset of bird flu, i.e., February 1, 2006 and
outbreak of Avian Flu was Navapur and Uchhal in remaining unpaid, into term loans. The converted
Maharastra was a localised one, which has been contained loans may be recovered in installments based on
effectively. The major poultry exporting States are located projected future inflows over a period up to three
at a considerable distance from Navapur. According to years with an initial moratorium of up to one year,
Ministry of Agriculture, the export of poultry/poultry
(ii) rescheduling of remaining portion of term loan with
products from these States is absolutely safe as the
a moratorium period up to one year depending upon
samples tested are negative (Government of India, 2006a).
the cash flow generating capacity of the unit,
According to the Ministry of Agriculture, there has
(iii)eligibility of borrowers for fresh need based finance,
been no case of avian flu reported since April 18 of this
and
year. Prudence, however, demands that we should take
(iv) extension of relief measures to all accounts of poultry
all possible precautions in this regard and be prepared to
industry, which were classified as standard accounts
face any eventuality of any nature. According to Minister
as on March 31, 2006.
of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
In addition, the Government has granted a one-time
Distribution, “though the poultry industry had suffered
interest subvention of 4 per cent per annum on the
heavily because of the outbreak of bird flu this year, India
outstanding principal amount as on March 31, 2006 (not
would be in a position to declare the country free from
including any part of the principal amount that has
this disease very soon (Government of India, 2006b).”
become overdue) to all poultry units availing loans from
To avoid any large scale avian flu pandemic, the
banks. To resolve any policy differences among the
Indian authorities have already announced various
regulators and to discuss issues relating to any overlaps,
protective measures. Action Plan has been prepared for
co-ordination and co-operation, a High Level Co-
the guidance of the Animal Husbandry Departments of
ordination Committee on Financial and Capital Markets
the State Governments. This Action Plan for the State
(HLCCFCM) consisting of Governor of the Reserve Bank,
Governments consists of three parts. Part I gives the
Chairman, SEBI and Chairman, IRDA along with the
Action Plan in case of any suspicion of occurrence of
Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Government
avian flu at any place. Part II describes the Action Plan
of India, is already in place. The Reserve Bank of India
in the unlikely event of the outbreak of the disease being
has also constituted an Inter-Departmental Committee to
confirmed by laboratory tests. Part III provides advice to
look into the details of the impact of avian flu on the
persons who may be required to handle highly pathogenic
financial sector of the economy.
avian influenza (HPAI) affected poultry. Recently, the
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has
VI. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS
developed an indigenous vaccine for poultry against the
deadly disease. Since the disease has got recurring
At the end, I would like to lay stress on the need for
possibility, the development of the indigenous vaccine can
proper coordination between the health authorities,
go a long way in tackling bird flu effectively.
business entrepreneurs and the financial policy makers.
As part of measures to protect domestic poultry
As the IMF is making efforts in sensitising the issue of
industry from any loss on account of avian flu, in April
avian flu among the central banks for better preparedness,
2006, the Reserve Bank announced guidelines for relief
the regulatory authorities within the countries also need
measures by commercial banks and urban commercial
to sensitise the regulated entities in order to ensure better
banks. Keeping in view the loss of income that occurred
preparedness with business continuity plans for the
due to culling of birds as well as steep fall in the demand
possible avian flu pandemic. I reiterate that these
for poultry products and their prices on account of
continuity plans are desirable for all types of contingencies
outbreak of Avian Influenza (bird flu) in some areas of
for the financial sector. Pandemic drill exercises may also
the country, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to consider
be helpful in assessing such overall preparedness. Further,
extending certain facilities to poultry units financed by
proper coordination is necessary to arrive at a realistic
them. Some of these measures are:
estimate of the potential risk of the pandemic and align
(i) conversion of principal and interest due on working
various measures within the financial sector with the alert
capital loans, which have fallen due for payment on/ system of health authorities. This will in turn help in not
968
C M Y K
968969
C M Y K
August Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006
only chalking out effective preparedness plans but also Institut Pasteur – Paris, France, June 29, 2006 (available
to ensure effective communication in implementation at the www.worldbank.org).
process. Similarly, there is a need to strengthen joint and
Financial Stability Forum (2006), “Press Release
strategic efforts, without which it would be a challenging
on Financial Stability Forum Meets in Sydney”, March
task for country authorities to prevent and eliminate the
17, 2006.
health, security, trade and financial threats emanating from
Government of India (2006a), “Weekly Report on
avian influenza and other animal diseases at global level.
Notifiable Avian Influenza (H5 & H7) week ending July
This will require adequate resources, particularly in
9, 2006”, Ministry of Agriculture.
developing countries and regions where challenges may
Government of India (2006b), “Press Release on
be large and resources insufficient. Therefore, our
States Urged to help Poultry Farmers”, Press Information
collaboration not only in terms of financial support but
Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture, July 19, 2006.
also information sharing and exchange of ideas on various
International Monetary Fund (2006), “The Global
emerging issues relating to economic and financial system
Economic and Financial Impact of an Avian Flu Pandemic
has become necessary. In this context, such series of
and the Role of the IMF”, February 2006.
Seminars being organised on the initiative of the IMF on
Standard and Poor’s (2005), “Determining the
the Avian Flu pandemic can prove to be quite helpful in
Insurance Ramifications of a Possible Pandemic,” Ratings
understanding these issues and exchanging the ideas for
Direct, November.
apt preparedness which is the ultimate goal for all us
present here. I wish all the success for the Seminar.
World Bank (2006), “Avian Flu: The Economic Cost”,
June 29, 2006 (available at www.worldbank.org).
World Health Organisation (2003), “Influenza”,
REFERENCES
Fact Sheet No. 211, March 2003 (available at
Asian Development Bank (2003), Asian Development
www.who.int/en/).
Outlook 2003, Hong Kong, China: Oxford University Press.
World Health Organisation (2006), “Regional
th
Bank for International Settlements (2006), 76
Influenza Pandemic Preparedness Plan (2006-2008)”,
Annual Report, 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2006, Basel,
Regional Office for South East Asia, New Delhi.
June 26, 2006.
United Nations (2006), Key Economic Developments
Brahmbhatt, Milan (2006), “Economic Impacts of
and Prospects in the Asia-Pacific region 2006, Economic
Avian Influenza Propagation”, Speech at the First
and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, United
International Conference on Avian Influenza in Humans,
Nations, January 2006.
969
C M Y K
969