Governor’s Speech on the Occasion of Release of
History of RBI (Volume III) on March 18, 2006
Respected Prime Minister, distinguished guests and friends,
On behalf of all the Reserve Bank employees - retired and serving; on
behalf of the Central Board of the Bank and on my own behalf, I have the
honour and privilege of extending a hearty welcome to our esteemed Prime
Minister, Dr. Manmohan Singh; Governor of Maharashtra Shri S.M. Krishnaji;
Chief Minister of Maharashtra State Shri Deshmukhji; Union Finance Minister
Shri Chidambaramji and other distinguished guests.  The Bank had the privilege
of a visit by the President, Dr. Abdul Kalam in November 2004 when he
inaugurated the Bank's Monetary Museum.  Today we have the unprecedented
privilege of a visit to the Reserve Bank by the Prime Minister of India, and Sir,
we are grateful to you for the very kind gesture.  Reserve Bank, established 70
years ago, can be proud of its achievements. The history volumes being
released today provide a testimony.
More importantly, the Reserve Bank is committed to maintaining
excellence and the globally best standards. The inauguration of the Centre for
Advanced Financial Learning symbolises this commitment.  It also signifies the
intended evolution of Bankers' Training College, started in 1955, into a Centre
devoted to advancing efficiency and stability in the financial sector as a whole.
The idea of institutionalising the advanced learning process has been inspired
by the initiative of setting up the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development and
Research (IGIDR).
Sir, the Reserve Bank is proud of its professional acumen and some
evidence of it is found in our publications.  One of them is the latest Report on
Currency and Finance. This Report captures the evolution of the Bank,
particularly, how it has maintained and enhanced its reputation as a credible as
well as respected public institution in our country.  It is only appropriate that the
Hon'ble Finance Minister Shri Chidambaram, who played a part ten years ago
as Finance Minister and is again playing a role now in the Bank's evolution, is
releasing it today.
Government of Maharashtra has been generous in extending their
valuable support to our functioning in all respects; and we are grateful for it.  Itrust, we are satisfactorily serving the State in various capacities such as its
banker, its debt manager, etc.  We warmly welcome the Governor and the Chief
Minister of our State, Maharashtra.
Finally, I extend a hearty welcome to all the distinguished guests
assembled here for kindly responding to our invitation.
Now, I have pleasure in requesting the Hon'ble Finance Minister to
release the latest Report on Currency and Finance.
x x x x x x x x
Volume I of RBI’s history is essentially work of Shri S.L.N. Simha, Senior
Economist of RBI and this has been reprinted. Volume II was authored by Dr.
Balachandran under the overall guidance of a Committee headed by Dr.C.
Rangarajan.  Volume III, completed now, is the work of Late Dr. Ambirajan; Ms.
Chandi Batliwala; Dr. A. Vasudevan and Shri T. C. A. Srinivasa Raghavan
under the overall guidance of a Committee headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan and
Dr. Bimal Jalan as Governor.
Now, I request Hon’ble Prime Minister to release the history volume.
x x x x x x x x x
May I request Hon’ble Prime Minister to launch Centre for Advanced
Financial Learning.
x x x x x x x x x
May I request Hon’ble Prime Minister to address the gathering.
********