49
 
Jalan
Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Colombo
On
th
Wednesday, 25 August 1999
*******
Governor 
th
It is a great honour for me to deliver the 49 Anniversary Lecture of the Central
Bank of Sri Lanka.  I am thankful to Governor Jayawardena for this invitation.  I have
had the privilege of knowing Governor Jayawardena personally over a long period of
time, and have been an admirer of his immense knowledge and wisdom in the conduct of
macro-economic and monetary policies. Under his stewardship, the Central Bank of Sri
Lanka is now one of the leading central banks in the developing world with marked
excellence in financial and monetary research and policy. The contribution of the Bank in
the overall socio-economic development of Sri Lanka has also been immense.  I am
2. The subject of my talk, as you know, is “International Financial Architecture:
Developing Countries Perspectives”.  This is an opportune moment to reflect on this
subject as considerable international discussion has already taken place.  The developing
countries’ stake in equitable and workable solutions to the problems affecting the world
economy is naturally very great. What I have to say to you today is more by way of
reflections and some loud thinking in order to advance our collective views on matters of
interest to developing countries rather than final conclusions. To begin with, it may be
useful to understand why there is so much interest now in the new architecture; on what
levels the debate has been conducted so far, and how effectively developing countries
have participated in this debate.  I would then like to deal with some of the major
elements of the debate with special reference to developing countries, including the
evolution of India’s views and policies on some of these issues.  Finally, I propose to
Atth
grateful to all of you, including so many old friends, for being here today.
Jayawardena and friends,
Bimal 
by
Developing Countries’ Perspective
International Financial Architecture:
 Anniversary Lecture – Central Bank of Sri Lankahighlight the institutional arrangements that have emerged, or are in the process of
emerging, in order to facilitate effective co-operation among developed and developing
Why the Debate Now?
3. The global crises that occurred after July 1997 have generated enormous
international concern over financial stability in the world. The concern translated itself
into a debate on how to prevent such crises arising in future and how to manage, such
crises, if  they do arise. Naturally, such a debate included a review of appropriateness of
existing international financial arrangements and the need for redesigning such
arrangements. Various facets of relevant reforms considered in the last 18 months or so
came to be referred to as the International Financial Architecture (or IFA, for short). At
the outset, it may be useful to recall the reasons for considering  a new IFA in the context
of the current crisis.
4. First, the recent crisis was sudden and unanticipated. Neither the countries
themselves nor the credit rating agencies nor the international financial institutions
anticipated a crisis of such magnitude. Second, the speed with which the crisis got
transmitted to other countries took the financial community by surprise. New technology
made capital flows easy and fast; it also made the transmission of panic easy. Third, there
was evidence of failure of market mechanisms as was generally understood, necessitating
a review of relative roles of the State and the market in financial systems. Fourth, when
the failure of markets resulted in systemic threats, the burden of market failure got shifted
to Governments and the public sector. This burden was borne, to a large extent, by the
Governments of borrowing developing countries, rather than lending or developed
financial centres, though “irrational exuberance” in lending and borrowing are
inseparable.  Fifth, although the international financial institutions, in particular the IMF,
came to the rescue of the affected countries, there were questions regarding the timing,
content and adequacy of their assistance package. Sixth, the contagion spread across and
beyond the region to  developed countries also. Global interdependence was no longer
merely a slogan or one-sided affair.  It became clear that developments in developing
5. The experience w ith the Asian crisis led to the perspective that international
financial architecture as it existed was inadequate to meet the new realities. It started with
expression of dis-satisfaction by several experts and some countries on the role of credit
rating agencies, and to some extent, on the role played by the International Monetary
Fund (IMF). As the debate proceeded, there occurred a distinct shift in emphasis in
favour of considering micro-economic aspects in addition to  macro-policies, such as
fiscal and monetary management. There was also a shift from abstractions to institutional
aspects such as corporate governance, regulatory structures, and transparency. Some
attention was also given to mechanisms whereby the Government could ensure market
accountability, and not merely market efficiency, lest the burden of market failure shifted
1
Features of the Debate
countries were important for stability in the entire financial world.
countries on monetary and financial issues.entirely to Governments. Finally, the debate had to recognise that the divide between
developed and developing countries or OECD and non-OECD countries was not as
meaningful as it was thought to be. The developing countries themselves represented a
wide-range with different degrees of openness of their economies, and consequently
Levels of the Debate
6. The debate on IFA occurred at different levels and in different fora. It occurred
within the international financial institutions, particularly the IMF and the World Bank.
Discussions were also held in the United Nations.  Intellectuals from both developed and
developing countries, such as, Krugman, Sachs, Bhagwati, Lal Jayawardena, my
distinguished predecessor Dr.Rangarajan, and Deputy Governor Reddy expressed their
views on various aspects of the IFA and exercised influence on the direction and the
course of the debate. The private sector in major financial centres participated in the
debate particularly through the Institute of International Finance. The voluntary
international organisations consisting of national level regulatory and supervisory bodies,
such as ,  International Organisation of Securities Commission and International
Association of Insurance Supervisors took this issue on board. Policy discussions were
also conducted under the auspices of the traditional groupings, such as, the G-7 of
developed countries, and G- 24  of developing countries  where Sri Lanka is currently in
the Chair.
7. The debate within these different fora and at different levels contributed to
structured and formal discussions in the Development Committee and Interim
Committee, especially the latter, which are formally charged with the responsibility of
guiding the international community in matters relating to global economic co-operation.
The discussions in these formal groupings were aided by informal and expanded high
level official meetings of developed and developing countries. Among  these, a mention
may be made of G-22 sponsored by USA, and G-33 sponsored by G-7. These later
resulted in another  Group known as the Financial Stability Forum. India has been
involved in almost all the discussions where developing countries have been  represented,
and an effort has been made by our representatives as well as representatives of certain
other developing countries, including Sri Lanka, to present the developing country
perspective on various issues.
Main Issues in the Debate
8. The debate on IFA has covered a wide spectrum of policy issues. However, I
propose to focus on those which are of particular significance to developing countries,
viz., the exchange rate, the policy on reserves, the role of the external private sector, the
management of capital flows, strengthening the financial system, transparency codes and
standards, reform of international institutions and new arrangements for international
2
liquidity.
different degrees of integration with the global financial system.9. Appropriateness of the exchange rate regime is considered to be one of the major
factors relevant to the Asian crisis. The debate is not new and there are, as always,
differing views on an appropriate exchange rate regime. One view is that a fixed
exchange rate can promote domestic macroeconomic and financial stability by providing
a firm nominal anchor. However, it has been pointed out - and more sharply after the
Asian crisis - that there are risks associated with a pegged exchange rate regime. This 
reflected in the fact that most of the currency crises in the past two years have occurred in
countries with pegged exchange rates.
10. A widely expressed view is  that countries should eschew variable peg regimes in
favour of either something much harder or the voluntary adoption of “managed floating”.
Currency board is an option that has been favoured by some developing countries,
particularly small open economies. But in most countries, the growing consensus seems
to be in favour of a flexible and floating rate regime. While there is also acceptance of the
hard reality that the degree of flexibility has to be “managed” in order to avoid undue
volatility and panic, there is as yet no consensus on the modalities and the rules which
should govern such “managed flexibility”. The recent experience of interventions by
Central Banks of some industrial countries in the management of the Yen-Dollar/Yen-
Euro exchange rates, as also recent market developments and the on-going debate on the
Euro-Dollar exchange rates, vividly illustrate the problems associated with devising a set
of hard-and-fast rules concerning an appropriate exchange rate regime, which is valid for
all countries.
11. There has also been some debate on the policy measures that can be taken by the
central bank to keep exchange rate movements “realistic” and relatively orderly. The
broad consensus can be summed up as follows. There is a fair degree of agreement that
stability in the exchange rate is well served by the stability in the conduct of monetary
policy. An increasing number of central banks, particularly in industrial countries, are
directing monetary policy to the sole objective of price stability. Countries are also
increasingly announcing near-term inflation targets explicitly.  Transparency in
objectives, intermediate targets and operating instruments are expected to play a role in
anchoring expectations. However, in spite of cautious policies, if there are unanticipated
or unacceptable movements in exchange rates, it is also generally, but by no means
unanimously, held that central banks must be prepared to move interest rates in order to
stabilise expectations. In these situations, direct intervention in foreign exchange markets
by the central bank may also become necessary, although the precise extent and modality
of intervention is likely to depend on individual country circumstances, especially the
size and depth of the market and the size of a country’s foreign exchange reserves. It has
been recognised that developed countries, and in particular the central banks of major
financial centres, are in a position to intervene in the exchange market on behalf of each
other. However, such options are not available to most developing countries. This
imposes additional challenges to the central banks both in tactics of intervention in the
3
forex markets and the need for supplementary monetary and administrative measures.
is
The Exchange Rate12. Let me, at this point , briefly touch upon the exchange rate policy in India. The
exchange rate policy has evolved from the rupee being pegged to a market related system
(since March 1993). The exchange rate is largely determined by the market, i.e. demand
and supply conditions. The objective of exchange rate management has been to ensure
that the external value of the rupee is realistic and credible as evidenced by a sustainable
current account deficit and manageable foreign exchange situation. Subject to this
predominant objective, the exchange rate policy is guided by the need to reduce excess
volatility, prevent the emergence of destabilising speculative activities, help maintain
adequate level of reserves, and develop an orderly foreign exchange market. The Indian
market, like other developing countries markets, is not yet very deep and broad, and is
characterised by uneven flow of demand and supply over different periods.  The market
is also characterised by a few major players, and lumpy public sector demands,
particularly on account of payments for oil imports and servicing of public debt. In this
situation, the Reserve Bank of India has been prepared to make sales and purchases of
foreign currency in order to even out lumpy demand and supply in the relatively thin
forex market and to smoothen jerky movements. However, such intervention is not
governed by a predetermined target or band around the exchange rate. While it is not
possible for any country to remain completely unaffected by developments in the
international exchange markets, fortunately we have been able to keep the spillover
effects of the Asian crisis to a minimum through constant monitoring and timely action,
including recourse to strong monetary measures, when necessary, to prevent the
13. There has always been a continuous but inconclusive discussion on the optimum
level of reserves. Traditionally, the adequacy of reserves of a country has been mainly
linked to import requirements. Recent experience has, however, shown that countries,
which were holding large levels of foreign currency reserves in relation to imports, did
not necessarily escape the crisis. These countries had large reserves, but these reserves
disappeared quickly as they tried to defend their currencies. Some part of the reserves
could not be accessed when it was most required by these countries since they were
invested in illiquid assets. Further, there was no transparency with regard to the precise
figure of unencumbered reserves.
14. In the aftermath of the Asian crisis, the emphasis has now shifted from measuring
the adequacy of foreign exchange reserves only in relation to imports to  measuring the
usable or unencumbered reserves  in relation to short-term liabilities, in particular short-
term debt. A notable suggestion on this subject for emerging market economies is 
countries should manage their external assets and liabilities (and the so-called “liquidity
at risk”) in such a way that they are always able to live without new foreign borrowing
for up to one year. In other words, usable foreign exchange reserves should exceed
scheduled amortisation of foreign currency debts ( assuming  no rollovers) during the
following year. This has implications both for the level of reserves and debt management
since this implies a limit on the size of the debt, in particular short-term debt and debt that
4
is falling due for repayment.
that
International Reserves
emergence of self-fulfilling speculative activities.15. The link between short-term debt and reserves has come to the fore in the IFA
deliberations. There is a cost  to building up reserves through large debt flows since the
cost of debt would generally be higher than return on reserves. At the same time, a high
level of reserves satisfies the need for liquidity, offers insulation against unforeseen
shocks and acts as a source of comfort to foreign investors. The essence of reserves
management being safety and liquidity, it stands to reason that all investments made out
of reserves should be of top credit quality and excellent liquidity. Hence, the return on
16. In India, we have been steadily building up reserves by encouraging non-debt
creating flows and de-emphasising debt creating flows, particularly short-term debt. In
fact, this strategy, coupled with the maintenance of acceptable level of current account
deficit and market determined exchange rate regime were cornerstones of the policy of
external sector management recommended by the Report of the High Level Committee
on Balance of Payments, ( Rangarajan Committee) in April 1993. In the context of the
changing interface with the external sector, and the importance of the capital account,
reserve adequacy is now evaluated by RBI in terms of several indicators and not merely
through conventional norms, such as, the import cover. Thus, for instance, we assess our
reserves in terms of the volume of short-term debt and stock of portfolio investments
also. As a matter of policy, as far as possible, foreign exchange reserves are kept at a
level which is adequate to withstand both cyclical and unanticipated shocks.
17. As of now, our foreign exchange reserves are about US $ 33 billion, which
includes $ 2.7 billion of gold and $ 30.3 billion of foreign currency assets.  Our foreign
exchange reserves were only $ 5.8 billion in March 1991. The last three years saw
increases in reserves of the order of $ 4.7 billion in 1996-97, $ 2.9 billion in 1997-98 and
$ 3.1 billion in 1998-99, i.e. a cumulative $10 billion despite the East Asian crisis and a
number of other domestic and external pressures on the foreign exchange situation.
Forward sales of foreign currency, net of forward purchases, are at present lower than $ 1
billion or less than 3 per cent of gross reserves. In the interest of transparency, India has
also decided to publish figures on RBI’s forward liabilities every month.  Our policy of
building and maintaining adequate level of reserves while at the same time constraining
debt, especially short-term debt, has served us 
Involvement of the 
18. The role of external private sector lenders and banks in forestalling a debt crisis,
and more broadly in external liability management is assuming importance. Efforts to
involve the private sector lenders in liability management has many objectives, viz., bring
about more orderly adjustment process, limit moral hazard, strengthen market discipline,
and help protect countries against volatility and contagion. The key issue concerning the
role of the private sector lenders in forestalling and resolving the crisis is whether by
involving the private sector, the overall costs associated with foreign exchange crisis can
be reduced, either by smoothening the crisis-resolution process, or by reshaping the
5
External  Private Sector
well  during the Asian crisis.
reserves and the cost of borrowing are not strictly comparable.incentives under which private institutions operate. The idea is to institute mechanisms in
19. While there is a consensus regarding the need for the private sector to share the
burden, discussions in various fora have centred on the “mode” of burden sharing.  Ideas
that are being considered include contingent credit lines, embedded call options, debt-
service insurance, bond covenants, bankruptcy procedures, debt standstill and creditor-
debtor councils.
20. Basically, these mechanis ms bind private sector participants to either provide
additional funds, or reduce debt service burdens in times of crisis without creating moral
hazard or disrupting normal market conditions.  For instance, it has been suggested that
countries could contract market based Contingent Credit Lines with commercial banks to
trigger liquidity support in times of crisis. If the credit lines were fairly priced, they could
provide effective insurance against adverse market developments. Similarly, it has been
proposed that standstill arrangements, which allow private sector to extend additional
credit when there has been default on existing debt, should also be considered. Such
mechanisms are considered essential since absence of such arrangements makes it
possible for banks holding short-term interbank claims to leave the market unscathed  or
significantly reduce their exposure, which contributes to a perverse incentive structure
inequitable burden sharing - and panic. Creditor-debtor councils could serve to improve
the flow of information. Similarly. bond and debt covenants could introduce sharing
clauses and provisions for the modification of terms by qualified majorities in order to
speed up the negotiation process.
21. From the official sector, the IMF has decide d to establish a Contingent Credit
Line (CCL) as a precautionary mechanism to ward off financial crisis. This is expected to
supplement and not substitute the contingent credit lines from the private sector, as in the
case of Argentina. This support would be available to members who are undertaking
sound macro policies but are affected by “contagion”. The CCL is expected to signal to
the market the confidence of the IMF in the policies of the country and boost confidence
22. It remains to b e seen how flexibly the eligibility criteria in the new IMF facility
will be operated in practice. For success of the scheme, it seems necessary to ensure that
performance criteria are in fact appropriate and objective so that there is no room for
subjectivity or introduction of political and other non-economic considerations. The
scheme is likely to succeed in avoiding potential problems only if it is operated in a more
or less automatic way subject to certain pre-determined quantitative and objective criteria
being satisfied by the country.  For example, one such test could be the extent of
outstanding short-term liabilities in relation to a country’s net reserves. Another test
could be a pre-specified and agreed level of fiscal deficit or the level of aggregate
demand. As long as a country is following policies which satisfy these and similar
quantifiable criteria, it should be able to use this new facility without further ado.
6
in the market.
place before any crisis takes place – so that resolution of the crisis is more orderly.23. After the Asian crisis, there has been an e xtensive debate on the issue of capital
account liberalisation and controls. The issues that are being debated now relate to the
desirability, form and content of capital controls, risk containment strategies in external
24. It is widely agreed that a major source of vulnerability in the Asian crisis was the
accumulation of short-term liabilities of banks and corporates and poor quality of risk
assessment. Overall, there appears to be a consensus now in favour of developing
countries' restraining the inflow of short-term capital. There is, however ,  a growing
debate on the means by which short-term flows can be controlled. Important suggestions
relate to effective monitoring, imposition of Tobin Tax, which is a tax on spot
transactions, and  unremunerated  reserve requirements as prevalent in Chile. The
empirical evidence on effectiveness of Chile's approach, though oft-quoted, is however,
25. There has also been a suggestion to  impose an increased capital requirement on
interbank transactions to bring about greater discipline on cross-border interbank market.
It is self evident that just as there is no irresponsible borrowing without irresponsible
lending, there is no short-term borrowing without short-term lending. Unfortunately, in
practice, the current policy is biased in favour of short-term bank loans rather than
medium term or long term loans to developing countries. Thus, by and large, short term
loans to a country are likely to enjoy a higher credit rating than longer term loans,
irrespective of the overall record of a developing country in meeting its debt service
26. The current Basle Accord provides that all claims on banks 
countries and short-term claims (i.e. up to one year) on banks incorporated in non-OECD
countries should carry a risk weight of only 20 percent, whereas long-term claims on
banks in non-OECD countries carry a risk weight of 100 per cent. The New Capital
Adequacy Framework, which has just been issued by BIS as a consultative paper for
comments is reviewing this particular norm. The proposed guidelines, however, seem to
permit the use of ratings of international credit rating agencies for imposition of risk
weights. As mentioned above, there is an inherent bias towards short-term credit in credit
rating agencies’ assessments. Hopefully, the BIS will address this issue while finalising
27. Basically, three positions signif icant to developing countries seem to have
emerged from the discussions on cross-border capital movements. First, while 
the longer term efficiency of relatively free capital movements, a case has been  made for
capital controls either as an emergency measure or as a temporary measure in a crisis.
This is based on the view that under some circumstances, financial markets do not
function well.  Second, it is felt that  emerging markets should not liberalise capital
account in a hurry, without prior action for strengthening their financial systems.
Financial markets are prone to rapid changes in perceptions and expectations because of
7
obligations.
reiterating
the guidelines.
incorporated in OECD
not entirely conclusive.
debt management, and the desirable sequencing of capital account liberalisation.
Management of Capital Flowspoor information and  herding. In developing countries, these are also typically thin and
volatile. Third, it is widely agreed that capital account liberalisation should be supported
by a consistent macroeconomic framework, stable exchange rate policies and strong
institutional framework in the financial markets. There is also a developing consensus
that controls, when necessary, should be temporary; they should be imposed on inflows
rather than outflows and they should be  market-based rather than direct and, as far as
possible, they should be focussed on short-term volatile flows.
28. A related issue is the possibl e amendment of the IMF’s Articles to extend its
jurisdiction over the Capital Account. The IMF itself has acknowledged that there is no
unique path that defines an orderly capital account liberalisation. In fact, the path and
speed at which countries can traverse across this path will depend to some extent on the
safeguards that the new international financial architecture can provide. It is worthwhile
to note that a significant amount of liberalisation of capital account has already taken
29. From the view point of developing countries, it needs to be  recognised that
external capital has benefits and acts as a complement to domestic savings. However,
short-term reversible flows can also have negative effects on the economy, particularly
during periods of political or economic uncertainty. While large inflows pose policy
dilemmas for macro-management, large sudden outflows can impose extensive damage
to the financial sector and also result in a disporportionate output loss. It must be
understood that merely by lifting all capital controls, the markets of a developing country
do not get as deeply integrated as a developed  country's markets. As such, each country
would need to decide on its own path of capital account liberalisation with regard to the
timing and sequencing. This in turn is likely to depend upon the extent of stability and
institutional structure of the domestic financial sector. Taking all these factors into
account, at this juncture, it does not seem necessary to embark on a time-consuming
procedure for amendment of IMF’s Articles in order to promote capital account
,. At the present time, a constructive consultative process between the IMF
and member countries on these issues should be adequate to achieve the objectives in
30. India’s policy on the capital account has been predominantly influenced by the
recommendations of the Rangarajan Committee, mentioned earlier. The Committee’s
recommendations with regard to discouraging short-term flows stand vindicated by the
current international consensus on the need for controlling short-term debt. In India,
short-term debt is carefully monitored with differential treatment  between trade and non-
trade related debt and is subject to a quantitative ceiling. Deposits by Non-Resident
Indians are also controlled through specification of interest rates or interest rate ceilings
for different maturities. As a result of these efforts, the average maturity of our External
31. India has cautiously but systematically moved, over a period of time, from a
comprehensive control regime to current account convertibility and market-determined
exchange rate.  We have managed our capital account to ensure growth with stability,
8
Borrowing  is about six to seven years. Commercial 
view.
liberalisation
place in the developing countries under the existing Articles.while consistently adding to our foreign currency reserves. Like several other developing
countries, we also experienced, and managed, phases of excessive capital movements.
There were periods of capital surge during 1993-95, and also two major episodes of
volatility in flows in the second half of 1995-96 and again during 1997-98. During
periods of exchange rate volatility in the wake of the East Asian crisis, there were major
imponderables involved, both externally and internally, and contagion and herd
behaviour had to be guarded against.  In these situations, a co- ordinated policy
framework and careful calibration of policy instruments resulted in an effective
management of capital flows without intolerable shocks on the performance of the
32. In sum, I believe that the policy of cautious movement towards capital account
liberalisation that has been adopted by us continues to be valid. Liberalisation of capital
account has to be viewed as a process and not as a single event. It has  to be embarked
upon cautiously as part of overall economic reforms as well as an assessment of the
33. In the debate on the IFA, increased  recognition has been given to three   pre-
requisites for the efficient functioning of the financial sector, viz., a well designed
infrastructure, effective market discipline, and a strong  regulatory and supervisory
framework.
34. A well designed infrastructure has many elements. First, it requires a proper legal
and judicial framework. A second  element relates to fostering good corporate
governance. A third element is comprehensive accounting standards and a system of
independent audits. The International Accounting Standards Committee has done
substantial work related to this aspect. A fourth aspect relates to an efficient payments
35. Effective market discipline also requires a good credit culture and well developed
and functioning equity and debt markets with a wide variety of instruments for risk
diversification. The Basle Committee is reviewing its existing capital adequacy
guidelines. The BIS has recently circulated a consultative paper to discuss the new capital
adequacy framework. The Committee has proposed a new standardised approach for the
risk weighting of book assets. The Asian crisis has demonstrated that problems can arise
when excessive leverage is coupled with excessive concentration of risk. Improving the
assessment and management of risks is, therefore, another 
36. International consensus has already been reached on what constitutes sound
practices in many areas of banking supervision and securities regulation. The Basle
Committee has released the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and the
International Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO) has produced similar
guidelines for securities industry. Individual countries themselves are taking steps to
develop markets ,  review  their ongoing regulatory and supervisory procedures and adopt
9
area which requires attention.
and settlement systems. Core principles are being established in this area also.
Strengthening the Financial System
emerging scenario relating to international economic and financial architecture.
economy.international best practices. Countries are also making efforts to strengthen the legal
environment in which the financial systems are operating. Appreciable steps have also
been taken to improve bankruptcy procedures.
37. In India, financial sector reforms were undertaken in the early stages of economic
reform, pursuant to the recommendations, of the Committee on Financial Sector Reforms
( Narasimham Committee), which submitted its report in 1992. This was followed by
another Committee on Banking Sector Reforms ( Narasimham Committee II), which
submitted its report in 1998. As a result of measures taken pursuant to the
recommendations of these Committees, the adoption of prudential norms relating to
capital adequacy, income recognition, asset classification, provisioning standards and
valuation of investment portfolio in India are now close to international best practices.
Asset-liability management is being put place in the banking system.  Supervisory
practices by the Reserve Bank of India have been closely patterned on the lines of the
BIS Core Principles of Bank Supervision. In some aspects, the Indian standards are
stricter than international standards.
38. Supervision of non-bank financial companies (NBFCs) is also conducted by the
Reserve Bank of India. The prudential norms applied for the NBFCs closely resemble
those for banks’ capital adequacy. Capital adequacy ratio for  NBFCs is currently 12 per
cent. Asset classification, provisioning and income recognition norms have also been
prescribed. Both, off-site and on-site supervision methods have been adopted, and
CAMELS (capital, asset quality, management, earning, liquidity, systems and control)
pattern is used to rate and evaluate NBFCs. ALL NBFCs are required to publish their
audited balance sheets.
39. However, there is a lot more work that needs to be done in order to make our
financial system deeper and more vibrant. A number of Committees have been set up to
advise the Reserve Bank and Government on further steps. A Technical Advisory
Committee on Money and Government Securities Markets has been established as a
consultative forum to advice the Reserve Bank of India on an on-going basis. Similarly, a
Technical Advisory Committee has been set up  to advise on the legal infrastructure. A
Government committee is also looking into the legal and judicial aspects. An RBI
committee is working on the weak banks issue. Our urban cooperative structure is being
reviewed. Another area of work relates to the review of deposit insurance system. A
national debate is also taking place on the desirability and other aspects of movement
towards universal banking.  We have also constituted an internal group to study the
consultative paper of the BIS on the proposed new capital adequacy framework.
Transparency in Systems and Developing Standard Codes
 40. During the on-going debate on IFA, an influential view was that the information
made available to the markets by the official sector or by corporates or even by financial
intermediaries, prior to the crisis, did not reflect realities in the emerging economies. The
practices of disseminating information as well as its reliability, timeliness, and quality
10varied sharply from country to country. Hence, considerable attention has been devoted
in the recent debate to developing uniform transparency codes and standards. For
instance, IOSCO is coordinating with other agencies, such as the International
Accounting Standards Committee, to develop proper accounting and disclosure rules for
the securities market. A noteworthy feature of the exercise is that these efforts encompass
the private sector also as many of the standards, e.g., accounting, auditing, bankruptcy,
corporate governance, and securities market regulation require to be implemented at the
 41. The IMF has also developed voluntary standards in certain areas in the financi
system. The Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency was recently approved. The
Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies is now
being developed. The transparency policies listed in this Code are purported to focus on
clarity of roles, responsibility and objectives of central banks, processes for formulating
and reporting of monetary policy decisions, public availability of information and
42. It is, however, important to recognise that while transparency is of paramount
importance as it enables and improves the understanding of the stance of policies by
market participants, the quality and content of transparency has to be appropriate and in
tune with country circumstances. Given the divergence in institutional development and
the nature of relations between various arms of national governments, it seems unlikely
that a uniform code could be universally valid at this stage. It stands to reason that the
accent should
be on voluntary adoption and gradualism rather than a “big bang”. It is also important
that the manner in which these international standards are monitored does not degenerate
into categorising countries as performers and non-performers. The goals of transparency
could be best served by a balanced and symmetric evolution of information as between
43. So far as India is concerned, consistent with democratic traditions and free press,
an impressive degree of transparency in provision of information is already in place.
India is one of the earliest members of the SDDS of the IMF.  The RBI provides up-to-
date weekly data on all relevant macroeconomic and financial indicators through the
Weekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin. In addition, the RBI and Government
disseminate as much information as possible through monthly, quarterly and annual
publications. Commercial banks in India are also required to maintain disclosure
standards on par with those of international banks. This has been achieved by mandating
disclosure of some of the essential strength indicators and performance related
parameters as part of commercial banks’ balance sheets. In fact, since April 1997, even
before the onset of the Asian crisis, Indian banks have been disclosing capital adequacy
ratios (both Tier I and Tier II separately) ,  percentage of NPAs to net advances, provision
made towards NPAs, and  gross and net value of investments. Since March 1998, banks
in India have been asked to disclose further information regarding interest and non-
interest income as a percentage of working funds ,  operating profit as a percentage of
working funds, and information on the financial position of subsidiaries. With effect from
11
the authorities and the market participants.
accountability.
al
corporate level.April 2000, the Reserve Bank of India has also advised banks to disclose maturity profile
International  Financial Institutions
44. The discussions on the future shape of international financial institutions have
revolved round three  pillars. These are strengthening the existing financial institutions,
45. There is consensus that international financial institutions (IFIs) must adapt to the
changing environment if  they have to maintain their effectiveness. Some  general
agreement on the principles that should guide efforts to enhance the effectiveness of IFIs
has also been reached. These include arrangements to enhance accountability, an
inclusive process that facilitates a broad range of countries and other institutions, and a
more participative and open decision making process.
46. The debate on strengthening the role of international financial institutions has also
covered the role of rating agencies. The ratings given by of these agencies seemed to
have influenced the decisions of investors in Asia greatly and after the crisis, questions
have arisen on the public accountability of rating agencies. An issue that is being debated
is whether ratings should be used as they are or should rating agencies themselves be
regulated. This assumes critical importance in the context of the consultative paper of
BIS on the proposed New Capital Adequacy Framework, which envisages the possibility
47. A proposal has also been put forward to create a new international institution
called World Financial Authority(WFA)  or a Board of Overseers of major International
Institutions and Markets with powers for oversight and regulation globally. Various
models have been envisaged for the proposed WFA. One proposal would entail the
establishment of a body with responsibility for setting regulatory standards for all
financial enterprises – funds and insurance companies as well as banks, and off-shore and
on-shore entities. National regulators would remain responsible for implementing
standards promulgated by WFA. Another model might be for the WFA to serve as an
umbrella organisation into which the existing bodies could be brought together. It is
however, well recognised that setting up such an institution would be a complex process.
As an intermediate step, a suggestion has been made in the Development Committee
recently for setting up a new and Permanent Standing Committee for Global Financial
Regulation. This intermediate proposal seeks to bring together not only the World Bank
and the IMF, but also the Basle Committee and other regulatory groupings on a regular
basis.
48. In response to these proposals, the major industrialised countries have now set up
the Financial Stability Forum with representatives from the finance ministries, central
banks and regulatory authorities of G-7 countries, as well as from the IMF, World Bank,
Basle Committee, IOSCO, International Association of Insurance Supervisors, BIS,
OECD, Committee on Global Financial System and  Committee on Payment and
12
of assigning risk weights according to ratings.
creating new institutions, and establishing new groupings.
of loans and advances, investments, and lending to sensitive sectors,Settlement System.  It has been proposed that the Forum should be broadened by
including participants from other industrial countries and emerging economies in order to
49. Finally, new arrangements are being discussed on the provision of international
official liquidity to countries or financial markets, including the question of IMF being
given the authority and the means to act as the lender of the last resort. The initiatives
under consideration in this area can be summarised as follows.
50. It is generally agreed that  the IMF should continue to play an important role in
providing international liquidity. The major issues regarding adequacy of funds relate to
increase in quotas, SDR allocation, sale of gold to augment the resource base, and
increased borrowing from members. Proposals for enhancing the accountability and
legitimacy of the World Bank have also received some attention. In this context, there is
a suggestion that the Interim Committee could be transformed into a Council of
Ministers. Reforming the Development Committee along similar lines has also been
51. As regards the proposal to establish an inter national lender of last resort, one line
of argument is that there is no such need. A better approach to crisis management, it has
been argued, would be to reform the debtor-creditor relationships, including introduction
of provisions for orderly debt workouts and arrangements for temporary standstills. A
number of other questions have also been raised. Who would function as the lender of
last resort? Some favour the IMF, while some others favour a complementary facility for
unconditional official lending. Could the IMF function without being able to create
reserves? What would be the modalities for access? Would access to funds attract
conditionality? What would be the extent of moral hazard? These questions are still being
debated.
52. In order to enforc e emergency standstill and orderly debt workouts, a suggestion
has been made to set up an international bankruptcy court, but this has not been found
feasible. As an alternative, UNCTAD has suggested establishing an independent panel to
determine whether the country concerned is justified in imposing exchange restrictions
53. Thus, there is no shortage of new ideas on new institutions and new arrangements.
However, a fair guess, at this point of time, particularly with improved prospects of
countries in East Asia, is that the present institutional structure will remain more or less
Conclusion
54. Let me now conclude.  I have traversed a fa irly large ground, and I do not propose
to take much more of your time by attempting a summary of all the issues.  I would like
13
in tact with some changes in operating procedures and management structures.
with the effect of debt standstills.
suggested.
New Arrangements
make it more effective.to end by highlighting a couple of “over-arching” issues, which deserve to be specially
kept in view as we workout the arrangements for financial co-operation in the new
millennium. An important consideration that the international community must pay
attention to is the hard reality that these new arrangements cannot operate successfully
without equal partnership between developed and developing countries, or between
capital surplus and capital borrowing countries.  The recent history has forcefully
demonstrated the close linkages between all countries across the globe, whether they are
lenders or borrowers.  The recent move to involve developing countries more closely in
the discussions on the New Financial Architecture are, therefore, welcome. But these
efforts have not yet gone far enough. The institutional arrangements for decision making
on the new financial architecture still remain too heavily weighted in favour of industrial
countries .  An important priority in the coming months is to find ways and means of
55. Despite many challenges, and despite the ir somewhat lopsided voting structure,
by and large, the Bretton Woods institutions have served the international community
well.  As such, the current consensus that there is no urgent need to create new
international institutions is perhaps right. Current focus is on measures to make the
existing Bretton Woods institutions more effective and responsive.  In order to achieve
this objective, it is now essential to provide greater representation to developing countries
on the Boards of these institutions, and to provide them with a larger voting power.  It is
one of the ironies of the last forty years that although developing countries, as a group,
have grown much faster than the developed countries over this period and their relative
economic strength in terms of output and trade has increased substantially, their actual
voting power in Bretton Woods institutions has tended to decline! This needs to be
corrected in the next round of Quota exercises in the IMF and capital increase in the
World Bank.
56. ly, for the developing countries, including countries in our region, it is of
utmost importance that we accord the highest priority to strengthen our banking and
financial systems and bring them up to best international standards.  In early development
economics, little or no attention was paid to the role of financial intermediation as an
essential component of growth and development policies.  The concentration at that time
was on measures to raise the rate of domestic savings and investment and on acceleration
of the pace of industrialisation through direct intervention.  In view of the realities of that
time and the historical background, this emphasis was understandable.  However, the
world has changed a great deal since then. The role of financial intermediaries in
mobilising and allocating domestic savings as well as external capital has now become
crucial. The East-Asian crisis has also demonstrated the vital importance of financial
institutions in sustaining the momentum of growth and development.  It is no longer
possible for developing countries to delay the introduction of strong prudential and
supervisory norms, and introduce structural reforms in order to make the financial system
57. Thi s is an area where central banks like, yours and ours, have a special
responsibility.  In the SAARC forum, under the leadership of Sri Lanka, we have initiated
14
more competitive, more transparent and more accountable.
Final
broadening the dialogue by making the concerned fora more representative.measures to bring about better co-operation among our central banks and Ministries of
Finance.  We, in the Reserve Bank of India, look forward to working closely with the
* I am grateful to Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, and Dr.A.Prasad, Executive Assistant, Reserve Bank
of India for their help and close co-operation in the preparation of this lecture.
15
Central Bank of Sri Lanka in moving speedily towards our common economic objectives.