* *
Discussion Paper on Universal Banking and Beyond
Respected garu, Dean of Deputy Governors ,  Talwar, and friends,
There are many reasons why I am happy to be here and the most important of these is to have
the honour of being with Mr. Narasimham, the Bhishma Pita Maha of financial sector in
India.  In fact, the Discussion Paper of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on “ Harmonising the
Role and Operations of Development Financial Institutions and Banking “ (DP) relies heavily
on the report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms or Narasimham Committee (NC).
In fact, if the Discussion Paper (DP), does not appear to say much that is new, the fault
entirely lies with, NC.  After all, NC left little that was unsaid on the subject for DP to make
The DP was released in January 1999 and was discussed almost simultaneously as one of the
subjects in a Seminar on Financial Markets and Institutions: Development and Reforms
organised by the Society for Capital Market Research and Development.   This was followed
up by two seminars, devoted exclusively to discussion on DP.  The first was 
by the Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI) and Industrial Credit and Investment
Mumbai.  The second was organised jointly by the Federation
of Chambers of Commerce and Industry, and Industrial Finance Corporation of India at New
Delhi in March 1999.  RBI considers this meeting in the Administrative Staff College of
India (ASCI), as the finale, with a gathering of almost all the luminaries of financial world.  It
should be possible in this seminar to come to definitive conclusions and arrive at consensus
In the Key Note address, therefore, I will start with some clarifications on the DP, in the light
of discussions so far. This will be followed by a narration of consensus arrived at so far on
some issues and, of issues that are yet to be resolved.  Some of the recent developments,
international and domestic, may warrant looking beyond DP, especially on linkage between
banking and insurance.  A brief account of international practice would be relevant to us at
this juncture. Finally, in viewing  universal banking in a broader context including insurance,
regulatory issues, especially regulatory coordination and regulations of conglomerates would
come up.  A possible approach to regulatory coordination is presented for discussion and
At the outset, it is necessary to be clear about focus of DP ; what it sets out to cover, so that
expectations are appropriate.  The main focus is to rationalise and harmonise the relative
roles of banks and DFIs in future. Draft proposals in the DP address this issue keeping in
view both the general approach to universal banking which has a primary regulatory
dimension, and the long-term capital needs of the corporate sector which has a primary
developmental dimension.  Hence, DP should be considered in a slightly different, though
related, context from immediate measures to solve the problems faced by Development
Financial Institutions ( DFIs), in raising long-term resources at reasonable cost in lieu of
concessional resources that were available to them till the reform process began.  In fact,
improved access to short-term resources through the traditional banking route helps diversify
DFIs’ business but would not necessarily add to the long-term resource base. The problems
                                                       
debate.Narasimham 
Clarification
on future actions.  Indeed, that is the purpose of this seminar, being the last in the series.
Corporation of India (ICICI) in 
organised jointly
an impact!
Shri Shri faced by the DFIs now or in the immediate future do require attention but their conversion
into universal bank, by itself is neither a necessary nor a sufficient option to overcome the
Second, there are  no legal or regulatory restrictions on adoption of universal banking in
India.  There are, however, prudential requirements as also entry conditions applicable to all
banks and DFIs could certainly do banking business if they satisfy them. However, for 
there are two practical  impediments viz., (a) backlog of liabilities in a DFI on which reserve
requirements have not been provided; and (b) the relatively high reserve requirements,
particularly Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR).  Needless to say, once the CRR is brought down by
RBI from about 10 per cent to, say the statutory minimum of three per cent, or  even less in
the banking system,  DFIs would find it less cumbersome to satisfy the preconditions for
becoming universal bank.  RBI is committed to bring down CRR, and the pace would depend
on fiscal and monetary conditions.  Thus, DFIs should find it easier to move towards
universal banking in future, as reserve requirements are brought down.
Third, on the issue of reserve requirement on stock of liabilities of DFIs, a view is expressed
that such reserve requirements be applied only on incremental liabilities.  The suggestion
would appeal as a good bureaucratic solution for a DFI problem, but one should pause and
consider its acceptability as a defensible and true prudential measure. The real solution is to
bring down the reserve requirements across the board.
Fourth, there is a further suggestion that reserve requirements should be applicable only to
cash and cash like liabilities in respect of banks. In other words, the reserve requirements are
to be linked to the maturity profile of liabilities. This could operate in a way that would make
it easier for DFIs to become universal banks. This suggestion has large systemic implications
and validity as a prudential measure needs to e looked at.
Fifth, and here the issue relates to transition path.  A view is expressed that DFI should be
permitted to become universal bank immediately with a pre-determined timeframe in which
reserve requirements are to be met by DFIs.  Apart from implications of regulatory
forbearance and level playing field arguments, it may be difficult to design a straight jacket
DFIs.
Sixth, RBI can only indicate appropriate regulatory regime for universal banking, but would
it be proper for RBI to impose a decision or insist on a time table for a DFI to become
universal bank? The move towards universal banking, the pace and mix of services will be
dictated by consumer demands and the response of concerned bank or DFI. RBI can only put
in place an appropriate regulatory framework that enables rather than inhibits such a move,
Seventh, and in the context of timeframe, there is an impression that the RBI insists on a 
year timeframe.  The five year timeframe was indicated as ‘ideal’, taking into account a
judgement on possible reduction in reserve levels in future and prospects of DFIs being able
to meet prudential requirements smoothly.  As mentioned in DP, there is no minimum or
maximum time prescribed for a DFI to become universal bank ; only an indicative or ideal
Eighth, on the status of DFIs, for purposes of regulation, a formal legally tenable and clearly
identifiable regulatory framework of RBI is available basically for banks and for non-bank
time frame has been mentioned in the DP.
five
while ensuring consistency with monetary policy and prudential standards.
path which would meet the needs of diverse transition 
DFIs,
difficulties.financial companies.  DFIs as a category are still loosely defined as indicated in DP and are in
a way an amalgam of State/Central level, company/corporate forms, with different extents
and degrees of public sector ownership and performing refinance, direct finance and other
functions.  The DP had given an approach to bring them under a transparent framework as
Ninth, there are many issues which are relevant but were not covered by the DP for a number
of reasons. Thus, issues such as inherent and relative capabilities of DFIs and banks to
undertake universal banking on an extensive scale; details of consolidated supervision; nature
of pressure from consumers in favour of universal banking; pressures towards universal
banking due to globalisation and financial integration etc. have not been detailed. However,
two of the issues not covered in the DP, but that have gained importance since circulation of
the DP, relate to link with insurance and issue of regulatory coordination.  I propose to flag
It may be useful to recall major elements of the architecture of the financial system for the
future envisaged in the DP and identify the consensus as well as unresolved issues as evident
First, while the approach to universal banking is generally endorsed, there are differences
among the participants on the pace, and sequencing. Some felt that the DP’s indication of five
years was too long, while others felt that DFIs need to continue as specialised institutions
longer. Yet another view was that RBI was too flexible and a uniform framework and rigid
timetable was preferred to flexible, case-by-case approach advocated in the DP. There was
also a view hat the consumers would drive the movement to universal banking, but regulators
have to enable such pressures to operate, maintaining prudential standards and systemic
stability. Enabling framework is to be timed and sequenced. Incidentally, a few questioned
the desirability of allowing 100 per cent DFI owned banking subsidiary as a backdoor entry
to banking.  Perhaps, more detailed discussion on these with special reference to role of the
Second, some expressed that DFIs need to continue as DFIs and indeed should be accorded
special support, while a few felt that DFIs operations themselves are hindering the
development of corporate debt market. There were extreme views also that the demise of
DFIs is imminent and the issue is rebirth. There was some sort of agreement that there should
be in future, only banks and NBFCs, but the issue is how DFIs will transit to one of the two
categories and how are they to be treated and regulated by the RBI till a transition occurs.
There is some reluctance among some participants to DFIs becoming “mere NBFCs”.  The
issue then is , what should they be, under what category of appropriate regulation by the RBI
or by any other appropriate regulator. Further, if DFI opts to continue indefinitely  as DFI,
would it then be an NBFC, and if so, under a separate or an existing category.  Mr. Khan, in a
recent discussion paper on Corporate Governance mentioned that the financial institutions
should be brought fully under the regulatory and supervisory ambit of the RBI.  He adds that
the RBI/Department of Supervision need to devise suitable tools/norms for financial
Third, there was a general agreement that banks are special for a country like India. As and
when DFI chooses to become a bank, what should be the transition path in terms of
instituions regulation/supervision consistent with the nature of their operations.
RBI would be useful.
from the discussions held so far.
Consensus and Issues
these two emerging issues for discussion in this seminar.
suggested by NC.availability of access to public deposits on par with banks  reserve requirements?
How should the asset liability risk management be structured during the transition?  Can it be
straight jacket or case-by-case? How to reconcile the conflicting considerations including
issue of level playing field between banks, which are admittedly special for us and non-
banks? One view was that SLR should be dispensed with and CRR reduced straightaway, but
these decisions are taken not only on compulsions of universal banking, but essentially as
Fourth, though there has not been detailed discussion, there appears to be a consent in favour
of consolidated approach to supervision and regulation. The dangers of universal banks being
big, and risks of failure of big universal banks, if regulation is inadequate, were touched
upon. A few felt that real focus should be on asset-liability management than on business.
There was a clear divergence of opinion on superregulator, though discussion was somewhat
Fifth, the superiority of corporate form of organisation under Companies Act in respect of
financial intermediaries appears to be technically favoured but there has been inadequate
attention on this issue.  In particular, its relevance for flexibility to meet the demands of
universal banking including mergers etc are yet to be debated. There was a mention about the
Sixth, the delinking of refinance institutions from supervisory functions has attracted
Seventh, RBI has expressed itself in favour of relinquishing its ownership roles in respect of
financial intermediaries, but, Government has to take a view and this would need legislative
action. A strong view was expressed that RBI should itself divest its shareholding to market
rather than transfer its share to Government.
Eighth, the institutions concerned have not yet indicated formal initiatives towards
harmonisation such as constituting a coordination committee. But, a variety of fora have been
Universal Banking and 
A formal process of examining the various issues pertaining to banks’ entry into insurance
sector commenced a few days ago with consultations between Ministry of Finance, Reserve
Bank of India and Insurance Regulatory  Authority.  It is, therefore, appropriate that the
discussion on issue of universal banking, which till recently was addressed in a narrow
context, is now widened to include insurance and adopts broader definition of universal
As mentioned in the DP, the term ‘universal banks’ in general refers to the combination of
commercial banking and investment banking, i.e., issuing underwriting, investing and trading
in securities.  In a very broad sense, however, the term ‘universal banks’ refers to those banks
that offer a wide variety of financial services, especially insurance. International experience
indicates that while there has been deregulation of combining of commercial banking and
investment banking, including securities business, deregulation concerning the combination
of banking and insurance business has been somewhat limited, at least until recently.
Historically, the banking and insurance activities have been strictly segregated in most
banking.
Insurance : International Trends
operating to ensure effective coordination. These could be further reviewed.
marginal attention.
importance of corporate governance in a consolidated framework of operation and regulation.
limited.
part of overall fiscal-monetary considerations.
vis-à-viscountries, except by way of ownership linkages.  Only licensed insurance companies have
generally been allowed to engage in insurance activities and the business of insurance
There is distinction between production of insurance services , i.e. underwriting which is the
principal function and, distribution of insurance products, i.e., agency function. Restrictions
are most strictly adhered to in connection with the “production” of services; but approaches
have been much more flexible in the field of “distribution”.  Thus, banks have generally been
permitted to act as distributors of insurance products.  Even here, however, several countries
Another distinction that needs to be made is between providing of insurance services in-
house and the ownership linkages with insurance companies. Restrictions on ownership
linkages between banks and insurance companies have generally been considerably less
severe than on the in-house provision of underwriting and distribution services. These
On banks taking up insurance activities ,  in most European countries banks are allowed to set
up insurance subsidiaries (“downstream linkages”) but in some others such as US and Japan,
restrictions do exist. The cross-country pattern of restrictions on the ownership of banks by
insurance companies (“upstream linkages”) is more or less like that of downward linkages.
Most countries that do not in principle set any limits on down-stream linkages do not set them
on upstream ones either.
One of the diversification paths widely used by banks in recent years has been the penetration
of the insurance industry, either directly or, most often, through an alliance with an insurance
company. As a result, financial conglomerates, which had previously been mainly limited to
banking and a range of securities activities, have increasingly extended their reach into the
insurance sector.
Generally, banks have followed one of the three paths to  the insurance industry.  Some banks
have set up their own insurance company in recent years.   Some banks bought shares of the
existing insurance companies. A third group of banks has chosen to swap shares with
Insurance companies in many countries have also acquired stakes in some banks.  Those
shareholdings can be seen as an investment, or as a way of diversifying from the insurance
business, or, finally as a procedure for promoting the distribution of insurance products
Banks and insurance companies have shown common interest for a number of reasons.
Commercial banks can use their distribution network to sell all types of insurance,
particularly life insurance, to their traditional customers.  Insurance companies are
experienced in designing certain complex financial products and are offering financial
products for placing savings that private customers find particularly appealing, such as,
Most important, the combining of banking and insurance activities raises the serious problem
of the dual regulation to which they are subject and this requires close co-ordination between
the agencies regulating them.
retirement funds or single-premium insurance policies.
through bank branches.
insurance companies.
restrictions have also been relaxed somewhat in a number of countries in the recent years.
apply restrictions, such as a blanket prohibition or strict limits.
companies has been largely confined to insurance and financial activities closely related to it.There are concerns among regulators that , any expansion in insurance activities by banks will
result in new and more managerially complex risks. Such risks could ultimately harm the
bank itself. In such contingencies, there could be  increased claims on the deposit insurance
There are three organisational ways in which banks could engage in insurance activities :  in-
house, via a department of the bank;  via a separately capitalized subsidiary of the bank, or
via a separately capitalised affiliate of the bank holding company.  The regulators do
recognise that the risks to the bank will depend on the degree of integration and the
Universal Banking and Insurance : Indian Scene
In India, as and when insurance sector is opened up to the private sector including
participation by foreign investment, many entities including major industrial houses, banks,
FIs, NBFCs and mutual funds may like to enter insurance business. Some of our banks have
already expressed interest in entering the  insurance industry. Some DFIs have also shown
interest. The process of discussion has just begun and it would be appropriate to take a view
on the desirable extent of functional as well as ownership linkages between banking and
insurance business, both in public and private sector. There are legal aspects that need to be
examined so that enabling provisions or notifications are considered by appropriate
regulatory jurisdiction and coordination is even more important, and on this also, an approach
will be suggested later.
Banks in India are of a wide variety.  Two broad categories are commercial banks and co-
operative banks.  In commercial banks category, there are nationalised banks, State Bank of
India and its subsidiaries, foreign banks and private sector banks.  There are also Regional
Rural Banks.  In co-operative banks category, there are state co-operative banks, central co-
operative  banks, primary or urban co-operative banks. The linkages between these different
Presently, there is no provision in the Banking Regulation Act whereby a bank could
undertake the insurance business.  The Act may have to be amended before banks could
undertake insurance business. Alternatively, there is a provision in the Banking Regulation
Act whereby banks could take any other form of business which the central government may
notify. Thus, if the central government notifies insurance business as a lawful activity for a
banking company, perhaps banks would be able to undertake insurance business. It may, of
course, be necessary to specify what type of insurance business they could undertake.
DFIs could be broadly divided into two categories, viz., those set up under the Companies
Act, 1956 and those which  are statutory bodies set up under the Acts of Parliament.
Companies set-up under the Companies Act, could be permitted to undertake banking and
insurance business provided it is allowed in the object clause of the Memorandum of
Association.  As regards statutory bodies, while there is no specific mention allowing   to
undertake insurance business, but is should be possible for Government to permit by simple
notification. Technically, NBFCs, like other companies could also be permitted to  undertake
As regards insurance companies, in order to stave off the risk of specialisation, insurance
banking and insurance activities, provided it is allowed in the Memorandum of Association
FIs
banks and variety of insurance businesses need to be considered.
organisational structure chosen in which to engage in insurance activities.
fund or the safety net in general.institutions may also like to diversify, especially by entering into banking business.  This will
be possible only when the relevant Acts are suitably amended, and regulatory framework is
Thus, Government will have to take a view on linkages between banks and insurance
companies, both as the owner of public sector banks, DFIs and insurance companies, and as a
sovereign that has to assign appropriate regulatory jurisdiction whenever the two activities
overlap. Indeed, the design of appropriate regulatory framework may be considered as a pre-
condition for any notification or permission for banks or DFIs to be involved in any type of
insurance activity. This would imply a view on the overall regulatory coordination in the
financial sector. Since such common activities operate with scale economies, conglomerates
will have to be expected and appropriate regulation designed for such conglomerates.
There are three important developments that have taken place in recent years which are
relevant to this debate on an appropriate regulatory framework for India now. First, the
question of supervision of financial conglomerates has gained significance, and global
consensus would be relevant to us. Second, draft of a new capital adequacy framework has
been circulated by Bank for International Settlements which is under discussion. Third, a
review of regulatory structures has been undertaken in many countries and for example, the
The Joint Forum on Financial Conglomerates (Joint Forum) was established in early 1996
under the aegis of the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (Basle Committee), the
International  of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and the International
Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIA) to take forward the work of the Tripartite Group
whose report was released in July 1995.  The  Forum has examined ways to enhance
supervisory coordination, including the benefits and drawbacks to establishing criteria to
identify and define the responsibilities of a coordinator. The papers prepared by the Forum
relate to Capital Adequacy Principles, Fit and Proper Principles, Framework for Supervisory
Information Sharing, Principles for Supervisory Information Sharing, Coordinator and
The Forum’s focus has been, primarily, on diversified financial firms with complex
organisational and management structures whose large scale activities cross national borders
and sectoral boundaries.  However, the lessons drawn and the guidance prepared could also
The new capital adequacy framework of BIS on banking, circulated as a consultative paper to
replace the existing BIS capital adequacy norms also addresses the issue of consolidation of
accounts and capital adequacy. The banking accord is to be  applied on a consolidated basis
for preserving the integrity of capital base in the banking system. The new accord has to be
extended to include, on a fully consolidated basis, holding companies that are parents of
banking group.  As an alternative to full consolidation, the application of the accord on stand-
alone basis, would be acceptable, provided investments in subsidiaries and significant
minority owned stakes are deducted from the capital. The draft emphasises the need to
continue efforts aimed at aligning capital standards of banking, securities, insurance
supervisors in order to assist the assessment of conglomerate-wide capital adequacy. The
draft also lays emphasis on the need for cooperation among banking, securities and insurance
apply to smaller conglomerates or conglomerates that only operate domestically.
Supervisory Questionnaire.
Organisation
UK has already adopted a super regulator approach.
Regulatory Issues
put in place.supervisors to ensure that the overall level of capital and its distribution are adequate to meet
the risks within the mixed group and the risks arising elsewhere in the group are adequately
taken into account.
The draft is being examined in RBI and at some stage soon, a detailed discussion among the
interested parties would be appropriate. Our views need to be firmed up and transmitted to
There has, in the recent years, been an on-going debate about the most effective structure for
financial services regulation.  It is driven mainly  by the rapid changes in the financial
services industry itself –blurring the boundaries between traditionally distinct forms of
financial intermediation and distinct categories of institutions through which such
intermediation took place. It is driven partly by public expectations in terms of both the
prudential and the behavioural standards of  financial intermediaries. We are no exception to
There is a need to review our regulatory framework, not only in the light of the global
The domestic compulsions that may warrant a review of the institutional structure of financial
regulation in India are : (a) There are regulatory gaps, as for example private placement of
debt. (b) There are regulatory overlaps; for example there is a growing recognition about this
issue from the point of view of developing market for securitised debt. (c) There is a
perceived need for formal co-ordination between the regulatory agencies, which is currently
occurring through an informal high level group on capital markets presided over by the
Governor of the RBI with SEBI Chairman and Finance Secretary as Members. (d) A variety
of issues are coming up with regard to the issue of Government nominees on the regulatory
bodies and their role in regulation.  Of course, in the Reserve Bank of India, the Government
nominee is a member of the Board but is a non-voting member.  But, in other 
like SEBI, where there may be more than one nominee of Government, the question of
regulatory-autonomy arises, more so if the Government is also the owner of regulated
institutions. (e) There are new developments like the establishment of insurance regulatory
authority.  There can be regulatory overlaps, for example, if State Bank of India diversifies
into insurance business or insurance companies diversify into banking business. The concept
of universal banking implies multiple business activities. The institutional approach focuses
on institutions (say, banks) while the functional approach focuses on business activity (say
securities trading). The multiple business activities, especially through possible
conglomerates would need a review of regulatory framework.
I had just a couple of weeks ago floated a tentative technical proposal in a seminar on
corporate governance, jointly sponsored by Dr.Yerram Raju of this College and
Dr.Y.R.K.Reddy of Yaga Consultants. Since there is no point in creating new bureaucracies,
there are practical difficulties in massive redeployment of personnel, and expertise for
regulation cannot be created overnight, some ways of filling up the regulatory gaps and
overlaps should be found without disrupting the existing regulatory structures.  The proposal
is to explore the feasibility of an umbrella regulatory legislation which creates an apex
regulatory authority without disturbing the existing jurisdiction.  The features of the proposal
are: The Board for Financial Supervision of the RBI can continue to supervise banks and
organisations
developments that have been mentioned, but also due to domestic compulsions.
An Approach for India
this trend and we have the experience of some countries like UK, which could be studied.
BIS effectively.non-banks but with the Deputy Governor as Chairman; the insurance regulating authority will
supervise insurance companies and Securities and Exchange Board of India will continue
with its regulatory jurisdiction. The apex financial regulatory authority may be constituted, by
statute with the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India as Chairman and the members could
be Chairmen of the three regulatory agencies. The apex body should also include some
outside experts on a part-time basis.  Finance Secretary could be a permanent special invitee
or a regular member without voting rights as in the case of the RBI Board.  The apex
authority could have by law, jurisdiction to assign regulatory gaps to one of the agencies
arbitrate on regulatory overlaps and ensure regulatory co-ordination. The apex authority
could be serviced by a part-time secretariat of the RBI.  In a way the proposal improves and
Let me hasten to add that between the apex regulatory authority that I suggested and super-
regulator model, I will be tempted to prefer  the U.K. model of Super-regulator for only one
purpose.  Because ,  Deputy Governor of Bank of England moved as head of the new body,  I
could hope for Mr. Talwar’s elevation as super-regulator.  Yet, I would favour simpler
Friends, I hope that the deliberations would provide significant guidance to many of us, and
indeed should help resolve some issues now, while setting the agenda for future.
I am also happy that the papers and deliberations of the seminar series on the DP would be
published soon.
*
“
Mr.Janakraj for his assistance Reddy is thankful to 
Harmonising the Role and Operations of Development Financial Institutions and Banks”, on June 28, 1999. Dr.
Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Seminar on Keynote Address by 
Let me wish the seminar a grand success.
Conclusion
version of apex authority that I just described, on objective considerations.
formalises the present informal arrangement into a legislative based authority.
;