Finance and Development – Which Way Now?
The Annual Foundation Lecture of this famous College is an important event in our country’s
academic calendar.  Several of our most distinguished economists, public administrators and
thinkers have shared their thoughts with you on this occasion.  I feel privileged to have been
invited to deliver this year’s lecture.  My happiness in being able to join you today has been
immeasurably enhanced by the presence of Shri M. Narasimham at this function. 
Narasimham’s substantial contribution to monetary economics, public administration,
academic institutions, the financial system, and international agencies are well known, and I
do not wish to embarrass him by recounting these.  Permit me only to say that if, in the
aftermath of the East Asian crisis, we are able to take some comfort in our relative stability
and the resilience of our financial system, it is in no small measure due to the guidance
provided by him, particularly in his capacity as Chairman of two high level committees on
financial sector reform. My personal association with him goes back nearly 30 years.  I have
learnt much from him and I have always admired his unfailing commitment to public service
and his unflinching confidence in our country’s future.  Thank you, Mr. Narasimham, for
2. Since I received this invitation, I have been thinking about what I should talk about.  After
some consideration, and a great deal of trepidation, I have chosen to speak about finance and
1
development, particularly where we are and where we should be going.  The role of finance
in development has, of course, always been recognised.  However, I believe that in the last
few years, there has been a fundamental change in the way we think about the financial
system and its role in development.  Part of this change is due to the changing role being
assigned to Government and public sector in the allocation of nation’s savings for
development. A more dramatic and recent reason for this change is due to the East Asian
crisis. This crisis, and its aftermath, have brought to the fore the critical role of the financial
system in determining the stability and sustainability of the real economy. As a result, the
reform of the financial system, and the rules and the codes that should govern the conduct of
financial business, figure high on the domestic agenda for reform as well as the international
3. I propose to begin this lecture with some reflections on the paradigm shift that has taken
place in the literature as well as economic policy making on the role of finance in
development.  This will be followed by a discussion of some of the lessons emerging from
the Asian crisis.  I would then touch upon the evolution of the Indian financial system, and
Krugman has noted in a
2
standards of living did not.”
Western countries, particularly, England, Germany, France and the United States. During this
where per capita incomes were increasing on a sustained basis for any length of time were the
 Up to about the end of the 19th century, the only countries
overtaken by population growth; the number of people slowly increased, but their average
essentially Malthusian. Improvements in technology and capital investments were always
modern invention.  From the dawn of history to the eighteenth century, the world was
recent book, “economic growth, at least economic growth that raises living standards, is a
recall just how recent is the story of economic growth.  As Paul 
reflect on the history of human civilization in the millennium just ending, it is surprising to
4. In less than four weeks, we will be celebrating the dawn of a new millennium. As we
I. Finance and Development – The Shifting Paradigm
end with some reflections on future directions.
agenda for global co-operation.
inviting me here.
Shri5. The development strategies of the newly independent and developing countries in mid-19
century were framed against this background.  The central and the leading role for breaking
away from the colonial legacy and for speeding up the process of industrialisation was
assigned to the State. The need for the Government to occupy the commanding heights and to
lead from the top received further support from the astounding success of the Soviet Union in
emerging as a rival centre of political and industrial power within a very short period.  India,
at that time, played a pioneering role in giving expression to the aspirations of the newly
independent Third World countries in the economic field.  Thus, in 1956, India’s Second 
“ The pattern of development and the structure of socio-economic relations should be so
planned that they result not only in appreciable increases in national income and
employment but also in greater equality in incomes and wealth. Major decisions
regarding production, distribution, consumption and investment – and in fact all
significant socio-economic relationships –must be made by agencies informed by social
purpose.”
6. In practice, that meant, that all allocation decisions were to be made by the Government or
its agencies.  The importance of raising resources for development was, of course, considered
important.  However, the primary emphasis was to be on increasing the domestic savings rate
by suppressing consumption, high taxation, and appropriating profits through ownership of
commercial enterprises.  Accelerated capital accumulation through these means was
considered to be the key to development.  In a celebrated observation which guided many a
planner and policy maker in developing countries, Professor 
“The central problem in the theory of economic development is to understand the
process by which a community which was previously saving and investing 4 to 5 per
cent of its national income or less, converts itself to an economy where voluntary saving
is running at about 12 to15 per cent of national income or more.  This is the central
problem because the central fact of economic development is rapid capital accumulation
3
7. In the process of capital accumulation, the role of financial system was essentially limited,
as allocation decisions were to be made by the central planning authorities and not by the
financial markets.  To a large extent, financial system also had a limited role in providing
incentives for savings and capital accumulation as interest rates were controlled, and
generally “repressed”, and household savings were pre-empted through high levels of
statutory reserve and liquidity ratio.  New banks and financial institutions were set up, and
old ones were taken over, in order to act primarily as deposit taking agencies and providers of
credit and finance for designated and centrally determined purposes.
8. The above development paradigm has, of course, shifted rather sharply in recent years.
Almost all developing countries are moving towards a more market-determined strategy of
development.  There are several factors which have contributed to this change in perception.
(including knowledge and skills with capital).” 
W.Arthur Lewis observed that:
Year Plan outlined the goals of development strategy in the following terms:
Five
th
income stagnation - was not missed by their leaders and intellectuals.
Western powers, and the connection between these two situations – the colonial state and
cases, declining per capita incomes.  A large number of them were also colonies of the
exporters of primary products and importers of industrial products with stagnant, and in some
entire period, the then so-called under-developed or Third World countries continued to beFirst and the foremost reason for questioning the earlier strategy was the simple fact that
actual results in terms of growth of incomes or industrial development were well below
expectations.  Despite substantial increase in the domestic savings rates in several countries,
including India, rate of growth of incomes was relatively low. While saving rates were rising,
so were capital-output ratios because of inefficiencies in the allocation and use of resources.
The period of relatively low growth also coincided with a period of virtually persistent and
recurring balance of payments crises.  Thus, paradoxically, a strategy which was expected to
reduce dependency on foreign aid and foreign trade, actually resulted in greater dependence
on aid and emergency assistance from abroad.
9. An equally important factor contributing to the change in perceptions was the astonishing
success of Japan and the East Asian countries in accelerating their rates of growth by relying
on market oriented pattern of industrialisation (with, of course, varying degrees of “guidance”
by the State).  Japan’s per capita rate of growth of 8 per cent per annum during 1953 – 1973
was unprecedented in the history of economic development.  No economy had ever grown
that fast before, and Japan emerged from the ruins of  war to become the world’s second
largest economy. Similar was the record of industrialisation in East Asia particularly in
countries like Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea.  In the 50s, their per capita
incomes or the degree of industrialisation was no different from those of the rest of Asia.
However, within a period of 30 years, they were able to catch up with the 
countries of the West. A final and decisive development leading to the demise of the old
strategy was the collapse of the Soviet Union and the acceptance of market-led development
strategies by all countries of Eastern Europe.
10. The change in the development paradigm also led to a change in the perception about the
role of the financial system in development. It became clear that liberalisation of product
markets also requires a well functioning financial system for mobilisation and allocation of
savings.  Banks, capital markets and financial institutions were no longer seen as mere
conduits for channelling savings in predetermined directions, but as important instruments for
11. In the more recent period, after the onset of the East-Asian crisis in mid-1997, there has
been a further change in the perception about the role of the financial system in development.
Earlier, the real economy was supposed to lead and shape the financial system.  Today, it is
the real economy which is supposed to have become a prisoner of a weak financial system.
In other words, proper development of the financial system is no longer regarded as an
“ancillary” or an adjunct to the development of the real sector, but as a necessary pre-
condition for growth.
13. The change in the perception about the role of financial system in development has been
growth by raising the level of saving and investment and the productivity of capital.
demonstrated that an efficient and well functioning financial system contributed to economic
importance of financial market as a source of innovation and productivity growth.  It was
buttressed by the emergence of endogenous growth literature, which emphasized the
intermediation and the real rate of economic growth.  These findings were financial 
repression”, particularly interest rate and exchange rate controls which restricted growth of
liberalisation literature developed in 1970s and 1980s stressed the costs of “financial financial 
literature which demonstrated the critical role of financial system in the growth process. The
12. The above developments in the real world were supported by findings in the theoretical
allocating savings among alternative investment choices according to their relative efficiency.
industrialisedcombined with a fair amount of debate on the nature and characteristics of financial markets
as distinguished from products or factor markets.  Are financial markets special? Do they
require a different set of regulatory or supervisory regimes? What are the relative roles of
international and domestic institutions and supervisory regimes in ensuring the viability and
the integrity of the financial system in a particular country in the context of globalisation or
14. Financial markets indeed have certain special characteristics.  The most important of
these is the large volume of transactions and the speed with which financial resources can
move from one market to another, and from one instrument to another.  A related
characteristic is the scope for instant “arbitrage” as between different markets and between
different types of instruments.  Financial transactions can be highly leveraged and the risk of
15. Another interesting characteristic of these markets is the role of financial intermediaries.
There are segments of financial markets, such as stock markets, and bond markets where
savers themselves make the decision about when and where their money can be used.
Markets are, however, also dominated by financial intermediaries (such as banks, provident
funds and pension funds, mutual funds and so on), which take investment decisions as well as
risks on behalf of their depositors. Yet another important characteristic of financial markets is
the so-called “negative” externalities associated with them.  A failure in any one segment of
these markets may affect all other segments of the market, including the non-financial
markets.
16. Financial markets are also highly susceptible to “self-fulfilling” prophecy or expectations.
Sometimes “self-fulfilling” expectations can lead to panic as behaviour of a limited group of
operators gets Bhagwati has described the classic case of a self-fulfilling
prophecy with reference to the behaviour of exchange rates dating back to the 1960s.  Let me
quote from an old article by him where he illustrates this particular feature of the foreign
“Let the objective reality initially be that the dollar will not depreciate. But suppose that
speculators expect the opposite, and move out of the dollar, depreciating it.  If the reality
were independent of the actions of the speculators, the dollar would go up again, and the
market would have chastised and ruined the speculators.  But it may well be that as the
dollar falls initially with the speculation, wages and hence prices rise in sympathy. If so,
the objective reality would itself have changed, legitimating the devaluation of the
dollar in view of the speculation-induced rise of prices. Such self-justifying speculation
4
17. In view of the externalities, volatility and certain other special characteristics, it is
generally agreed that financial markets have to be closely monitored and supervised. It has
also been the past experience that, in view of the growing integration of worldwide financial
markets, failure and vulnerability in the domestic market in a particular country can have
international implications.  Similarly, problems in the external markets can create difficult
problems for the functioning of the domestic markets, even if the country concerned was
following prudent macro-economic policies.  This close relationship between the two
markets, domestic and external, raises the question of appropriate duties and responsibilities
of domestic supervisory authorities and international financial institutions.
shapes its own reality.”
exchange market:
Jagdish generalised.  
failure can be transferred by actual decision-makers to innocent by-standers.
globality”, as some prefer to call it? “18. Most of these issues have come to the fore in the context of the East Asian crisis and
subsequent developments in certain other countries, such as, Russia and Brazil. Let us briefly
I 
19. Much has been said and written about the causes of the Asian crisis and its aftermath.
The literature is voluminous and growing by the day.  In some ways, it is as impressive as the
earlier literature on the “Asian miracle”, and raises the obvious question of what developing
countries must learn from their successes.  It is not my purpose to review this literature 
comment on what went wrong and what policies could have been handled better either before
or after the crisis.  My purpose is limited, and confined to recapturing some aspects of the
Asian crisis which may have a bearing on our understanding of the relationship between
finance and development, and the lessons that countries like ours need to keep in view in
order to avoid having to go through similar devastating experiences in the future.
20. An important point to remember in this connection is that even relatively small 
in the conduct of macro-economic or exchange rate policies can sometimes lead to big crises.
The Asian experience is certainly mixed, and the magnitude of macro-economic and other
policy failures in different East Asian countries was not the same. However, in several of
them, the degree of deviation from the best practices or prudent policies was relatively small.
It may be that they persisted with the defence of the pegged exchange rates for a week or two
longer than was desirable, or it may be that they did not take corrective monetary or fiscal
action early enough. However, the devastation and the pain that their economies went
5 
through because of these policy mistakes were sizeable and unprecedented.
incidentally, was also the experience of Mexico and Argentina in early 1995, when a major
emerging crisis was brought under a semblance of control by a massive international rescue
effort launched by the IMF, the United States and the World Bank. It is no coincidence that in
all these cases, in East Asia as well as in Mexico and Argentina, the proximate cause was the
relatively sudden reversal of capital flows on which these economies had become excessively
dependent. It had taken a relatively long time to build a climate of confidence, and for capital
inflows to rise gradually. However, it took no time for this confidence to be dissipated and for
foreign capital to disappear. It is also interesting to note that the major reversal was not only
on account of foreign lenders or investors, but also on account of resident holders of domestic
assets who rushed to 
21. The point is simply that handling capital flows is not an easy business. While capital
account liberalisation and large capital movements have brought considerable growth
benefits, they have also brought with them greater potential for volatility in asset prices and
financial markets, including forex markets. This can cause unanticipated damage to the real
economy during periods of uncertainty about the future economic or political outlook. As
mentioned earlier, adverse expectations about a country’s future during periods of uncertainty
can often become “self-fulfilling”. The fact that such volatility can be aggravated by a weak
financial system, leading to severe development problems, has also to be borne in mind. The
lesson from the Mexican or East Asian episodes, I must emphasise, is not an argument
against capital flows or capital account convertibility. It is about careful and judicious
handling of such flows and about the pace of movement towards capital account 
for residents. It is also about building domestic safety nets, for example, by keeping the level
mistakes
reserves  high in relation to short term external obligations. of liquid foreign exchange 
liberalisation
encash or convert their holdings into foreign currency.
This,
nor to
I. Lessons from the Asian crisis
look at the lessons emerging from recent developments in East Asia and elsewhere.22. It can not be denied that, despite the earlier spectacular successes, the financial systems of
East Asian countries were characterised by several weaknesses. Thus, banks were not subject
to effective prudential regulation and supervision. Credit expansion in these countries was
large and banks took untenable positions in real estate and other unproductive assets, in the
process building up large asset-liability and currency mismatches. Banks had also built up
huge off-balance sheet liabilities, which moved on to the balance sheet once there was
adversity. Cross-border interbank positions were also large. Non-banking financial
23. Corporates were also highly leveraged. External debt was available at low interest rates
and the fixed exchange rates in these countries offered them a false sense of complacency,
encouraging them to hold large unhedged positions. External debt was high, short-term,
leveraged and concentrated in the private sector. Thus, on the whole, there was an inherent
vulnerability in the financial sector, and once expectation turned adverse, this vulnerability
easily translated itself into a panic. Standards of accounting practices, financial reporting and
disclosure norms were somewhat inadequate in these countries. There was lack of
transparency in the operations of market participants as well as the central banks in some
24. Events in East Asia have certainly highlighted the two-way interaction between the
financial sector and development and the need for an appropriate policy framework.
Improving the efficiency of financial sector through market based reforms is an important
concern of the new development paradigm. However, this has to be accompanied by policies,
practices and certain amount of restraints that strengthen the financial system towards
stability so that growth becomes sustainable. At the same time, proper emphasis has to be
placed on growth policies that do not give rise to problems that engender systemic instability
25. A related issue is that of striking an appropriate balance between financial regulation and
market freedom. While freedom is essential to foster efficiency, it also raises an equally
important question of an appropriate regulatory framework given the wide divergence
between private and social interest in ensuring the stability of financial system. Hence, a
proper system of regulation relating to prudent risk limits, short-term foreign borrowing and
the degree of tolerable maturity mismatches in the banking system assumes critical
importance for 
26. The most important lesson emerging from the Asian crisis, in my view, is the need to be
vigilant about domestic and international developments which may impinge on a country’s
financial relations with the rest of the world. The process of integration of worldwide
financial markets has resulted in product innovation and greater efficiency, but it has also
made developing countries subject to greater vulnerability and new risks. Strong
fundamentals alone cannot provide full immunity from a crisis. There is a need to take
preventive early action, to build firewalls, and to keep some safety nets handy. It is also clear
that when things are going well, the rest of the world shares in the prosperity. However, when
things go wrong, the price has to be paid primarily by the country concerned. It is, therefore,
an important responsibility of the countries themselves to put in place an efficient, prudential
and safe financial system which can aid and protect the development process at all times –
I I 
I. The Indian Experience
good and bad.
minimising risks to the stability of the financial system.
in the financial sector (e.g. a large fiscal deficit).
cases.
companies contributed to the crisis as these were subject to little or no regulation.27. Against the backdrop of the lessons from the Asian crisis, let us now turn to financial
sector reforms in India from the perspective of our past experience, the present stage of
development and some issues for the future.
28. As mentioned earlier, our development strategy for nearly forty years or so after
independence, placed emphasis on state guided development initiatives, with primary role
assigned to the state and its agencies for mobilisation and allocation of savings. It was not
until the Eighth Plan that the role of the financial sector and financial markets was given an
explicit recognition in the development strategy. The emphasis on accelerating investment
rate through state intervention in a number of key areas meant channelling credit to certain
preferential sectors at subsidised interest rates, exercising public ownership control on banks
and restricting their activities through policy prescriptions. Some of the typical features that
got built into this system were the directed lending programme with high levels of cash
reserve ratio and statutory liquidity ratio, ceiling on deposit and lending rate, lending to
priority sectors, branch licensing, and detailed regulation of banks’ loan and investment
29. As far as external finance was concerned, India relied primarily on bilateral and
multilateral official development assistance and did not encourage private external capital
inflows as a way to supplement domestic savings. The exchange rate was administered and
there was extensive control over all foreign exchange transactions, which were subject to
approval on a case-by-case basis. Because of pervasive exchange controls, the Indian
financial system remained largely insulated from international markets. This, however, did
not prevent India from suffering regular balance of payments crises year-after-year and
30. The financial system, as a result, faced little or no competition, either domestic or foreign,
and costs and efficiency of transactions were not its primary concern. Productivity was
generally poor and profitability low. The system was also subject to limited accountability.
By the beginning of 1990s, it was becoming evident that the system could not be sustained
31. The balance of payments crisis in 1990-91 provided the trigger point of reform in several
sectors, including the financial sector. The reform initiatives in financial sector started with
Government appointing two committees: one on balance of payments under the chairmanship
of Dr. C. , which went into  of policies in external sector and the
second, on the financial sector under the chairmanship of  M. , which
deliberated on domestic financial sector reforms. The reform programme in financial sector
since 1992 has largely followed the broad approach set out by these two committees,
32. What has been our progress in financial sector reform and what are our achievements so
far? In so far as the “ arithmeticals” of reform in the financial sector – to use a phrase used by
the Narasimham Committee – is concerned, significant progress has been made in the past
few years. There has been a steady decline in the level of resource pre- emption from the
The Present
Narasimham Committee, which was set up in 1997. supplemented by the Second 
Narasimham Shri
liberalisation Rangarajan
without a thorough revamping of its operations.
becoming dependent on aid flows or credits from the IMF.
portfolios.
ThePastbanking system. Both cash reserve ratio and statutory liquidity ratio have been reduced from
their high levels of 15 per cent and 38.5 per cent, respectively, in 1991-92 to 9 per cent and
25 per cent now. Interest rates in various segments of financial markets have been
deregulated in a phased manner. This had preceded the abolition of control on capital issues
and freeing of interest rate on private bonds and debentures. While the government borrowing
rates are now market determined, there has been a gradual phasing out of interest rate
subsidies on bank loans. Wide-ranging reforms have been initiated to develop and deepen the
government securities market, money market, capital market and foreign exchange market.
The Bank Rate has been reactivated, regular short-term Repos at a pre-announced rate are
being conducted, and a system of prime lending rate has been introduced to provide direction
to movement of interest rates in the credit market.
33. In the sphere of external financial policy, while the exchange rate is market determined,
over the years, there has been a progressive liberalisation of foreign direct and portfolio
investment, and approval procedures have been considerably simplified. As a result, there are
now minimum restrictions on inflow of capital into the economy, or its repatriation and
servicing. There has also been a significant liberalisation of policy regarding industry’s
access to foreign equity and borrowing through long term debt instruments. The banking
sector has been given a greater degree of freedom with regard to raising funds abroad and
managing their external liability, subject to prudential guidelines. The end result of all these
and other reforms has been the growing integration among various segments of financial
markets, closer convergence of Indian financial system with practices prevailing in
international financial markets, and greater opportunity for investors to access both domestic
and international markets. At the same time, care has been taken to avoid excessive short
34. Competitive condition in the banking industry has been facilitated by relaxing entry and
exit norms and permitting the public sector banks to raise additional capital from the market
(up to a certain level). While public sector banks continue to be predominant, the changing
competitive environment in the banking sector has made a significant difference to banking
practices and disclosure requirements.
35. Prudential regulation and supervision have formed a critical component of the financial
sector reform programme. India has adopted international prudential norms and practices
with regard to capital adequacy, income recognition, provisioning requirement and
supervision. These norms have been progressively tightened over the years, particularly
against the backdrop of the Asian crisis. Recently, the required capital adequacy ratio has
been increased to 9 per cent, from 8 per cent, in the banking sector. The mark to market
practice for valuation of government securities has been gradually enhanced from 30 per cent
in 1992-93 to 75 per cent by 1999-2000. Further refinement, in line with  international best
practices, in valuation and classification of investments by banks is currently under
consideration. As a further prudential measure against credit and market risks, risk weights
have been made applicable to government and other securities to take account of price
36. An attempt has also been made to avoid the problems arising from “connected lending”.
There have been regulations that limit the exposure of individual banks and non-banking
finance companies to any particular borrower or groups of borrowers. There are restrictions
on banking system’s exposure to equity and lending against equity as collateral, and its
exposure to real estate is very limited. Prudent limits have been placed on the financial
variations.
term external liability and asset-liability mismatches.37. In the area of supervision, a full-fledged institutional mechanism has been developed
keeping in view the needs of a strong and stable financial system. The system of off-site
surveillance has been combined with periodical on-site supervision for monitoring the risk
profile of banks and their compliance with prudential guidelines. The Basle Core Principles
for Effective Banking Supervision is substantially being adhered to. A “CAMELS” 
rating  system  for Indian banks  has  also  been  introduced.  The Reserve Bank’s regulatory
and supervisory responsibility has been widened to include financial institutions and non-
38. As a result of these and other measures, some progress in the performance of the Indian
banking system in recent years is noticeable.  The trend in erosion of profit and capital base
has been reversed. The net profits of the public sector banks, as a  percentage  of  their  total
assets,  averaged 0.4 per cent during 1994-95 to 1998-99, against the loss of about 1.0 per
cent in 1992-93 and 1993-94. The gross non-performing assets of public sector banks
(without allowing for provisions) as per cent of total assets have declined from about 12 per
cent in 1992-93 to about 7 per cent in 1998-99.  As of March 1999, all public sector banks
except one had achieved capital adequacy ratios exceeding the prescribed norm of 8 per cent.
Currently most of them are on the threshold of the prescribed 9 per cent ratio by March 2000.
The improved performance has enabled  most of the banks to meet their capital requirement
from internal resources and the market without dependence on budgetary support.
39. The consolidation of financial system in the recent years has led to increased resilience of
the Indian economy to external crisis.  This has been evident from the muted impact of the
Asian crisis on the Indian financial markets. Since then there has been a constant effort to
Shri 
strengthening of India’s financial system. The task is, however, far from complete. Let us
areas which require priority consideration in the future.
41. The agenda for future is long. Fortunately, there has been a widespread interest and
debate among experts and market participants on various aspects of financial reform which
has enabled India to chart out a path which is best suited to our conditions.  Limitations of
6
time - and of your patience – do not permit me to cover the entire agenda for the future. I
will, therefore, confine myself to highlighting only a few areas which, in my view, deserve
42. First and foremost, it is necessary to continue with the process of strengthening our
prudential, provisioning and capitalisation norms and bring them in line with best
international standards.  It is equally important to continue with our efforts to introduce
maximum transparency, disclosure, and accountability so that investors and counter parties to
financial transactions can take their decisions based on full information and their own
assessment of market and other risks. Tighter and tougher prudential standards will no doubt
cause some pain and impose greater responsibility on banks and other financial institutions.
However, as I mentioned before, given the new international focus and externalities and
priority.
The Future
briefly look at some of the 
Narasimham, there has been significant progress in broadening and Rangarajan and 
40. To sum up, it is clear that, thanks to the guidance provided by committees headed by Dr.
enhance the regulatory and supervisory standards in conformity with international standards.
banking financial companies.
based
system and the corporate sector as far as external borrowing is concerned.linkages involved, the regulation of the financial sector is no longer a matter of choice or a
matter of domestic concern alone.  Over a period of time, it is likely that the willingness of
the rest of the world to do financial business – either by way of trade credits, direct
investments or other types of investments and loans will depend on their confidence in our
financial practices.  India must remain ahead of the curve in its prudential management.
43. The level of Non-Performing Assets ( NPAs) of the banking system in India has shown an
improvement in recent years, but it is still too high.  Part of the problem in resolving this
issue is the carry-over of old NPAs in certain declining sectors of industry. The problem has
been further complicated by the fact that there are a few banks which are fundamentally weak
and where the potential for return to profitability, without substantial restructuring, is
doubtful. The Narasimham Committee and the Verma Committee (which recently submitted
its report )  have looked into the problems of weak banks and have made certain
recommendations which are under consideration of Government and the Reserve Bank.
These are also being widely debated, so that an acceptable long-term solution can be evolved.
Leaving aside the problem of weak banks, in profitable banks also, the NPA levels are still
high. A vigorous effort has to be made by these banks to strengthen their internal control and
risk management systems, and to set up early warning signals for timely detection and action.
The resolution of the NPA problem also requires greater accountability on the part of
corporates, greater disclosures in the case of defaults, and an efficient credit information
system.  Action has been initiated in all these areas, and it is hoped that, with the help of
stricter accounting and prudential standards, the problem of NPAs in future will be
NPAs is also tied up with the issue of legal reform.  This is an area which
requires urgent consideration as the present system, involving substantial delays in arriving at
a legal solution of disputes, is simply not tenable. It is hoped that recent efforts, such as
establishing more Debt Recovery Tribunals and setting up of Settlement Advisory
Committees in banks, would help.  However, there is an urgent need to institute a proper
legal framework to ensure expeditious recovery of debt and give adequate legal powers to
banks to effect property transfers. The absence of quick and efficient system of legal redress
constitutes an important “moral hazard” in the financial sector as it encourages imprudent
45. In order to allow for growth in their assets in line with real growth in the economy, banks
and financial institutions would need to increase their capitalisation quite substantially in the
next few years.  At present, the minimum shareholding by the Reserve Bank in the State
Bank of India, prescribed by legislation, is 55 per cent.  The minimum percentage of
shareholding by Government in public sector banks is 51 per cent.  So far, a number of strong
banks have been able to access capital markets to meet their capitalisation requirements in
line with prudential guidelines.  Some of these banks, including SBI, now have limited scope
to raise further capital from the market within the prescribed floor of RBI and Government
shareholdings. If the risk weighted assets of these banks grow in line with the growth in the
economy in the next five years, additional capital requirements of these banks may exceed
,000 crore.  As against this requirement, the headroom available for these banks to raise
,000 crore.  After  allowing  for additional infusion of
reserve capital through  internal generation  and  access  to  subordinated  debt, the  gap
between their additional capital requirement and the leeway available to raise capital from the
market will still remain quite sizeable.
capital from the market is less than Rs.1
Rs.10
borrowing.
44. The problem of 
effectively contained.46. In this situation, an issue that needs to be debated and resolved is whether this gap should
be filled by contribution from the Reserve Bank (in the case of SBI) and Government (in the
case of other public sector banks) or whether legislative ceiling for capital to be subscribed
by the public should be raised.  The provision of additional capital by the Reserve Bank is
tantamount to additional monetisation, and its monetary impact is equivalent to that of
printing additional currency. Contribution to banks’ capital by the Government has a similar
effect as it will add to Government’s deficit, which is already very high. Government, in any
case, would need to provide additional capital to weak banks, which are not in a position to
raise capital on their own.  Does it make economic or fiscal sense to add to this burden
further? On balance, there seems to be a strong case for raising the legislative ceiling for
47. At the same time, it has to be  that in our situation, particularly in view of the
need to give adequate attention to agricultural credit and rural banking as also to maintain
public confidence in the safety of banks, the public sector character of these banks should not
be given up. Keeping these considerations in view, i.e., those of allowing greater access to
markets while at the same time maintaining the public sector character of banks presently
owned by the Government or the Reserve Bank, it may be necessary to prescribe a maximum
(at a suitably low level) for shareholding by any single individual or a corporate in public
sector banks. Government may also retain the pre-emptive right to appoint, if itn wishes, the
48. Over the years, progressive liberalisation of financial markets and institutional reforms
have led to growing inter-links among various segments of financial markets. The emergence
of different types of financial intermediaries, in addition to banks and financial institutions, is
healthy and desirable. A diversified structure contributes to greater stability of the financial
system in the event of unanticipated problems. Part of the reason why problems in Japan’s
financial sector have persisted for so long is believed to be due to virtually “Bank-only”
7
financial intermediation . In India, while there has been progress in developing various
segments of the markets including money and debt markets, the depth of these markets
remains low and the volumes as well as number of participants are not very large.  An
important priority for the future is to develop the depth and breadth of these markets and to
allow multiplicity of intermediation possibilities with different risks and leverage profiles.
RBI will continue to work with financial experts and market participants to develop an
49. We also have to devise measures to make our interest rate structure more flexible in order
to take account of changes in economic cycles and the inflation outlook.  At present, for
reasons which were highlighted in the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy in
October 1999, there are several constraints  which limit the flexibility of interest rates in the
banking sector as well as the rest of the financial sector.  Given the fact that some of these
constraints are deeply embedded in historical practices, consumer preference and public
sector requirements, it may take some time to fully meet this objective. However, the process
50. The above are just a few priority areas which require consideration. These are by no
means exhaustive. I believe that if we get these right, it would make movement in other areas
IV. Conclusion
of financial reform speedier and easier.
should begin now.
appropriate procedural and policy framework to move in this direction.
Chief Executive and the majority of the Board members in public sector banks.
recognised
market participation in equity capital of public sector banks.51. I would like to conclude with a few observations on the second-half of the title of this
lecture, i.e., “Which Way Now? ”. At the beginning, as you would recall, I had discussed the
changing perceptions about the role of finance in development in recent years. The change in
the development paradigm from a largely state-directed strategy to a market-oriented one,
and the unsatisfactory results of the earlier strategy, highlighted the role of the financial
system in efficient mobilisation and allocation of a society’s savings.  All over the developing
world, in the last few years, there has been intense activity in reviewing the structure of the
financial markets and taking measures to 
52. Against this background, and against the background of past dissatisfactions with the old
strategy, it is interesting to note that the record of development in the nineties has been a
highly disappointing one for the developing world as a whole, with two important exceptions
– India and China. The nineties – the period of the triumph of capitalism and financial
liberalisation -  has seen a growth rate of only 3.2 per cent in world output which is lower
than the average of 3.9 per cent in the 70s, and not much different from the rate of growth of
3.4 per cent in the 80s. This period has also been a witness  to a large number of currency
crises (from the ERM crisis in Europe in the early part of the decade to the Mexican, Russian,
Asian and the Brazilian crises recently); substantial swings in exchange rates (including the
exchange rate of two leading currencies – the dollar and the yen); run ups in asset prices
followed by sharp collapse (for example, in Japan, Nordic countries and Asia); and banking
53. My purpose in drawing your attention to this rather disheartening record is not that we
should now return to the old failed strategy. Nor is it to suggest that financial liberalisation or
development of the financial markets are unnecessary. The old strategy collapsed under the
weight of its own excesses and contradictions. Similarly, there is no doubt that financial
reform and liberalisation of markets are necessary, essential and desirable to derive the
maximum advantage from the momentous changes that are taking place in technology,
international movement of capital, and comparative advantage of nations. My purpose in
highlighting some of the problems that have emerged in the world economy in the 90s is to
underscore simply one point, and that is that we must not confuse  “means” with “ends”.
Financial reforms and liberalisation of markets are the means to an end, and not ends in
themselves. The final objective of a successful development strategy remains what it has
always been – a sustained and rising income for all the people, and removal of poverty,
54. While we must remain steadfast in our pursuit of financial sector reforms, the success of
this process should not be viewed from the angle of how much freedom it allows to the
market players. The real test is how much benefit all this brings in terms of development,
including greater employment opportunities and poverty alleviation for those who do not
participate in the markets. It will also be wrong to view financial reforms as antithesis of
Government’s role in development or the role of public policy in widening social choices and
opportunities. In developing countries, with massive illiteracy and underdevelopment of
infrastructure, Government will continue to have an important and crucial role in creating the
necessary conditions for growth through investments in areas, such as, education, health,
water supply, irrigation and infrastructure, etc.  These and similar tasks cannot be fully taken
over by the market. Successful financial reforms must result in strengthening the ability of
governments to do what they need to do by helping to generate higher growth, higher
revenues and higher productivity. In developed countries, the so-called “potential output” of
deprivation and illiteracy within a reasonable period of time.
crises in almost all the regions of the world.
liberalise and broaden them.the economy, whatever its estimated level, can be left to be realised by changing the
parameters of financial and monetary policy. In developing countries, the main challenge is
to raise the level of potential output by removing the constraints of infrastructure and low
human resource development.
55. Which way now? Alongside financial reform and development of markets, I would urge
that the country’s attention must also turn to fiscal empowerment of the state and
improvement in public administration.  This College  has contributed enormously to
inculcating a public service culture in our country, and to train civil servants in the highest
traditions of service to the nation.  Yet, more than 50 years after Independence, who can deny
that our public offices, including public sector institutions, leave a lot to be desired in
delivery of services or in the efficient discharge of essential functions?  A 
review of our institutional framework, rules, regulations, and accountability of the
administrative organs of the state is now essential.  The focus has to be on what they do for
the people, and not on what they do for themselves. If our public institutions, including those
in the field of education and health, are unable to overcome their inertia, then alternative
56. Many of the functions of the state are now left undone or inefficiently done because of
financial stringency at the Centre as well as the States. The dependence on borrowings to
finance even essential expenditure has been increasing year after year leading to a vulnerable
and unsustainable fiscal situation.  Without adequate finance, the state cannot fulfil its
developmental role or remove the constraints to country’s potential output.  Pioneering work
has been done by our research institutions, as well as by Central and several State
Governments, to identify measures that need to be taken to reinvigorate the fiscal system.
57. With a revitalised fiscal situation and further progress in establishing a forward looking,
strong and stable financial system, the first century of the next millennium can truly be a
century of development.
Thank you.
I am thankful to Dr.A. 
help in the preparation of this lecture.
1
Dr.Amartya 
December, 1983.
2
Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics, The Penguin Press, London, 1999.
3 
 Labour”,  Manchester
School, Vol. 22,   1954.
4
 
MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998.
Stream of Windows - Unsettling Reflections on Trade, Immigration, and Democracy, The
Bhagwati, “Wheel of Fortune”, New Republic, October 5, 1987. Reproduced in A Jagdish 
W.A.Lewis “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of 
Paul 
 
”. See Economic Journal, 1982 in Dublin, “Development: Which way now?
Sen in The title of this lecture has been inspired by an address delivered by 
 of the Reserve Bank of India for their Prasad M.S.Mohanty and Shri 
We must move decisively in this direction without loss of time.
modalities have to be found by Government for delivering these and other services.
thorough-going5
 For a recent review of the situation in East Asia after two years of the crisis, see P.S. 
September, 1999.
6
 For a review of the present position and future agenda, please see Dr.Y.V. 
on, “Financial Sector Reform: Review and Prospects”, reprinted in Reserve Bank of India
Bulletin, January 1999.  For a recent review of financial sector issues by experts, see
J.A.Hanson and S. Kathuria, “India: A Financial Sector For the Twenty-first Century”,
Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1999.
7 
Greenspanata World Bank–IMF Seminar on September 27, 1999,
Washington D.C. (mimeo).
Remarks by Alan 
Reddy’s address
“South East Asia and the Future of the Global Economy”, World Affairs, New Delhi, July -
Jha,