1
Euro and its Implications for India
Mr.Singh and friends,
It gives me great pleasure to deliver the keynote address at this seminar today. True, a lot has
already been said and done on Euro and it is not easy to be original or innovative or even funny
on a subject like this at this stage. But, Euro as a subject is of great contemporary relevance to all
of us. So, we have to keep revisiting it. In any case, when my senior colleague and good friend
Mr.R.V.Gupta asked me to deliver this address, I could not resist.
In the presentation today, after briefly reviewing the features and the current status of
euro, I will highlight the current discussions on the benefits and the risks, arising out of euro for
the European Monetary Union (EMU), and implications for the rest of the world. I am bound by
duty to present an update on the actions taken by the RBI on euro. The implications of euro on
India’s macro variables such as trade, external commercial borrowings, etc. will have to be
focussed. I will conclude with a quick assessment of the Indian experience with regard to euro
after January 1, 1999. You would appreciate that the assessment has to be tentative and based on
an informal assessment conducted in consultations with a few relevant banks in India.
Features and Current Status
Eleven of the fifteen countries in the European Monetary System have irrevocably linked
their domestic currencies to the euro. The introduction of the euro
marks the culmination of years of preparatory work. The preparatory work included, in
particular, satisfying what is known as the Maastricht convergence criteria. The convergence
criteria for membership of EMU covered price stability, Government financial position, interest
rates and exchange rates.
The technical and logistical challenges during the changeover weekend were met most
satisfactorily. Thus, a common monetary and exchange rate policy has now become totally
functional.
The monetary policy of the euro area is conducted by the two tier European System of
Central Banks (ESCB) – the European Central Bank (ECB) and the National Central Banks
( NCBs).
The ECB is responsible for framing the monetary policy for the euro area.
The NCBs of the participating countries are responsible for implementing the monetary
The regulation and supervising of banks and credit institutions continue to be the
EMU country Governments are bound by the Stability Pact to maintain relatively low
levels of debt as compared to current values.
On January 1, 2002, euro notes and coins will be put in circulation along with notes and
coins of participating countries. Until June 30, 2002, both euro notes and coins and national
                                                         
responsibility of the national supervisory authority.
The day to day exchange rate policy is the responsibility of the ECB.
The primary objective of monetary policy is to maintain price stability in the euro area.
policy set by ECB.currencies would co-exist. However, with effect from July 1, 2002, the national currencies
would cease to be a legal tender and would be completely replaced by euro for all transactions.
Euro as a currency started trading in the international markets on January 4, 1999. After
opening at 1.1742 US dollars per euro, it weakened marginally thereafter in January and
February. The euro was quoted at 1.1180-85 US dollars as of February 19, 1999.
 Benefits and Risks for European Monetary Union
There has been a lot of discussion about the possible benefits and risks arising out of
euro for the EMU itself. There is even greater interest in the implications for the rest of the
world. It may be useful to highlight the differing viewpoints in this regard.
First, by eliminating different currencies, the euro eliminates foreign exchange risk,
including to countries that are members of the EMU.
Second, an immediate implication of the introduction of the single currency is the
reduction in transaction costs. The costs associated with converting one currency into another,
cross-border transfers by companies and hedging of risks are reduced.
Third, the current nationally based bond markets are transformed into a single market
with common conventions. The integration of financial markets is expected to boost the supply
of new issues and instruments.
Fourth, the new funding and investment possibilities in the euro-region are expected to
become more efficient and competitive. As a result of increased price transparency and
competition, financing costs of firms will probably scale down.
Fifth, the higher yield corporate debt market will in all likelihood become much larger in
the euro zone with the elimination of foreign exchange risk. This will enable corporate credit
risks to be priced more accurately.
Sixth, elimination of exchange rate fluctuations between legacy currencies or in-
currencies is expected to lead to a significant increase in trade and investment within the euro
area.
Seventh, it is argued that giving other countries the ability to peg their currencies to a
basket of hard currencies (say a mix of US dollar and euro) might stabilise fixed exchange rate
I have listed out some of the benefits, but there are also some concerns that have been
voiced about the success of euro. I will list some of them for record and I am deliberately saying
for record since, in my view, the risks do not appear to carry as much conviction as the benefits.
Risks for EMU
First, it is held that the different economies in the EMU are at different levels of economic cycle,
and hence there may be occasions when a single monetary policy appears inadequate to tackle
the problem of growth and employment in a comprehensive manner.
Second, the stability and growth pact provides an excellent in-built mechanism to ensure fiscal
discipline among the EMU countries. However, it is felt among some that the in-built mechanism
may come under some stress during the early periods.
Third, some concern has been expressed by some regarding absence of clear rules on 
sharing and open market operations.
2
seignorage
regimes.
BenefitsFourth, since introduction of the euro, there has been some degree of volatility of euro against
the US dollar. However, it is too early to formulate any medium-term view on the euro based
Fifth, it is conceded that there would be significant reduction in transaction costs, but there are
doubts about the extent to which this will get translated into efficiency.
Implication for Rest of the World
It is too early to be able to assess accurately how important the euro will become in the
international monetary system. It would take some time for borrowers, investors, traders,
analysts and other financial market agents to become accustomed to a new currency and decide
on the weight that they will assign to euro. However, in the medium to long run, there are
expectations that the following benefits would emerge.
First, many feel that the euro may become a more attractive currency for bond issuers in
future. In fact, the euro was the most popular currency for bonds issued in the international
markets in the first month after its introduction. It accounted for approximately 55 per cent of the
volume of new bond issues, compared with 40 per cent for the US dollar. This could well have
been due to initial euphoria about euro denominated instruments. At this stage, we cannot state
with authenticity how long and how far this trend in favour of euro will continue.
Second, there are some who are of the opinion that euro may also become an attractive
currency for the investment of official reserves. Currently the US dollar is by far the most
important official reserve currency worldwide. It is reported that well over half of official
reserves are held in US dollar denominated assets while around one-fifth are currently held in
EMU currencies. It is possible that some countries in Asia and Latin America, which
traditionally have predominantly held US dollar reserves, may find it useful to consider
divestment of part of their reserve holdings gradually by acquiring euro. The shift to euro assets
by central banks around the world may among other factors, be motivated by its strength, its
increasing use as a transaction currency and the more liquid and deeper bond market. However,
it is reasonable to expect that such a shift will take place in a manner that will be non-disruptive
of currency markets. In any case, it is perfectly rational to expect that there would be some
coordination in ensuring non-disruptive currency movements between euro and US dollar in the
same manner as G-7 currencies.
Third, some people expect that the euro could also emerge as an important anchor
currency for other countries particularly among countries in central and Eastern Europe by virtue
of their geographical closeness and possible economic linkages. Some of these countries, it is
held, may find it useful to peg their currencies formally or informally to the euro or to a basket of
currencies in which the euro is a large component.
Fourth, it is possible that international trade would find euro an alternate currency for
invoicing. Roughly, 50 per cent of the world exports is invoiced in US dollars, almost four times
the share of US in world trade. On the other hand, around 20 per cent of world exports are
invoiced in EU currencies and 5 per cent in Japanese Yen. Almost all major internationally
traded commodities are currently priced in US dollars. In the long run, it is expected that euro
may become an important alternate currency for the invoicing of foreign trade.
Fifth, there is a feeling that euro may increasingly be recognised as a preferred currency
for financial transactions. Trade finance could be more easily available to corporates in India and
elsewhere as the European banks are expected to compete for business and are expected to
3
movements in this short-term.extend credit at cheaper rates in order to stay ahead of each other. Also, in respect of long-term
financing, those corporates that have natural hedge in euro may find it advantageous to borrow
in euro and take advantage of lower costs.
It is expected by some that with elimination of currency risk and the formation of a single
market, the scope for sector specific funds are attractive. Thus, raising funds for sectoral projects
like financing of infrastructure projects could be easier with the introduction of single currency.
In sum, therefore, the implications to the rest of the world are not very clear but the
general perception is very very positive. How important and popular would euro be, and how
rapidly it would impact on the world depends on a variety of factors. In particular, it would
depend on how the benefits and risks evolve.
 Reserve Bank of India and Euro: An Update
The RBI had initiated, well in advance, preparatory work relating to the euro. I will
quickly list the action taken by RBI before I move on to the implications of euro for India.
(i) The RBI commissioned a study on "EMU, Euro and India" under the aegis of
Development Research Group (DRG) in the RBI. The study made an important contribution in
terms of analysing the impact of euro on India.
 In order to identify the measures required to be undertaken to ensure smooth transition to
euro, a Working Group on Euro comprising officials from RBI, commercial banks and
Government of India was set up in the RBI. The Group examined various issues concerning
euro, ranging form the broader economic impact on trade and investment to micro and
operational aspects relevant for commercial banks in India and also for trade and industry.
 RBI continuously reviewed commercial banks' preparedness for euro, which included
 Follow up action on the recommendations of the Working Group was initiated by RBI.
The follow up actions related to changes in market practices and changes in the rules of Foreign
Exchange Dealers Association. A notification was issued under Foreign Exchange Regulation
Act facilitating use of euro as a new currency.
(v) The RBI also convened a meeting of banks on December 29, 1999 to review and confirm
their preparedness for switching to euro. Participating banks reconfirmed that the various issues
relating to the transition such as setting up correspondent arrangements, opening of euro deposit
accounts, training of staff, settlement instructions and changes in swift messaging standards had
been addressed and action taken.
  Necessary changes in software etc. were effected in the RBI systems. Training was
imparted to staff dealing in euro related issues. Seminars were organised by RBI on euro and
organised by outside agencies.
 High-level discussions were held with heads of institutions of Euro countries on
 RBI commenced publication of Rupee-euro rate in its Weekly Statistical Supplement and
(ix) In addition, FEDAI issued operational instructions to banks and conducted
seminars/workshop for banks.
(x) 
4
RBI Bulletin.
(viii)
emerging issues.
(vii)
RBI officials participated in seminars 
(vi)
(iv)
operational and computer system changes.
(iii)
(ii)
Steps taken by RBIImplications of Euro
The implications of euro on India can be analysed in terms of its probable impact on
trade, external aid, external commercial borrowings, foreign direct and portfolio flows, banking
External Trade
The eleven countries comprising the EMU region have 25 per cent share in India’s
exports and 30 per cent share in imports. There may not be any direct immediate impact of
introduction of euro currency on India's exports and imports to and from these countries. But, it
is expected that European corporates will become more competitive as they would 
streamline and become cost efficient competitors. At the same time, the evolution of a market of
a huge size in terms of euro is expected to open up many new commercial activities for
businesses. This would mean Indian corporates have larger opportunities to be proactive and
competitive. Sectorally, there could be scope for software exports as a result of switchover to
euro.
Trade Invoicing
Indian exporters and importers are currently invoicing approximately 85 per cent of its
total trade in US dollars. Shift into invoicing in euro by Indian business will depend on a number
of circumstances. Oil and fertilisers, which are major items of import for us, are denominated in
US dollar as per international practice. Similarly, the buyers and sellers in other countries may
still continue with US dollar denomination. However, it is likely that European companies,
which were earlier invoicing in US dollars, may prefer to shift to euro. Indian business will no
doubt keep observing international practices, preferences of trading partners, and their own
convenience in such a shift in invoicing from US dollars to euro.
Foreign Currency Accounts/Deposits
These can be classified into nostro accounts of banks, foreign currency accounts
maintained in India by banks such as EEFC/RFC accounts and Foreign currency deposits
accounts (FCNR-B) in DM. During the period of transition, banks can maintain nostro accounts
in "in currencies" or/and euro. Banks in India have already opened nostro accounts in euro. In
the case of foreign currency accounts, banks have been allowed to open accounts in euro also.
Similarly, in the case of FCNR(B) deposits, banks have been permitted to offer "Euro accounts"
in addition to DM during the transition period. In respect of existing fixed rate 
deposits, the interest rates will continue till maturity. For existing floating rate deposits, as these
are linked to Libor, banks have been advised to use Eurolibor, which is the successor index. For
new deposits, banks have been allowed to link their interest rates either to Euribor or Eurolibor.
Foreign Direct Investment
Of the total forei gn direct investment in India, EMU countries accounted for around 12
per cent. Euro is unlikely to have an impact on the existing investments in India, which are
denominated in rupees. The investor can remit the funds in any convertible currency of his
choice including euro. Only in the case of GDRs, if they are denominated in any of the national
currencies, the issuer can redenominate to euro during the transition period. It is expected that a
broader and deeper euro market would make euro more attractive.
5
FCNR(B)
rationalise,
related issues, technology, etc.External Commercial Borrowings
The introduction of euro could open financing opportunities for Indian corporates who
have been so far largely tapping the markets abroad in US dollars in the form of bonds and
syndicated loans. With euro becoming important, competition between US dollar and euro could
be intense resulting in a possible marginal reduction in spreads for us. In any case, in terms of
borrowed funds, India can have more options and possibly a marginal reduction in cost - both in
terms of euro and US dollar market. It is expected that Indian borrowers can now have greater
access to European markets in view of the larger investor base and a common financial market.
In terms of long term financing, those corporates that have natural hedge in euro may find it
advantageous to borrow in euro and take advantage of lower costs.  There is scope for raising
dollar denominated and euroloans in EMU region.
Banking Issues
Among the Indian bank branches in EMU countries, State Bank of India has branches in
Frankfurt, Paris and Antwerp, while Bank of India and Bank of Baroda have a branch each in
Paris and Brussels, respectively. The most significant impact for the branches operating abroad is
the elimination of exchange rate risk across the EMU region, which will encourage branches to
buy/sell securities across borders on a larger scale. Indian banks will no doubt face more
competition than before.
Issues Related to Business/Industry
The euro will pose some challenging questions to Indian companies possibly requiring
assessment of corporate strategies. I trust most corporates are already doing this. For my part, I
First, the euro will greatly enhance sales and procurement possibilities as currency related
obstacles to the mobility of goods, services and factors within EMU region will cease.
Second, the euro region will also be attractive investment locations as they may serve as
access points to the entire EMU region and the newly emerging markets of Central and Eastern
Europe.
Third, selecting a business location in Europe will be easier for Indian companies as
exchange rate considerations no longer matter for the choice of right business location.
Fourth, enterprises could concentrate on other critical parameters directly related to the
demands of the company such as production cost, proximity to market centres and infrastructure.
Fifth, Indian companies with already established sales and production networks in
Europe will face more strategic challenges. They will come under pressure from newly emerging
competition within the EMU area. Innovation and cost cutting will be crucial for competitiveness
and the future market position in Europe.
Sixth, managements must see the timetable for the changeover for a number of business
activities including offers and price lists, new contracts, invoices, accounting and controlling,
payrolls, balance sheet and profit and loss accounts.
6
will list a few, may be self evident, observations.Information and Technological Issues
Modifications may be required in the existing computer systems to include euro as a
currency. The modified systems must be able to provide a linkage between the legacy currencies
and the euro as all the legacy currencies are connected through euro.
Legal Issues
There should be no difficulty in Indian law regarding continuity of contracts per se .
Under FERA, RBI has notified euro as a permissible currency and hence it will not be contrary
to law to make or receive payments in euro. However, a clause on continuity of contracts has
been recommended for existing contracts, which spill over to 2002 and beyond.
Review of Indian Experience after Euro
The RBI has started publishing data on rupee/euro exchange rate since its inception. The
rates are also available in the RBI page of Reuters. All the banks are also quoting rupee/euro
rate. Since January 4, 1999, when the first quote on euro/dollar rate was available, the rupee has
appreciated against the euro during the period.
A few banks were informally contacted to ascertain their experience with regard to euro.
 Some banks are also quoting euro-rupee forward premia. It is seen that generally, the six-
month forward premia of euro is around 9.0 per cent annualised, implying a six-month forward
rate of Rs.49.90 against the euro. Spot and forward deals are being undertaken in euro by both
Indian public sector banks and foreign banks.
The recent trend indicates that most corporates continue to undertake transactions in in-
currencies and no significant change to euro has been observed. However, major corporates,
who manage their foreign exchange actively, have started using euro to hedge existing in-
currencies exposure. As a result, the market has witnessed a few forward and swap deals in euro.
A few option deals in euro have also been reported.
Some banks are still maintaining nostro accounts in in-currencies alongwith nostro
accounts in euro. However, the number of nostro accounts in in-currencies has considerably
reduced and the balances in in-currencies are showing a declining trend. Banks are reportedly
waiting for euro transactions to pick up in order to further rationalise their nostro accounts.
With regard to trade invoicing, external commercial borrowings and FCNR-B dep osits in
euro, it is too early to expect any perceptible shift to euro. However, minimal as it might be,
FCNR-B deposits in euro have been opened.
 Banks are continuing to organise seminars in order to make them familiar about euro.
Some corporates with outstanding loans in the in-currencies have received notification from
lending agencies of change in benchmarks to Euribor/ Eurolibor. Most of the larger corporates
seem to be aware of these benchmarks. However, among the smaller companies, awareness is
Finally, I expect this seminar by ASSOCHAM will also help us make an assessment of
the situation and identify areas needing the attention of corporates, banks, RBI and Government.
We are eagerly looking forward to the result of deliberations today.
1
RBI, at Seminar on Eurocurrency and its Implications for
India, at ASSOCHAM, New Delhi, on February 20, 1999. I am grateful to Dr.A.Prasad and Shri.Rajiv Ranjan for
their valuable assistance.
7
Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor,  Keynote address by 
limited.