Conference of Chairman of Private Sector Banks
th
 at NIBM Pune, on 15 February 1999 .
(Address  by S.P.Talwar, Deputy Governor,  Reserve Bank of India)
Way forward for Private Banks in India
It is a Pleasure to be in the midst of my banker friends whom I had a privilege to
R
2.  It is indeed nice on the part of NIBM to have organised such a Conference
which I am sure would in the normal course deliberate on the role and initiatives of the
private banking community. I shall at the same time consider it worthwhile if you would
also take into account  the responsibilities cast on the private sector banks in the present
times when the Indian banking system is trying to  reorient itself to meet the challenges
arising out of the competitive environment in the context of ongoing financial sector
reforms by way of deregulation of interest rates and prudential self governance, besides
the pressures of globalisation bringing in their wake not only extensive use of technology
and also application of  transparency standards in published accounts. For a Conference
of this kind, it is therefore very appropriate for NIBM to have made this congregation a
mix of traditional bankers together with the technology driven new breed of Indian banks.
3.  Of course, I am also aware that for around 3 decades NIBM has been playing
this catalyst role in bringing together the Rrofessional bankers and providing an
opportunity for them to have an interface with the central bank of the country on the
various aspects of their immediate concern. I am informed that this session is essentially
meant for an interaction between us. But in the background of what I stated earlier, I seek
your kind permission to convert this into a session of introspection on some of the vital
issues before the Indian banking system and particularly those which I perceive are
crucial for the very survival of Rrivate banks in our country.  I would like to highlight
some of the more important ones to serve as a backdrop for the fruitful discussions that
are bound to follow later.
4.  On the positive front, I would be failing in my duty if I do not acknowledge the
fact that the new banks have brought in the latest technologies in transaction processing,
innovated on banking products and excelled in customer service almost giving a run to
even well established foreign banks in the matter. Their operating costs, particularly staff
costs to total income are at much lower levels than that of the foreign banks due to
extensive use of technology and absence of restrictive practices in an officer oriented staff
set up. It also makes me proud to note that some of the old private banks maintain high
standards of operational efficiency and won accolades from the market and rated at top by
leading financial dailies and journals.
5.  The focus of the statutory regulation of commercial banks in India till the early
1990s was mainly on licensing, administration of minimum capital requirements, pricing
of services including administration of interest rates on deposits as well as credit, reserves
and liquid asset requirements.   After evolution of BIS prudential norms in 1988,  RBI has
ast. meet individually on many occasions in the taken  a series of measures to  realign its regulatory standards almost on par with the
international best practices. At the same time it also took care to keep in view the socio-
economic conditions of the country, the business practices, payment  systems prevalent in
the country and the predominantly agrarian nature of the economy and ensured that the
prudential norms were applied  over the period and across different segments of the
financial  sector in a phased manner.
6.  Some of the regulatory and prudential norms suggested by the Narasimham
Committee (2) though essential for the transformation process of the Indian banking
system to reach global standards also cast heavy responsibility on banks in strengthening
their financials which may not be feasible unless there is also a simultaneous structural
realignment on the lines suggested by the Committee. I would like to discuss a few such
recommendations of the Committee which do have a bearing on the course the private
sector banks should follow in the days to come.
Capital Adequacy standards
7.  Main thrust of the committee in this regard is on the following direction:
• increase of CRAR from 8 to 10% by 2002 and authority for RBI to raise this
further for individual banks taking into account the risk profile
• capital adequacy requirements should take into account market risks in
addition to credit risks
• 5% risk weight for market risk for government and approved securities
• risk weighting of government guaranteed advances
100% risk weight for foreign exchange open position
Implementation of the aforesaid  recommendations require a great deal of efforts
on the part of not only public sector banks but also old private banks many of them being
8.  In fact I would like to mention in this forum that the public sector banks
despite their largeness would need to mobilise externally only around Rs 5400 crores, that
too by only 13 nationalised banks and 5 associate banks of SBI, as additional capital
funds to meet the proposed CRAR requirement of 10% by year 2002. This is despite
assuming an average annual growth at 15% in their risk weighted assets, conservative
estimate on return on assets at 0.8% and 12% increase by way of retained earnings based
on past trends over this period. Again, a large proportion (Rs. 3350 crores) of the above
capital funds are meant for the strong banks and easily mobilisable from the capital
market either through equity or sub ordinated debt. Further, the needs of associated banks
would easily be met by a cash rich SBI. I thought that we should provide aforesaid correct
picture to the market and public in general and show how the assessment, in some cases
pitched  upto Rs.13500 crores, by various international agencies on the additional capital
funds need of our public sector banks falls wide off the mark.
9.  All said, it has to be accepted that the old private banks in the country need
2
 
 
 
substantially under capitalised.
 
 
 large infusion of capital funds to make their operations viable and enable them to reach a
level playing field. Additional capitalisation is essential for them for business growth and
match the capital prescriptions for dealing with various emerging risk weighted products
in Indian banking system. They need to make these efforts to reach the capital level
standards of, if not the public sector banks, at least their immediate cousins viz. New
private banks.
10.  It is to be acknowledged that many of the old private banks suffer from low
capital base. Although many banks have been in existence for considerably long period
and  12 banks have  in fact completed  more than 50 years of existence , they have not
taken steps to adequately strengthen their capital base. This is perhaps due to
apprehensions of the management groups of losing controls over the banks on an
enhanced capital base.
11.  As many as 14 old private banks had capital funds which ranged from
Rs.2.04 crore to Rs.95.12 crore as on 31 March 1998. Seven banks had capital funds of
less than Rs.50 crore and have been advised to increase the position beyond Rs.50 crore
within a period of 3 years.  Five banks had CRAR at levels less than 8 per cent as on
31 March 1998 which continued to be so even as on 30th September 1998. Only 18 of
the 26 banks enjoyed CRAR level of more than 10% as on 30th September 1998. I expect
that these facts would engage your attention and trigger the coming together by the
regional groupings and those with symmetry in business and operational profiles towards
consolidation and restructuring  to provide the much needed  thrust for synergising the
functioning of private banks in the country.
Prudential norms
12.  Implementation of financial sector reforms in their second phase requires
entire portfolio of government securities should be marked to market in the next 3 years.
While this is already in vogue for new banks, old banks have to gradually  move towards
this regime from the existing level of 70% in respect of current assets. It is a matter of
satisfaction that the old private banks together have reached a level of 87.31% in respect
of current investments by end of September 1998, with many of them already switching
over to marking their entire investment to market As already indicated in the RBI’s Mid
term review in October 1998, marking investments upto 100% to market would be put in
place over the next three years and I expect the remaining banks also to move in this
direction on their own as done already by many of their counterparts and foreign banks.
13.  While dwelling on the subject of investments, I would like to mention an
emerging issue of supervisory concern in this area. In the light of substantial growth in
the Non SLR investments by banks during the last 18 months, there is a need for proper
assessment of underlying risks in equities and corporate bonds and debentures acquired
by banks. This is all the more important in the context of the quoted non SLR investments
to total non SLR investments reaching a level of as low as 39.59% in respect of new
3
st
stbanks and 35.28% in old private banks as on 30th September 1998.
Non performing advances
14.  The following are some of important norms of asset classification and income
recognition norms commended for adoption by the central bank as outlined by the
• classification of assets as doubtful if it had remained in the substandard
category for 18 months in the first instance and to be brought down to 12 months  
• non performing government guaranteed advances should also be brought
under NPA classification norms
• evergreening of irregular advances by making fresh advances should be
avoided and suggestions for relaxation of the definition of NPAs and the classification
norms should be resisted by the central bank
• average level of net NPAs for all banks should be reduced to below 5% by
2000 and to 3% by 2002
• banks with international presence (Bharat Overseas Bank has international
presence at present amongst private banks and new banks may aspire in the times to
come) should reduce gross NPAs to 5 and 3% and net NPAs to 3 and 0%by 2000 and
2002
• international practice of income recognition  norm of 90 days as against the
present practice of 180 days should be introduced by 2002
• general provision for standard assets at 1 %
As you are already aware,  RBI has already moved ahead in implementing many
of the above recommendations except in regard to adoption of 12 months for
classification of doubtful debts and reduction of past due tenure to a period of 90 days for
income recognition asset classification. At the same time we have taken care to phase
them for adoption, as in the past, over  a gradual spread of time to ensure that the burden
of absorption remains at bearable level for the institutions.
15.  While it is normally expected that the banks in private sector will be more
concerned in credit management and ensure faster recovery and recycling of loan
portfolio, it is surprising to note that their NPA level, including that of new banks has
been increasing at alarming levels over the last few years.   The gross NPAs of old private
sector banks have been rising   in absolute terms during the last 3 years, from Rs.1474.34
crore in March 96 to Rs.2794.13 crore in March 98 and forming 7.99 % and 10.92% to
the gross advances as on the respective dates. As many as 17 old private banks has gross
NPAs level exceeding 10% as on 31st March 1998. The level of gross NPAs of these
banks has shot up to 13.84% (net NPAs at 8.58%) as on 30th September 1998.
4
 
 
 
 
 
 
later
Narasimham Committee (2) over the next few years.16.  It is more a matter of concern to note that  New private sector banks though
have started their operations in the real sense only from 1995 have accumulated  non-
performing advances within short period. The gross NPAs of these banks had increased
from 218.90 crore in March 97 to 405.63 crore in 31 March 98 with the percentage also
raising from 2.30 % to 3.21 %  at the end of respective periods. The gross NPAs were
estimated at 5.40% (net NPAs at 3.98%) at the end of September 1998.
17.  The increase of NPA in private sector banks is indicative of an alarming trend
in this area viewed in the light of a rise of as much as 71.68% in gross NPAs in respect of
new banks followed by 22.95% by old private banks as against 5.49 per cent increase
registered by the Indian Banking System during the half year ended September 1998. It is
unfortunate that 2 of the 9 new banks have reported gross NPAs above 5%  and 19 old
banks reporting gross NPAs above 10%. I would like all of you seriously look at the
factors which led to such a sorry state of affairs in the area of credit management. You
should initiate  immediate steps for a relook into the credit appraisal techniques followed
by your banks and institute or activate loan review mechanism especially for large
borrowal accounts and systems to identify potential NPAs.
Credit  and fund Management
18.  The private banks and particularly the new banks continued to depend heavily
upon bill  market as a part of their lending operations with bills purchased  constituting
more than 30% of their loans and advances (13% for old banks) as on 30th September
1998. The banks were found on many occasions dealing with such a portfolio in a rather
casual manner leaving aside time tested evaluation standards relating to appraisal of
customer’s capabilities to retire the bills in time. They had instead rested on the
availability of other bank’s comfort letters, which at times proved forged and violated
maximum permissible level of finance a customer can obtain from banking system by
way of funded and non funded exposures.
The new banks are particularly taking recourse to market borrowings as a regular
source of funding their operations and also for arbitrage reasons. There should be clearly
defined limits beyond which banks should not  rely on the call money market. Access to
call market should be only for meeting unforeseen swings and not as regular means of
financing bank's lendings.
Risk Management and ALM techniques
19. The ratio of off balance sheet items as a percentage of total assets was high at
85.41% in respect of new banks  (30.17% for old banks,  55.36 % for all banks, 321.69%
for foreign banks) as  at the end of September 98. The banks should  pay greater attention
to ALM and avoid mismatches and cover liquidity and interest rate risks. They should
also adopt statistical risk management techniques like value at risk in respect of balance
sheet items which are susceptible to market price fluctuations, forex rate volatility and
5
interest rate changesCredit Deposit Ratio
The Credit Deposit Ratio of the new banks was 46.58% followed by 49.55%
registered for old private banks as against 48.68% for the Indian Banking System as on
30th September 1998. The banks should make extra efforts to optimise their credit
portfolio without sacrificing credit discipline.
Profitability
20. The proportion of  high cost inter bank deposits is high in the case of new
private sector banks like in the case of foreign banks.  In fact, largest proportion of high
cost deposits is held by new banks followed by old private sector banks. This may lead to
lower profitability particularly in the context of these banks already having a thin margin
of interest spread in their operations.
21. The new banks have recorded the lowest   interest spread at 0.89 per cent
followed by 1.24 % in respect of old private banks which was less than industry average
of 1.48% recorded for the half year ended September 98.  They were still be able to
maintain profits perhaps on account of low operating costs. The staff expenses as
percentage of total income constituted only 2.82 per cent in respect of new banks and
even less than foreign banks at 7.62%. This is indeed a commendable aspect of their
working. The proportion was 11.46 per cent for old private banks for half year ended
September 98.
22.  It is worthmentioning that barring 4 banks all other banks reported profits
during 1997-98 and declared dividends ranging from 9% to 75% for that year.
Transparency and Disclosure norms
23.  There is a growing demand world over for introduction of better transparency
and disclosure norms. As you all know, RBI has already introduced  such norms over the
last 3 years requiring banks to include in their published accounts various critical ratios
relating to their operations, state of health of their provisioning and loan and investment
portfolio and staff productivity levels. Narasimham Committee(2) has particularly
recommended following disclosure parameters for adoption by the industry.
• need for disclosure of maturity pattern of assets and liabilities, foreign
currency assets and liabilities, and movements in provision account and NPAs
• direction by RBI to banks for publishing consolidate group balance sheet
• full disclosure relating to connected lending and exposure to sensitive sectors
• disclosure of loans to related companies in bank's balance sheet
RBI is already working out the modalities for introduction of the aforesaid
standards and banks are being advised shortly in the matter.
6
 
 
 Systems and methods
24. There is increase in the number of frauds reported by the private banks
including new banks during the last 3 years. The total number of frauds reported had
increased from 182 (Rs.14.51 crore) in 1995 to 270  (Rs.95.92 crore) in 1997. Number of
frauds reported during 1998 (upto September 1998) were 170 for Rs 76.06 crores. The
banks should therefore make internal control systems as core of their business operations
with particular focus on internal inspection and audit, concurrent audit, submission of
control returns by branches and controlling offices, visits by controlling officials to field
level offices. The banks should also introduce computer audit on a regular basis.
Technology upgradation
25. With globalising, financial systems have undergone fundamental changes
because of the ongoing revolution in IT and EFT and payment system areas, these two
emerging as pillars of modern banking developments. There is immediate need for
introduction of information and control systems particularly in many of the old private
sector banks towards
- better tracking of spreads, costs and NPAs for higher
- to identify and promote profitable products and quality
  customers
26. The banks should explore the feasibility of collaborative arrangements with
universities and other institutions in India and abroad offering specialised training to the
financial services industry to facilitate inflow of emerging training packages and
Structural Issues
27.  As already mentioned by me, capital adequacy levels would have to go
undergo rapid changes flexible with emerging risk trends in the banking system.  The
question of minimum threshold capital for  old private sector banks deserves attention and
mergers could be one of the options available for reaching the required capital threshold. I
would like to emphasise that mergers need not necessarily be between weak and strong
banks but can happen even between strong banks as is happening around the world. The
latter type of mergers would make greater economic and commercial sense and have a
7
methodologies.
- efficient treasury management
- risks and assets liability management and
- accurate and timely information for strategic decisions
   profitability,Connected Lendings
28. I would like to mention another disturbing trend emerging of late in the
management of banks. As all of you are aware, Section 20 of the Banking Regulation Act
prohibits loans to directors or to any firm or company in which directors are interested.
The banks should maintain arms-length relationship in respect of own subsidiaries or
joint ventures; all loans to such companies have to be made at commercial rates and are
subject to limits which apply to similar companies. But in many cases the aforesaid
discipline has not been adhered and violated in spirit and ultimately resulted in the loan
facilities turning as NPAs. Such instances which have come to light during the course of
inspections and through off-site reporting by banks are viewed seriously by the central
bank. I would like to stress again that we resort to extreme supervisory action in such
cases and in fact two chief executives of private banks have been removed by the central
bank for gross violation of the above norms of connected lendings. Though it is not my
intention to scare the bank managements, I still thought that I can leave a word of caution
Millennium (Year 2000) Issues
29. I would like draw your attention to one of the current IT related issues viz.
Y2k problem which is pursued by RBI more as a business continuity risk  than a
technology problem. Initiation of Supervisory measures by RBI is in synchronisation with
the standards set by BIS. RBI has an enlarged role of monitoring and enforcing the
compliance by the entire financial sector and co-ordinates its efforts with the National
30.  A target date of 31st December 1998 was fixed for ensuring Y2K compliance
and banks may be subject to penal measures in case of persisting non compliance beyond
March 1999. Institutions have also been advised to put in place appropriate contingency
plans to take care of possible system failures. A High Powered Working Group in RBI
under the chairmanship of Deputy Governor and with representatives drawn also from
banking industry reviews the progress made in compliance at regular intervals.
Issues to be addressed
31.  To conclude , I would like to reiterate the following issues for introspection
• In order to bring in synergy to their operations and bring in economies of
scale, the private banks should go if necessary for voluntary mergers among themselves.
The mergers need not necessarily be between a weak and  strong bank. It can also be
between two strong banks as proven by recent global experiments.
• There is an ever increasing pressure on banks' profits and business portfolio
due to globalisation. The banks should therefore go in for an appropriate training
8
by the banking community.
level Task Force set up by the Prime Minister of India.
to the private banking community in this area.
 
 
 
 
'force multiplier' effect.packages and collaborative arrangements with specialists in technology and new product
areas.
• The future trend of private banks should be not by mere expansion but more
by way of consolidation.
• The performance ratios of both old private banks  in comparison to other
segments of the Indian banking system should make them vulnerable. Unless the banks
wake up and redraw their business targets and operational strategies towards  optimum
earnings some of them will land in serious problems of even survival in the near future.
Any apathy on the part of private banks will cast poor reflection on the investors' interest
I take this opportunity to thank the Director, Shri Subramaniam for providing me
an opportunity to share my views and concerns in this august forum of professional and
dynamic bankers. I wish the Conference all success.
9
besides proving themselves as a drag on the Indian Banking System.