A Synoptic View of the
Twelfth Finance Commission’s Recommendations
I am indeed very happy to be in the midst of familiar faces and familiar
surroundings. This is perhaps the first public occasion on which I am commenting
on the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission. As such, this
meeting has some special significance at least to me. I congratulate the Reserve
Bank of India in organizing this meeting of Finance Secretaries so that the full
implications of the various recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission
can be understood. It will also pave the way for action by the States, the Centre
and the RBI. Today’s meeting is yet another example of the proactive role being
played by the RBI in the field of economic policy.
In federal fiscal systems, on grounds both of equity and efficiency,
resources are generally assigned more to the central government whereas states
together with the local governments have the larger responsibilities. The resultant
vertical imbalance requires transfer of resources from the Centre to the States.
States also have different capacities and needs, and this lends a horizontal
dimension to the issue of resource sharing. Neither vertical nor horizontal
imbalance is expected to be static.  Some of the core provisions regarding
sharing of resources are built into our Constitution itself. But changes in the
economic and fiscal situation warrant a review of the arrangements from time to
time.  The Indian constitution has provided for both continuity and change.  The
Finance Commission is entrusted with the task of periodically examining these
issues according to the constitutional provisions and the terms of reference.
The Twelfth Finance Commission has recommended a scheme of fiscal
transfers that can serve the objectives of equity and efficiency within a framework
of fiscal consolidation. The effort needed to achieve fiscal consolidation must be
seen as the joint responsibility of the central and state governments. For
achieving vertical and horizontal balance, consistent with the responsibilities of
the two levels of governments in respect of providing public and merit goods and
services, both the centre and the states need to raise the levels of revenues
relative to their respective revenue bases, exercise restraint in undertaking
unwarranted expenditure commitments and prioritizing expenditures.
The finances of the central and state governments, individually and in the
aggregate, have evinced large and persistent imbalances in the period preceding
the Commission’s award period.  Not only have fiscal and revenue deficits
increased, the proportion of revenue deficit to fiscal deficit has increased.
Outstanding debt as a proportion of GDP touched 81 per cent in 2004-05. Four
factors have accounted for the continuing deterioration: fall in centre’s tax-GDP
ratio compared to the peak levels achieved in the late eighties,
Inaugural Address by Dr. C. Rangarajan Chairman Economic Advisory Council to the
th
Prime Minister at the 16 Bi-Annual Conference of the State Finance Secretaries Reserve
Bank of India Mumbai on April 8, 2005substantial increase in the level of salary and pension payments,
particularly for the states, in the wake of the recommendations of the Fifth
Central Pay Commission, high levels of nominal interest rates in the late nineties
combined with the subsequent fall in inflation rates, and the low growth rates in
the first three years of the new decade. Besides, the tax devolution to states was
less than projected because of the deterioration in the tax-GDP ratio of the
centre. While these reasons account for the acuteness of the ailment, there are
also underlying structural reasons for the persistence of fiscal deterioration
because of the tax structure and expenditure pattern.
Vertical Transfers
In the scheme of fiscal transfers, the correction of vertical imbalance is, to
some extent, based on judgment. An assessment has to be made of the gap
between resources and responsibilities at the two levels of government.
Sometimes it is not recognized that the share of states in the combined revenue
receipts undergoes a radical change after tax devolution. For example, during the
Tenth Finance Commission’s period, the share of states which was 38.6 per cent
before transfers became 63.0 per cent after transfers. Taking into account a
variety of factors including the historical trends, the Commission had
recommended an increase in the share of states in the divisible pool of taxes to
30.5 per cent from the previous level of 29.5 per cent.  This increase was also
necessary to provide some cushion to states whose share in the total tax
devolution might go down as a result of any modifications in the formula of
horizontal distribution. The Commission felt that this increase could be
accommodated by the central government by pruning their activities that fall in
the domain of the states.   The Commission had raised the indicative limit of
overall transfers out of the gross revenue receipts of the centre from 37.5 per
cent to 38 per cent.
Horizontal Transfers
In the context of horizontal imbalance, the Twelfth Finance Commission
felt that the equalization approach to transfers was appropriate as it was
consistent with both equity and efficiency.  It has not, however, been possible to
implement this approach fully, as the extent of disparities in the per capita fiscal
capacities of the states is too large and some of the better-off states are also in
serious fiscal imbalance. In the devolution scheme recommended, the
Commission has endeavored to strike a balance among different criteria
reflecting deficiency in fiscal capacities, cost disabilities, and fiscal efficiency.
While the Commission has retained, by and large, the indicators used by the
Eleventh Finance Commission for determining the horizontal transfers, it has
altered the weights to some extent.  The distance criterion combined with the
criterion of population, representing together the needs and deficiency in fiscal
capacity have a combined weight of 75 per cent. The cost disabilities get a
weight of 10 per cent through Area and fiscal performance 15 per cent.Role of Grants
The Twelfth Finance Commission has increased the proportion of grants
to tax devolution in the scheme of transfers. Grants constitute around 19 per cent
of total transfers compared to around 13 per cent in the Eleventh Finance
Commission. Grants achieve certain purposes which cannot be fulfilled by tax
devolution. First, they provide greater stability to revenues of states which
became an important issue in the recent period. Second, they enable the
application of equalization principle. The Twelfth Finance Commission has made
an effort in this direction by focusing on education and health which are two
critical merit services. Third, special purpose and conditional grants can be given
which promote specific objectives. It is therefore necessary that in judging the
transfer to states, tax devolution and grants should be taken together into
account. The coefficient of correlation between comparable GSDP per capita
(average of 1999-00 to 2001-02) and the recommended per capita transfers,
comprising tax devolution and all the grants, among the general category states
excluding Goa, is estimated at -0.89, which emphasises the redistributive
character of the transfers.
A word must also be said about the estimation of non-plan revenue deficit
grants. Very often such an approach is called ‘fiscal dentistry’ or gap filling
approach. This approach has been misunderstood. No Commission goes by just
the gaps projected by the states. The Twelfth Finance Commission also
examined each item of expenditure and adjusted it according to some common
normative criteria. These are detailed in the Report. Similarly, adjustments were
made for revenue projections as well. Even base year figures were adjusted. An
important adjustment made by the Twelfth Finance Commission in the base year
figures relates to fiscal capacity. In the final analysis, the pre-devolution non plan
revenue deficit was 25 per cent of the states projections. It has also to be noted
that nearly 85 per cent of the deficit grant goes to special category states.
The Commission has laid emphasis on strengthening the local bodies in
keeping with the constitutional mandate for effective and autonomous local self-
governance, recognizing that local bodies must be supported by a scheme of
transfers that encourages decentralization and own effort for raising revenues.
The recommended transfers for the local bodies constitute about 1.24 per cent of
the shareable taxes and 0.9 per cent of centre’s gross revenue receipts.
Debt Restructuring
The Commission has recognized that the debt burden of the states is
currently heavy. It has, therefore, recommended a scheme of debt relief, which is
in two parts. First, there is the relief that comes from consolidating the past debt
and rescheduling it, along with interest rate reduction. The second part consists
of a debt write-off, which is linked to the reduction in the absolute levels of
revenue deficits. Both reliefs will be available, only if states enact appropriate
legislations to bring down the revenue deficit to zero by 2008-09 and commit to
reducing the fiscal deficit in a phased manner. With the relief that has been
recommended, it should be possible for states to pursue their developmentalgoals with fiscal prudence.  The condition imposed also mitigates the moral
hazard problem.
Institutional Changes
The Commission has argued that important institutional changes are
required to tackle some of the structural problems in managing government
finances. One central change relates to the regime of government borrowing. It
has recommended that states, like the centre, must decide their annual
borrowing programme, within the framework of their respective fiscal
responsibility legislations. In fact, as the background papers for this Conference
indicate that if the state governments move on a path of fiscal correction, the
market borrowing programme of the states will be sustainable and should not
face difficulties in terms of eliciting the necessary subscription. There is also a
need to let the states access the market directly for their borrowing requirements.
Such a practice will bring in the needed fiscal discipline. The overall limit to their
annual borrowing from all sources should be supervised by an independent body
like a Loan Council with representatives from the Ministry of Finance, Planning
Commission, Reserve Bank of India, and the state governments. This Council
may, at the beginning of each year, announce borrowing limits for each state,
taking into account the sustainability considerations into account. Our suggestion
for de-linking grants and loans in plan assistance, as these need to be
determined on different principles, is part of the reform of the borrowing regime. It
is this part of the Finance Commission’s recommendations dealing with the
changes in the borrowing scheme that will receive detailed attention at this
meeting.
Restructuring Public Finance
The scheme of restructuring envisages the fiscal deficit to be reduced to 6
per cent on the combined amount of the centre and states and revenue deficit to
zero by 2008-09. This will result in an increase in the aggregate saving rate as
well as an increase in government capital expenditure as a percentage of GDP.
In consequence, as aggregate investment rate increases, growth is stabilized at
above 7 per cent. The reduction in the revenue deficit by 4.5 percentage points is
to be achieved by an increase in the total revenue receipts by 2.9 per cent and a
reduction in total revenue expenditure by about 1.6 per cent.
In our plan for restructuring government finances, we expect a positive
growth dividend, as revenue deficits relative to GDP progressively fall, implying a
fall in government dis-savings, and an increase in the overall savings relative to
GDP. A higher tax-GDP ratio combined with higher growth on a sustained basis,
and fall in interest payments, create the necessary space for increasing
government capital expenditure, and productivity enhancing non-interest, non-
salary revenue expenditure. The virtuous cycle of reforms, robust government
finances, and an equalizing system of fiscal transfers, should help establish a
sound federal fiscal system in India.