Foreign Exchange Regulations – a review
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. I am happy to be here at the annual
general meeting of the FEDAI. As we never tire of mentioning, the role of FEDAI
is unique. It is not merely a self regulatory organization in the sense of
complementing regulation, its own regulations have a binding nature to the extent
they are issued under directions from RBI. As a self regulatory organization, we
look to FEDAI to promote better customer service, efficient market practices by
encouraging high standards of conduct, promoting compliance with the spirit of
RBI regulations integrity and professionalism. Furthermore, the role of FEDAI
encompasses the entire area of foreign exchange which includes besides foreign
exchange trading all aspects relating to goods, services, non-residents etc.
In today’s address, I propose to review the entire gamut of foreign exchange
regulations from a balance of payments perspective. The destination is clear.
However, a review of this nature gives us a better understanding of the how the
regulatory environment has evolved and also indicates how to move forward.
Current account transactions
The whole objective of markets including foreign exchange markets should be to
support economic activity and raise the potential for economic growth.
International trade in goods and services (current account transactions) provides
this stimulus. The focus of exchange control regulations will, therefore, have to
facilitate transactions in international trade in goods and services. There has
been significant liberalization of the trade account in respect of export/imports as
well as invisibles. While the repatriation requirement for export earnings
continues  guided by the macroeconomic situation, exporters can hold export
proceeds in foreign currency in India in EEFC accounts as per regulations.
Having regard to the liberalised approach in trade matters, specific steps were
taken to allow exporters greater flexibility and freedom in the matter of seekingregulatory compliances. The system of self write off and self extension of due
date for export realisation for exporters was introduced followed by raising the
threshold limit for GR declaration. Reliance has therefore been placed on
simplifying procedures for the genuine exporter. Similarly, exporters can avail of
foreign currency or domestic credit as per their choice and banks are not
constrained from raising foreign currency resources for this purpose. In fact our
data shows that substantial foreign currency resources have been raised by
banks for this purpose and the aggregate foreign currency borrowings therefore
on an average exceed  50 percent of Tier I capital. In regard to invoicing, there is
no restriction on invoicing in any currency.
In regard to imports too there are no restrictions on payments for bonafide
imports. Importers are allowed to avail of trade credit up to one year for imports
of raw materials and up to three years for capital goods. In regard to small value
imports we have recently liberalized and delegated follow-up for bills of entry less
than US$100,000 to authorized dealers. This ensures that genuine importers are
not put to difficultly. Similarly for import of services, there is no need for RBI
approval beyond indicative limits and authorized dealers are allowed to permit
remittances by verifying the documents. Overall, measures for simplification of
procedures have been made subject to KYC and Anti Money Laundering
guidelines.
A number of initiatives have been taken towards procedural simplification with an
objective of reducing the transaction cost. In the case of individuals, foreign
exchange for current account transactions such as education, medical, travel,
emigration, maintenance of close relatives abroad can be drawn from the
Authorised dealer based on simple declaration up to certain indicated limits. The
focus of external sector reform measures has therefore been to dismantle
controls and provide an enabling environment to all entities engaged in external
transactions.Capital account transactions
When we come to the capital account we enter into a much more complex area.
In emphasizing the advantages of deregulation, globalisation and economic
reforms, a word of caution is necessary; that for a society like India, which is
complex and diverse, comprising different states with different levels of
development, social disruption has to be avoided. The total cost of the social or
political disruption or market disruption has to be weighed against the flow of
benefits whenever we talk of economic reforms. So in that sense again, it
involves balancing between benefits over a period and costs of immediate
disruptions.
We therefore have to take an integrated view of the domestic financial as well as
the fiscal situation and the imperatives of the international financial architecture in
capital account liberalization and our carefully calibrated capital account
liberalisation precisely captures this objective. In this regard we need to make the
following distinctions:
(i) non-residents and residents; under residents, households, corporates
and Fis
(ii) debt and equity
(iii) inflows and outflows
Accordingly, our preferred policy orientation is  towards hierarchy of capital flows
emphasizing the importance of non-debt creating flows. In pursuance of this
approach, a sequenced liberalization of current and capital accounts has been
undertaken with a focus on encouraging these flows with free repatriability and
international rates of taxation but with defined processes of approval/registration
and reporting accompanied by sector specific ceilings. In regard to equity
investment for non-residents, at present, FDI is permitted under the automatic
route subject to specific guidelines except for a small negative list. There are six
sectors where investments are prohibited and eleven sectors where investmentsrequire prior approval of Government. Seven sectors are subject to sectoral
caps. Similarly the policy on portfolio flows is quite liberal and in fact India has
received large flows on portfolio account. The portfolio flows are permitted
through two channels, NRI and FII. The ambit of sectors where such flows are
permitted has been increased in a phased manner, the recent addition being
permission for FIIs to invest in security receipts issued by ARCs.
The policy relating to outward remittances for residents is to give freedom to
corporates to invest in companies overseas and establish either reenfield
projects or acquire companies. The objective is to create an enabling
environment for Indian companies to become multinational in nature which
eventually leads to greater international trade in goods and services.   In
furtherance of this objective, several measures are being considered including
proposal to allow all forms of guarantees by corporates under Automatic Route
subject to the overall limit, extending the scope of the general permission for
ESOPs and repurchase by issuing companies, proposal to allow disinvestment
under the Automatic  Route, revision of formats of APRs and Statutory Auditors
Certificate.
In regard to debt flows, we need to take into account the balance sheet approach
and how risks apply to different sectors and maintenance of monetary and
financial stability. This requires that any policy should not unduly constrain
independent monetary policy making. Recent literature on “debt intolerance”
emphasizes that developing countries have historically run into problems at much
lower debt to output ratios rather than advanced countries. The focus of a
balance sheet approach is therefore of particular relevance for emerging market
economies.  There is also need to reckon the possibility of balance sheet
problems in one sector spilling over into other sectors often snowballing in the
process. Problems can originate in the corporate sector (as in some Asian
economies in 1997-98) or in the fiscal sector (as in Russia 1998, Turkey in 2001and in certain Latin American countries) with the banking sector playing a key
role in all these episodes. Similarly, if banks tighten their lending to prevent the
asset portfolio from further deteriorating this further complicates the situation of a
corporate or a government in need of fresh financing or debt roll overs.
Furthermore, in assessing the balance sheet risks one has also to take into
account the contingent liabilities. In fact the off balance sheet exposures both
credit substitutes and derivatives can substantially alter the overall risk exposure.
Our external commercial borrowings policy therefore seeks to address some of
the above issues. The whole process of permitting such external debt may be
either through the automatic route or non-automatic route, but slowly the
automatic route is being expanded and the non-automatic route reduced. Again,
in the capital account apart from the government’s there are three balance
sheets that we take into account whether for residents or non-residents: The
balance sheet of the households, the corporates, and the financial
intermediaries. Though in theory, everything may be integrated, in our phase of
development, definitely these three are distinct in terms of their immediate
reactions to market forces. That is the reason, the recent External Commercial
Borrowings (ECB) policy makes a clear distinction between financial
intermediaries and corporates and entities having an element of sovereign
gurantee. So, depending on the situation and the nature of balance sheets, one
has to define the capital account convertibility.
Procedural simplifications
In recent years, the Reserve Bank has delegated authority to authorised dealers
to such an extent that there is hardly any need for the individuals to approach the
Reserve Bank for any approval. However, we have come across instances where
the liberalised procedures have not permeated to the grassroot level in banks
possibly due to lack of knowledge about various rules and regulations and also
procedures to be followed for various types of forex transactions. In someinstances, banks show a distinct indifference to dealing with individual
transactions either because of the transaction cost or charge adverse exchange
rates and high commissions. The RBI is examining measures to further enhance
the level and quality of customer service to individuals by reviewing the scope of
activities of entities currently eligible to undertake forex transactions.
Furthermore, with a view to provide comfort to the citizens and corporate
community by minimizing transaction costs, while taking severe view of willful,
malafide and fraudulent transactions, it has been decided to put in place the
procedures for compounding of contravention under FEMA. The Government of
India has, therefore, in consultation with Reserve Bank placed the responsibilities
of administering compounding of cases with the Reserve Bank, except under
Section 3 (a) of FEMA.  Directorate of Enforcement would continue to exercise
powers of compounding under clause (a) of Section 3 of FEMA (dealing
essentially with Hawala transactions).
Issues to be addressed in derivatives transactions
In the area of derivatives, numerous risk management instruments have been
allowed in a phased manner though a lot of issues are to be addressed here
which may not be possible unless all stakeholders put in a sincere and combined
effort. The major concern is on structured products both in regard to the products
themselves as well as the accounting and valuation. This problem becomes more
acute in case of forex related instruments since it is essentially an OTC market.
We are already working on restructuring the valuation and accounting aspects, in
consultation with ICAI, and would also invite the industry comments before
finalizing the same. Ideally, the guiding principles in regard to derivative
operations would be:
o No structured product should contain embedded derivative
structure, which is not otherwise allowed on a standalone basis.
o Except under specified exceptions, the derivative structure should
not permit any leeway that is not allowed for the cash market.o The structure should not result in the ‘dollarisation’ of the balance
sheet of the banks.
I must also add that any such framework for only the banking sector would be
just the job half done. The ultimate users, the corporates, have to be prepared for
the disclosures and recognition principles in line with International Standards. I
understand that ICAI is working on this but the FEDAI as an industry association
must take up with them for much greater disclosure by corporates of all their
derivative transactions. The draft now proposed by ICAI provides
recommendatory guidance rather than making it obligatory and it is for
organizations like FIMMDA and FEDAI to ensure that this happens. Any further
liberalization will be subject to appropriate accounting and disclosure standards
being adopted by corporates.
The "appropriateness standard" ensures that banks use the same principles for
taking credit decisions in respect of complex derivative transactions as they do
for non-derivative transactions. Banks are expected to evaluate the purpose of
the derivative transaction and make an assessment as to whether it is
appropriate to the customer’s needs and level of sophistication. Also whether the
Boards of companies understand the risks.
It would be pertinent to mention here about the recent report of the Counterparty
Risk Management Policy Group. An initiative of the major international players in
the financial market, the report is directed at complementary measures that will
further reduce the risks of systemic financial shocks and limit their damage when,
rarely but inevitably, such shocks occur. A similar initiative could be worthwhile in
the Indian context too and could go along way further streamlining the regulatory
framework. FEDAI and FIMMDA should take up this initiative.
I wish the deliberations all success. The RBI welcomes suggestions from FEDAI
for further simplification of FEMA regulations to facilitate genuine trade
transactions.