 
Vote of Thanks Speech by Shri V. K. Sharma, Executive Director 
 
Respected Mr. Pranab Mukherjee, Hon’ble Finance Minister of India, Dr. 
Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, Ambassador Richard Boucher, 
Deputy Secretary General, OECD, Mrs. Shyamala Gopinath, Mrs. Usha 
Thorat, Dr. K.C.Chakrabarty and Dr. Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governors, 
Reserve Bank of India, Mr. S.V. Ranganath, Chief Secretary to the Govt. Of 
Karnataka, Mr. Hans-Helmut Kotz, Member of Deutsche Bundesbank 
Executive Board and Chair of OECD Committee on Financial Markets, Ms. 
Flore-Anne Messy, Principal Administrator, OECD, senior officials of 
Ministry of Finance, Government of India and Government of Karnataka, 
Chairmen and Managing Directors & Chief Executive Officers of banks, 
distinguished invitees and guests, delegates to this Workshop, members of 
the electronic and print media, ladies and gentlemen. 
2. First of all, on behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I would like to 
profusely thank Hon’ble Finance Minister for making it convenient to grace 
this occasion and delivering  his truly pace-setting and very keenly 
perceptive keynote address.   Sir, your illuminating account of the Indian 
and international experience clearly bears out that the national and 
international agenda of financial literacy and education will have to be 
driven, in a mission mode, by public policy.   Sir, we are sure, that your 
profound thoughts, and perspectives, will inspire the engagement over the  2
next two days and will make this Workshop a truly high impact event.  
Thank you very much, Sir. 
3. We cannot thank enough respected Dr. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve 
Bank of India for being the guiding spirit and inspiration behind 
conceptualising and designing this ambitious Workshop.  Governor, Sir, 
your today’s address was, like always, intellectually stirring, incisive and 
truly insightful.  In particular, your conceptual construct of financial 
literacy constituting the demand side and financial inclusion, the supply 
side, provides a truly new analytical and operational perspective.  No less 
so were your words of advice on the research agenda on the way forward 
and these would surely inform the serious engagement over the next two 
days.  Thank you, Sir. 
4. As the Governor so aptly put it, partnering with OECD in hosting this 
Workshop is a huge and valuable learning experience for India.  
Ambassador Boucher, Sir, your address today truly summed up coordinated 
initiatives that are being taken globally for advancing the cause of 
financial literacy and education.  Sir, there cannot be a more eloquent 
testimony to you and OECD than the Governor’s observation that OECD has 
been an intellectual leader in the field of financial literacy.  Sir, thank you 
very much for lending a helping hand in our inexorable and indefatigable 
pursuit of our national agendum of financial literacy.  3
5. I also thank Dr. K.C.Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of 
India, for having kindly agreed to deliver the welcome address.  Sir, your 
address brought out the imperatives of credible and effective financial 
literacy and education in consumer protection and consumer 
empowerment.  I also thank our Deputy Governors, Mrs. Shyamala 
Gopinath, Mrs. Usha Thorat and Dr. Subir Gokarn for having made it 
convenient to be with us to guide us.  I also thank the delegates to the 
Workshop for making it convenient to attend the Workshop. 
6. I would also like to thank the Government of Karnataka for their 
unstinting support and co-operation.  I also thank the members of the 
electronic and print media for covering this event and helping us in taking 
the message of this Workshop to a much wider audience.   
7. Last but not the least, it would not have been possible to hold an 
event of such scale and magnitude without the sincere and untiring efforts 
and unflinching commitment of our colleagues in the Reserve Bank of 
India, Bengaluru, ably led by the Regional Director.  I thank them all for 
this.   
Thank you all so very much indeed! 