SPEECH BY HER EXCELLENCY THE PRESIDENT OF INDIA, 
SHRIMATI PRATIBHA DEVISINGH PATIL, AT THE  PLATINUM 
JUBILEE CELEBRATIONS AND RELEASE OF POSTAGE STAMP 
th
ON THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ON 16  JANUARY, 2010 AT 
NEW DELHI 
  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
 I am happy to be participating at this function to mark the 
Platinum Jubilee of the Reserve Bank of India and to release its 
Commemorative Stamp. I convey my greetings to its Governor, the 
Directors and the staff.   
 
  The Reserve Bank of India has been a part of the country’s 
economic journey. It has stood at the centre of India’s financial 
system. From ensuring stability of interest and exchange rates to 
providing liquidity; from ensuring bank penetration and safety of 
depositors’ funds to promoting and developing financial institutions 
and markets, the Reserve Bank has played a crucial role in the 
economy.  It has in the 75 years of its existence, acted in a highly 
responsible manner and has contributed to providing support to the 
nation’s economy both during critical and relatively normal times. It is 
also an institution which has had the privilege of having eminent 
economists as Governors.  Prime Minister Manmohan Singh himself 
was the Governor of the Reserve Bank from 1982 to 1985.   
 
 Established in 1935 during the aftermath of the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, Reserve Bank marks its platinum year at 
the end of another global downturn. The impact of the credit and 
 1financial crises of the last two years, in terms of lowered economic 
growth rates and high unemployment rates, is somewhat comparable 
to the Great Depression. The performance of the Reserve Bank, 
including during the recent crisis demonstrated that its experience of 
regulating monetary flows of the nation has lent to it high stature and 
given it deep maturity and perspective to deal with a range of 
complex economic issues.   
 
 India was fairly successful in weathering the economic storm.  
The Government of India announced stimulus packages while the 
Reserve Bank took steps to regulate the liquidity in the system.  
Fiscal policy took care to arrest the domestic demand slowdown and 
revive it, while the monetary policy was used for providing stimulant 
to growth impulses. The prudent and carefully calibrated polices 
adopted by RBI and our well regulated banking sector, were noted 
by financial experts. Though we did see a fall in our growth rate 
initially, we have now returned to close to a 7 percent growth rate, 
testifying the correctness of our policy stance. Our growth trajectory 
is expected to be higher in the coming year. 
 
 If there is one lesson that can be drawn from this crisis is that 
there cannot be unbridled extension of credit.  The Reserve Bank 
must continuously ensure that banks have proper guidelines for risk 
management.  While indiscriminate grant of credit must be avoided, 
credit policies should definitely not deny finance for productive 
enterprises. There is a need to speed up development and 
 2infrastructure projects in the country and to ensure that bank credit is 
available to all sectors, sections and units across the scale. 
  
 India enjoys some unique advantages like a high saving rate, 
large domestic market and demographic factors that will remain 
conducive to sustaining demand.  Nevertheless, the current situation 
warrants a close watch on various economic indicators, including of 
the international economy.  In the last few years there has been 
another development - an acknowledgement that the dynamics of a 
globally integrated economy require the involvement of emerging 
economies like India.  This makes the Reserve Bank’s role even 
more exacting now. In an inter-linked world, our central bank has to 
factor in global developments while designing policies and 
programmes. However, while doing so, it has to all the time think of 
the specific Indian context, see the immediate relevance of such 
developments in our lives and keep in view the evolving needs of 
men and women across our country.  
 
 In India, one of the major objectives is financial inclusion.  The 
priority of the banking system should be to strengthen itself 
significantly to support a modern, vibrant and inclusive economy.  
The banking system in the country has grown considerably but yet 
even today the challenge is to reach the unbanked areas, particularly 
in the rural areas. I am confident that the Reserve Bank will provide 
the appropriate policies and frameworks to achieve this objective. 
Maximum use of technology should be made while fulfilling this goal.   
 3  
 The Reserve Bank has been aligning the banking system to 
respond to the needs and priorities of our development agenda.  At 
this stage, as part of their increased social responsibility, we need a 
greater involvement of the banking system in the ongoing national 
development programmes.  There are a number of Government 
schemes that are being implemented ranging from the National Rural 
Employment Guarantee Scheme to widow pensions; from skill 
development to supporting Self Help Groups.  The banking system, 
guided by the Reserve Bank, should look at how their participation 
can make the implementation of these programmes, more effective.   
 
Self Help Groups have been recognized as effective vehicles 
for empowerment of economically weaker sections, especially 
women and those who are in the BPL category.  Banks are required 
to give 40 percent of the net banking credit at below the Prime 
Lending Rate, towards priority sector advances, like agriculture, 
small enterprises and weaker sections.  Advances to Self Help 
Groups get broadly reflected under advances to agriculture sector 
and to weaker sections, but it has not been found to be adequate to 
meet the demand of the large number of women SHG beneficiaries.  
Therefore, advances to Self Help Groups should be got clearly 
specified under the small enterprise advance category and under the 
DRI schemes, to enable them to get credit at lower rates of interest.  
The RBI should consider evolving a mechanism under which Women 
SHGs, particularly those comprising the BPL category, are provided 
 4credit at an interest rate not exceeding 4 percent per annum and 
prescribe a cap if necessary on the interest rates for onward lending. 
 
 In conclusion, I would like to say that not only has the Reserve 
Bank adapted well to the changing requirements, it has also been 
able to innovate and implement policies that have enabled the 
country to achieve high growth rates. In the coming decade there will 
be many more challenges and requirements for the banking sector.  
But I am confident that these challenges will be met with confidence. 
I once again congratulate the Reserve Bank and all those associated 
with it, for reaching this milestone and wish the very best for the 
future.  
 
Thank you, 
 
Jai Hind. 
 
  
 
 
 5