Lecture Two 
The Strategy of Economic Adjustment 
Jacob A. Frenkel 
November 30, 1992 
I feel extremely privileged to have been invited to present the second  L. K. Jha Memorial Lecture and 
honored to have the opportunity of addressing this august gathering. This being my first visit to India, I 
could not have expected a warmer hospitality or a more gracious reception. During the past two days, 
which is the amount of time I have spent here, I have already had the opportunity of making many new 
friends. I never realised how many old friends I have here, and I am delighted to renew acquaintances 
made in my past incarnations at the University of Chicago, the International Monetary Fund and, of 
course, the present gathering. 
The subject that I will be discussing today is somewhat general : “The Strategy of Economic 
Adjustment”. Naturally, I am aware that when one starts a title with the strategy, one may be 
misinterpreted because there is nothing like the strategy. I should probably have indicated “Strategies 
for Economic Adjustment”, because there are so many peculiarities that each country and society 
faces, and the strategy of adjustment must be tailored, custom-made for their specific needs. Still, I do 
not feel apologetic for having used the strategy because there are some general principles that 
encompass many of these possibilities and should therefore be of interest. 
I would like to address several topics today. First, the issue of stabilisation; second, the transition 
towards growth; third, liberalisation in general, which raises the question of what you should do first, 
namely, the sequence of economic measures, as well as how fast you should go about it. Then comes 
the issue of a safety net, protecting the economic programme and the society undergoing the 
adjustment programme, how secure it should be and why it is so important to have it. Of course, certain 
preconditions are needed, and I will also articulate them. Most importantly in the present context, since 
we are in the Central Bank, the Reserve Bank of India, I would like to pay special attention to the 
concept and importance of the capital market. 
What does stabilisation mean? What are the lessons that I can bring from my own country in this 
context? I do realise that in India the issue of economic stabilisation is not the most pressing one, but 
should always be kept in mind. All over the world, there have been attempts at stabilisation when 
countries have experienced extremely high inflation. There are several lessons that can be learned 
from these experiments. First, it is a long journey, and there is always political pressure to declare 
victory prematurely and move from what might be called the stabilisation phase to the phase of growth. 
I still remember in my IMF days visiting a country two months after the onset of stabilisation, when the 
head of the State asked me: “Is the stabilisation phase over? Is this the time to move towards growth?” 
And indeed, as you look at the countries that have attempted to stabilise, you see that the first phases 
are the easiest ones, like going on a diet; it is very easy to shed the first few kilos or so. It is 
sustainability, or staying power, which makes it so difficult to stay the course. Therefore, if it was up to 
me to decide when to declare victory, I would say that great prudence is called for and one should 
never declare victory, rather keep the effort up as part of one’s way of life. However, as we look at 
various countries which have been successful in effecting stabilisation, we see that their problem has 
not been so much stabilisation itself as the resumption of growth. It is this notion of failure to resume 
growth that has so discredited the strategies of stabilisation. I would therefore like to address the 
question : what lessons can be learnt about stabilisation efforts with reference to the resumption of 
growth? If one looks at a typical stabilisation package one sees that a great deal of emphasis is placed on 
economic aggregates. The budget deficit must be cut, total government spending must be reduced, 
monetary control must be in place, etc. etc. Yet, when “stabilisation” succeeds one sees that somehow 
there is no basis for takeoff. This leads to the following conclusion: growth should not be viewed as just 
another stage in the process, but should rather be built into the very design of the stabilisation 
programme. This means that telling governments to cut down their aggregate spending is not good 
enough. We should be more informative. We should be much more specific, perhaps even intrusive, 
pointing out that if you cut certain kinds of spending, you curtail the infrastructure for growth. The 
selfsame reduction in spending that is needed for the stabilisation will have a different impact on growth 
and investment, and attention has to be paid to this from the outset. For example, those countries that 
have attempted to stabilise have generally taken the politically more convenient line of saying, let us cut 
infrastructure investment, education and spending on health care, but not government consumption or 
….. public sector. Why? Because politically it is of course, less convenient and if you cut the size of the 
public sector, there may be repercussions from the electorate. If you cut infrastructure investment, that 
affects the next generation but they are not voting yet. So the victim of stabilisation is the future. It is 
therefore a big mistake to assess the success of stabilisation by just one number : the inflation rate. 
I am all for cutting inflation, which is public enemy number one, but I think it is extremely important that 
the design of a stabilisation effort should incorporate a long-term perspective, which means that 
government should be told to cut spending, but on consumption, not on capital formation. Do not make 
reductions at the expense of the infrastructure, as it is so much more difficult to rebuild. As a matter of 
fact, studies on the factors that stimulate private-sector investment show that there is a high degree of 
complementarity between infrastructure investment by the government and private-sector investment. 
Economists, myself included, maintain that a very large public sector is something which upsets private 
enterprise, competing with it and creating difficulties. This does not encourage private investment. 
There are, however, exceptions – infrastructure investment, or activities like research and development 
that the private sector would not undertake on its own. It is, I think, this kind of insight that one looks for 
in the broad array of stabilisation programmes. Those that have succeeded to resume growth and those 
that have not, teach us about it. 
We all talk about interest rates: we want to keep real interest rates low because we want to promote 
investment. In all the countries that I am familiar with, including my own, there is pressure on the 
monetary authorities to relax monetary policy, because that is the way to reduce interest rates, and if 
you lower interest rates, so the story goes, you promote investment and growth and all kinds of 
beautiful things. The reality is that what upsets investment are real, not nominal, interest rates. What 
causes high real interest is not tight or easy money per se – that is the story of inflation. What causes 
high real interest rates in the present conditions of capital markets, is the budget deficit. One does not 
need to convince professional economists like the people in this room of the obvious, and yet there are 
difficulties in convincing the general population of this. After all, somebody has to pay for the budget 
deficit, and if the government does not have a tax system in place, a tax administration mechanism that 
is capable of mobilising the resources to pay for government spending, then a budget deficit follows. A 
deficit means that somebody has to pay. But who is this somebody? If there is a well-managed tax 
system we know who pays. A democratic society expresses its priorities in its choice of who pays, and 
if you have notions regarding the distribution of income, egalitarianism, and social objectives, you can 
manifest them through your tax structure –a tax structure that is voted in and legislated upon. 
There are also more implicit notions. If some people do not pay taxes, there is the illusion that 
somebody is getting something for nothing. We all know how wrong that is, because it is either paid for 
through the inflation tax or, if we are strong enough on the monetary side, as we ought to be, it is paid 
for by the crowding-out of private investment. Because when the government enters the market place 
and borrows, it competes with the other investors and drives up real interest rates. Activities that would 
have been undertaken by the investors are crowded out, and the next generation is saddled with 
smaller capital stock and less accumulated investment. There is also a larger public debt to service 
without the tax base that can be used for this. Therefore, I think that the issue of the budget deficit 
should be addressed on three fronts : We have to recognize that a budget deficit means that somebody 
pays for it explicitly or implicitly. We should be very mindful of the dangers in using the “inflation tax”, which we do not want and if we want to ensure that it does not happen, we have to have a strong and 
independent central bank. This message comes through at every stage of the process. I have been 
involved with the IMF during the past few years and the Fund has looked at Eastern Europe, at the 
former Soviet Union and the various Republics and one lesson has been learnt: if you really want to get 
inflation under control you must have a strong and independent central bank. That is what has to be 
done on the inflation front. When it comes to the other issues, it is essential to have a tax system in 
place, otherwise real interest rates will remain high. And when real interest rates remain high and the 
budget deficit is large, the entire economic system is shattered. 
There is a notion that a budget deficit is something that does not put a burden on society because after 
all the government is large and can accumulate more debt. But who is the government? It is the tax 
payers, and it is therefore very important that we measure the budget deficit correctly and do not think 
that if we manage to borrow and finance the budget deficit we do not have a deficit problem. By doing 
this we are simply shifting the burden to the future. Thus, economic stabilisation cannot be fully 
assessed unless you regard growth performance as part of it, and the budget deficit cannot be 
assessed unless the mechanism by which it is repaid is part of it. 
I now turn to the issue of the sequencing of economic measures and the liberalisation of the economic 
system. There has been a long debate as to what should be liberalised first; the balance of trade or the 
capital account of the balance of payments. The debate came up most recently with the economic 
reforms is Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union and the call for currency convertibility. I think 
that we have learnt several lessons there, the most important being that we must draw a sharp 
distinction between currency convertibility for the current account and currency convertibility for the 
capital account. When it comes to the current account, I am all for it, because that is basically where the 
gains from trade are to be found. After all, who could object to consumers having the opportunity to 
consume and import goods as cheaply as possible from the world economy, especially when new 
markets are opened? Furthermore, when you start with an economy that is highly monopolised, who 
could object to introducing greater competition into it? There is no better mechanism than introducing 
competition into an economy, than confronting it with international prices and norms. It also brings in 
the discipline of the price system, because once you are in a large market then, if you cannot make it, 
you should probably not be there. When it comes to capital-account convertibility, I would be much 
more prudent and be very sure to have my parachute with me before I jumped from the aeroplane. If I 
could assume that there was a safety net somewhere down there (like a large stock of international 
reserves) that would be a bonus. Confidence in the financial system and a stable macroeconomic 
environment are essential to the introduction of capital account convertibility. But in the public debate 
that developed concerning ‘convertibility’ versus ‘non-convertibility’ there was some confusion and 
people did not distinguish sharply enough between current account convertibility and capital-account 
convertibility. I think that it is very difficult to find good reasons why a nation should forgo the benefits of 
free trade and current-account convertibility. 
Permit me to make a few remarks about capital market reform. Capital markets have undergone an 
enormous change in the last few years, both domestically and internationally. There is a good reason 
for this, and I will also try to demonstrate that economic development within a nation is hampered 
unless there is a liberalised and well-functioning capital market. But for a well-functioning capital market 
not to be risky there must be additional elements. Let me start from the most trivial example. There 
were no car accidents 200 years ago, yet today there are a great many. Would anyone suggest 
returning to the days of no cars as the best way to stopping accidents? Obviously not. I think we all 
understand that if we really want to minimise the cost of car accidents the right strategy is to widen the 
roads and legislate, may be make seat-belts compulsory and introduce safety precautions. This is also 
the prognosis, as well as the main instrument, for capital market reform. If you liberalise the capital 
market you must make sure that it is accompanied by an extremely effective supervisory authority as 
well as a regulatory authority. Here we are in a bind. The American philosopher George Santayana 
once said that those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it. That is right, provided 
tomorrow has something to do with yesterday. But when we have a fundamental change in both 
perceptions and technology, as is indeed the situation regarding the nature and functioning of capital 
markets, our tomorrow gains very little from the knowledge of yesterday. So when I say : let us design a supervisory authority with regulatory capacity and all the rest, the question is; supervising what? The 
unchartered territory? This is the paradox. We should be cognizant of the fact that when we invent cars 
we will have car accidents. We should also be cognizant of the fact that we should have as wide a road 
as possible, with seat-belts as effective as possible, but that still tomorrow is not like yesterday, and 
therefore very little can be learnt from yesterday. Therefore, driving is hazardous, but we must try to do 
our best, and try not to skid. Accidents come with the territory, as it were. I would also say that they 
illustrate the paradox of liberalisation and regulation. In a society that has no degrees of freedom, 
where everything is set in advance and organised from the centre, you do not need to regulate 
anything. You do not need to supervise anything. Everything is predetermined. So, paradoxically but 
logically, the more open a society is, the more free enterprise it has, the more regulation you need. Not 
the regulation of the way individuals operate, but regulation of the way in which the markets and society 
operate so that within the well-functioning regulated markets individuals can operate freely as free 
enterprise prevails. 
This brings me to the importance of the capital market. And again, although I may draw my examples 
from extreme cases like the centrally planned economies of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, I 
think that some general principles emerge. At the early stage of transition towards a market system, 
you have an economy that is fully owned by the public sector, representing the diametrical opposite of 
the free enterprise, private-ownership society. Now you want to open up and to start having private 
ownership and free enterprise, and the question is : how do you start? In the old regime, the one in 
which enterprises were all run from the center, where profit considerations were not the prime 
consideration, an enterprise could run losses but was in no danger of having to close, because if there 
was a problem then you go to the central government, or you go to a bank, and you get credit. And you 
get credit whether you are a good or a bad firm, because you will never go out of business, because if 
you get into trouble Big Daddy (the State) will be there to bail you out. So we had a system in which 
enterprises were run inefficiently. They never went out of business because credit was available, and if 
the bank did not give credit, another firm gave credit and a very intricate network system of inter-
enterprise credit developed. In deciding on credit allocations there was no need to examine whether an 
enterprise was viable or not. This information was useless; there was no incentive to accumulate such 
information since there was always somebody to bail you out. Now these economies undergo a 
revolution as the society decided to move to private enterprises and to adopt stringent rules and tight 
budget constraints, not soft budget constraints. But they have a problem, namely, that they start with 
extraordinary excess luggage on their back. Their balance sheets are very complicated; the assets of 
one enterprise include the liabilities of another; some liabilities are good and some are bad. How do we 
know where to start? 
Introducing a fundamental reform, where tomorrow differs from yesterday, requires taking a logical step 
with respect to the initial balance-sheets. A sharp cut has to be made and this means different rules of 
the game, sometimes a different legal structure and “clearing the books”. There is only one point of time 
at which it is possible to clear the books without yielding significant redistributions of wealth, i.e., when 
all the books are owned by the public sector. Because then clearing the books means undertaking a 
book-keeping exercise and shifting money from one pocket of the public sector to the other. Then it is 
literally a pure book-keeping exercise. But once the government sold enterprises to the private sector it 
is too late. So I am in favour of undertaking this financial restructuring at a very early stage. But a tax 
system must be in place, because if the government is about to sell enterprises to the public, by 
privatising the profitable enterprises, then the government loses future sources of tax revenues. Unless 
the government can change its spending patterns, it will produce the breeding ground for the next 
budget deficits. I pointed out earlier that the budget deficit involves sacrificing the future by crowding out 
private investment. It follows, therefore, that one needs to have a tax administration in place, with a 
proven capacity to raise revenue, prior to unloading those revenue-yielding enterprises. Thus, I cannot 
be more emphatic in saying that yes, privatisation is essential, but it is equally as urgent to have a well-
developed and functioning tax system. Even if the tax system is in place, we still need to worry about the capital market, and we need the 
capital market for at least two reasons. Let us take trade liberalisation. When you liberalise the 
economy and open it up to foreign competition, you are always subject to the pressures of those who 
feel that they will be displaced. Labour fears unemployment and enterprises fear they would be out of 
business, and so on. I think that two remedies are called for here: First, there must be a very clear 
recognition that the process of trade liberalisation takes time: but second, it must be realized that the 
process is a one-way street, with no going back. I think it makes no sense to declare from one day to 
the next that all tariffs are eliminated, not because I am against eliminating tariffs, but rather because I 
am in favour of it and I am enough of a political realist to realise that such a declaration will not be 
adhered to. If a reform measure involves even a single step of retreat along the way, its credibility will 
be lost. So that in the liberalisation of trade, what is needed is a multi-year trajectory, preferably one 
that is legislated, with a very clear timetable of removal and ever-increasing reduction of protection. 
Nonetheless, some enterprises will have to go under because they are not viable without protection. 
Here the role of the capital market is central, because once the books have been cleared, the well-
functioning capital market should ensure that good enterprises can sail through the storm. The capital 
market has the virtue of being able to separate the losers from the winners and provide credit when the 
economic realities warrant it. By the same token, if an enterprise is not viable, the credit markets will not 
support it. But for this we need to have a well-developed credit market and capital market, because if 
we do not, then even the good enterprises may join in lobbying against trade liberalisation. 
Another example illustrating the usefulness of capital markets pertains to monetary policy. Consider for 
example a situation in which the monetary authorities decide to make monetary policy tighter because 
of various considerations, including the fight against inflation. Naturally, this will put some pressure on 
enterprises and by its nature, monetary policy does not work like a laser beam; it is an aggregative 
policy. It affects the entire economy. However, the very existence of the capital market provides the 
opportunity for good firms to smooth out such adjustments and borrow in the market, thereby making 
the monetary policy that was adopted more effective. 
With regard to exchange rates, in Israel our exchange rate is pegged to a basket of currencies, and we 
have used the exchange rate in our stabilisation effort. But we were very careful to do it only after our 
budget deficit had been checked. Otherwise you get into another fundamental difficulty, namely, if you 
have a large budget deficit you drive up real interest rates, and the tendency is to strengthen your 
currency. You find that you lose competitiveness, but this is not because you have managed your 
currency wrongly, interest rates are too high, or monetary policy is tight, but because of the real interest 
in the context of the budget deficit. The recurrent crises in  the foreign exchange market of the 
European Exchange Rate Mechanism have demonstrated time and again that a tendency towards 
currency appreciation and loss of competitiveness was induced by high real interest rates in the wake 
of the budget deficit. Thus, drawing on our own experience, focusing on the budget deficit and the 
exchange rate, we see that the exchange rate can be a very powerful and useful instrument, 
contributing to stabilisation as well as increased competitiveness, provided the other fundamentals of 
economic policy are in place. Thus, an economy with a large budget deficit is really handicapped in 
making good use of its other efficient policy instruments. When we introduced stabilisation in Israel we 
started with triple-digit inflation in the mid-eighties and brought inflation down in a very short period to 
about 17 to 18 percent and there we got stuck. Then we saw that other successful stabilisation efforts 
had also got stuck at exactly the same point. We looked at Chile, Mexico and the Argentina, and saw a 
very similar situation. Hyperinflation was stabilised, the exchange-rate anchor was fine, the budget 
deficit reduction was successful, but we had got stuck. We then realised that one of the reasons for this 
was that the economy had become accustomed to living with inflation and had developed 
extraordinarily sophisticated instruments to cope with it, and hence had reduced the incentive to fight it. 
An extremely intricate mechanism of indexation evolved, resulting in a very inflexible labour market. 
When the wages of nurses rise, this goes through to the wages of doctors, plumbers and shoe-makers. 
You cannot have any flexibility in the labour market, you cannot fire or hire according to economic 
performance and productivity. This is the heritage of the period of high inflation. Therefore, as you 
stabilise, you realise that the first few kilos in the diet are the monetary phenomenon, requiring ‘‘only” a 
significant cut in the budget and stringent monetary policy. The rest requires a much more 
comprehensive approach, putting together the trade side, the labour market, and the financial market. 
Only when such added arms of the economic reforms are mobilized the process gains credibility, and you can continue in resuming growth and in making further gains on the inflation front. Taking the 
example of Israel again, as our growth resumed to the range of 6 to 7 percent per year during the past 
two years, we have now cut our inflation by half, and in 1992 our inflation rate was below 10 percent. 
The exchange rate is also an instrument that can support the anti-inflation fight. Exchange-rate policy 
should be consistent with the inflation objective. Rather than compensating for past inflation, the 
exchange rate should be adjusted according to the feasible target inflation-rate. That is the mechanism 
adopted in Israel by which the anchor principle can be used, cutting loose from the past, which you 
want to abandon, and moving to the future in accordance with your economic objectives. 
 Travelling today through various countries that have undertaken reform, one cannot help but be 
impressed by the fundamental change that has taken place during the past ten to twenty years. At 
present there is much less of an ideological debate when it comes to economic policy than there used 
to be. In the past, the debate between fiscal austerity versus fiscal easiness or inflation versus 
unemployment, were debates between right and left, rich and poor. I think that there is much greater 
convergence of professional views. Now the issues concern the tactics of implementing an agreed 
strategy rather than the debate between strategies. And it is in this sense that I kept the word the 
strategy of economic adjustment in the title of my talk, because there are general principles. These 
principles recognise that there are no free lunches, that when the government takes something, 
somebody pays for it, that in a complex economy there is no better mechanism than the private sector, 
that price mechanism is of the utmost importance, and that the difference between gradualism and non-
gradualism is not between being careful and careless. Dogma has given way to professionalism. There 
are areas where once a decision has been taken it must be implemented decisively and not gradually. 
The analogy that comes to mind is the decision to move from driving on the left-hand side of the road to 
driving on the right. It would never occur to anyone to do this gradually, saying that on Monday small 
cars will move, and on Tuesday large cars, etc. 
It is in this sense that in some areas once a decision has been taken it must be implemented in one 
shot. Decisions with regard to issues like opening up an economy and removing tariffs or the 
liberalisation of trade, are also dramatic. However, their implementation can be smooth and spread over 
time, provided it is credible, and credibility means a one-way road, not a stop-go approach. One of the 
problems one sees today in various places where economic reforms have been undertaken is the 
frustration of the population who is disappointed with what was promised to them. But I must be frank in 
saying that often the mistakes are not because of the strategy of reform but rather because of the 
politicians’ tendency to make unrealistic promises. There is no such thing as a “velvet revolution” when 
it comes to economic reform. Drastic reforms are always painful, and are always at the expense of one 
element or another. While society may of course create appropriate safety nets, you cannot protect 
everyone, because if you did, the reform would not constitute a true surgery, and some surgery must be 
undertaken. But if there is one lesson it is – explain what is happening and mobilise political support by 
pointing to the alternatives. This is something that was done in the Israeli Stabilisation of 1985. We had 
a painful hyperinflation, enterprises stopped producing and concentrated on playing with financial 
instruments. Inflation destroyed the price mechanism and the economic system became completely 
dislocated. It was against this background that the politicians approached the public explaining that 
things could not go on like this, a change was essential, the alternative to stabilisation was much worse, 
and therefore, even though adjustment would be tough, it would still be better than the alternative. In 
this regard, in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union there was euphoria about the political 
change and a naive view about the economic hardships that reform entails. Of course, multilateral 
organisations must help, and the tax system will generate safety nets, and so on but it must be tackled 
in the right way. Conditionality clauses in agreements with multilateral organisations like the IMF and 
the World Bank must also be tackled in the right way, so that when money is borrowed it is used well, 
and is an investment, so that the fruits of the tree will be there to repay the loan yet the tree will still be 
there. All of this has to be done well, and I think, therefore, that what we have seen recently is not that 
the strategy of economic reform has been discredited but rather that the educational efforts that have 
been made in mobilising political support have been inadequate. Let me conclude with a remark made by Lord Keynes at the closing ceremony of the Bretton Woods 
Conference which was held almost half a century ago. It was there that the World Bank and the IMF 
were created amid heated deliberations and a great deal of criticism. Lord Keynes said in his closing 
speech, “ I am greatly encouraged, I confess, by the critical, skeptical and even scalping spirit in which 
our proceedings have been watched, and welcomed in the outside world; how much better that our 
projects should begin in disillusion than that they should end in it”. 
Indeed, because economic reform is so essential, deliberations, public debate and free discussions are 
always helpful in clarifying the inevitability and usefulness of the strategy of economic adjustment. 
 