Two Decades of Credit Management in Indian Banks: Looking Back and 
1
Moving Ahead
 
Shri K.R. Kamath, Chairman, IBA and Chairman, Punjab National Bank; Smt. V.R. 
Iyer, Chairperson, Bank of India; CMDs of banks, delegates to the BANCON 2013; 
members of the print and electronic media; my other colleagues from the banking 
fraternity; ladies and gentlemen! At the outset let me thank the Indian Banks’ 
Association and the Bank of India for giving me this opportunity to share my thoughts 
with you from the platform of BANCON. This annual event is the most awaited event 
on the calendar of bankers as it provides them an opportunity for a free and frank 
deliberation on contemporaneous issues that the banking community is facing and 
what the future portends for them. In that sense, the theme chosen for this year’s 
BANCON - “Bank of the future, gearing up to meet the emerging environment” aptly 
sumps up the purpose of organising this event. I observe that the ‘who is who’ from 
the world of banking and finance have spoken on this theme and all of you have a 
pretty clear vision of what the banks of the future should look like and what you need 
to do to meet the emerging challenges.   
All of you who know me closely know that, very often, I hold a contrarian view of 
things. At the present juncture, as a bank supervisor, I am much more concerned 
about the “future of the banks” than the “banks of the future”. Arguably, credit 
administration and the asset quality of banks is the most significant factor that affects 
the future of the banks and in my address today, I intend to highlight the concerns 
surrounding these areas. The purpose of my address today is not to find fault but to 
encourage introspection and self-criticism, to identify where we have gone wrong in 
the past and what corrective steps need to be initiated to undo some of the past 
mistakes and steps that need to be taken to move ahead. To this end, I intend to 
begin with looking back at historic trends in asset quality and credit management of 
banks and then use the ‘learnings’ to suggest a comprehensive solution to tackle the 
issues. 
Introduction 
1. In a bank dominated economy such as India, the asset quality of the banking 
system has important implications for the stability of the overall financial system. The 
general perception about a bank’s health is greatly determined by the level of non-
                                                            
1
 Address delivered by Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at BANCON 2013 on November 16, 2013 in Mumbai. 
Assistance provided by Ms. Dimple Bhandia and Ms. Vinitha is gratefully acknowledged.  
1 
 performing advances (NPAs) held in its books. It is, therefore, not surprising that the 
current spurt in NPAs in banks has attracted a lot of attention.  
2. The business of banking essentially involves intermediation – acceptance 
of deposits and channelling those deposits into lending activities - and credit risk is a 
direct fallout of this intermediation process. Certain amount of default and 
impairment of assets are likely to show up in the normal course of banking business 
and hence, credit risk management assumes a critical role in ensuring that such 
impairment is contained to a minimum.  
3. Needless to say, when banking was simple, credit risk management was also 
straightforward. Lending decisions were made on impressionistic basis as the banks 
knew their borrowers and their businesses quite closely and hence they did not 
appreciate a need to collect and process elaborate information/data for supporting 
their credit decision making framework. Over time, as banking activities diversified 
and became more complex and the products became more sophisticated, risks also 
increased and became more complex. Although, the risks from intermediation 
became more transmitive and contagious, the evolution in the credit risk 
management failed to keep pace. The advanced credit risk management 
necessitated a granular analysis of the risks that the banks were being exposed to; 
however, they failed to appreciate these requirements and relied on a primitive 
management information system. To my mind, the failure of the banks to collect and 
analyse granular data/information on various elements of credit risk is one of the 
major reasons why the banks failed to foresee the impending problems. This is one 
theme that would continuously resonate all through my address today.  
4. Against this backdrop, let me present my analysis of how Indian banks have 
dealt with credit risk over the last two decades, the present state of asset quality of 
Indian banks and the various factors that have contributed to the present situation. 
The analysis is based on a detailed study of data/information compiled by RBI from 
the banks. I would like to thank the banks and their data management teams for 
providing us extensive data and working closely with my team for facilitating the 
analysis that I have presented before you today.  
5. Credit risk management is interlinked with the regulatory framework and I shall 
attempt to explore how the regulation at various stages has contributed to the 
present situation, how market forces have captured the regulation and exacerbated 
2 
 the problem. I would also try to dispel some common myths surrounding the lending 
to priority sector, small and micro enterprises by providing hard facts.   Finally, I will 
list out the way forward for the regulators, policy makers, banks and bank customers. 
Evolution of NPA regulation in India 
6. The NPA trends, if studied carefully, can be observed to mirror the changing 
regulatory landscape. Let me first trace briefly the evolution of NPA regulation in 
India. 
7. Until mid-eighties, the management of NPAs in India was left to the banks and 
the auditors. As the need for fine tuning regulatory structures to deal with the 
changing risk-profile of banking was felt, in 1985, the first-ever system of 
classification of assets for the Indian banking system was introduced. This system, 
called the ‘Health Code’ system, involved classification of advances into eight 
categories ranging from 1 (Satisfactory) to 8 (Bad and Doubtful Debts). A significant 
change in this evolution process in regulatory instructions, however, came in April 
1992 with the introduction of prudential norms on income recognition, asset 
classification and mathematical methods for the computation of provisioning 
requirements. A graded norm for NPA recognition was brought-in, beginning with a 
four quarter norm for classification of advances as non-performing. With the 
introduction of 90-day norm for classification of NPAs in 2001, the NPA guidelines 
were brought at par with international standards. 
8. Even as the NPA classification norms were being gradually tightened to bring 
them at par with international standards, RBI also introduced guidelines on 
“restructuring of advances” during the early 1990s. The guidelines required that 
standard assets, where the terms of the loan agreement regarding interest and 
principal had been renegotiated or rescheduled after commencement of production, 
be classified as sub-standard. In 2001, the instructions were further strengthened to 
clarify the asset classification treatment of restructured accounts prior to 
commencement of production as well.  
9. The classification of advances as per the newly introduced “prudential norms” 
enabled a proper assessment of the extent level of non-performing assets in the 
Indian banking system for the first time. The initial figures for the NPAs in the system 
were quite high and hence, created sufficient incentive for the regulators and the 
banks alike to bring them down to manageable levels. Over time, as the banks 
3 
 introduced improvements in credit risk management systems and processes, the 
headline NPA ratios declined appreciably (Table 1). Empirical evidence, thus, 
indicates that increased stringency in regulation facilitated reduction of NPAs.  
Table 1: Trend in Non Performing Assets  
Period Average GNPA  Average NNPAs 
(in per cent) (in per cent) 
1997-2001            12.8 8.4 
2001-2005 8.5 4.2 
2005-2009 3.1 1.2 
2009-2013 2.6 1.2 
Mar 2013 3.4 1.7 
Sep 2013 4.2 2.2 
 
10. After the early 2000s, the pace of introduction/ tightening of regulatory reforms 
slowed. Regulatory norms were not further tightened during the “good” pre-crisis 
years which resulted in lowered credit standards and increased delinquencies. On 
the contrary, the norms were relaxed in some instances post the crisis. Some 
instances of flip-flop in regulation were also witnessed e.g. changes in norms with 
regard to usage of floating provisions, relaxation in norms for provisioning coverage 
ratio, delay in the introduction of dynamic provisioning coverage. Further, the 2008 
special dispensation that permitted restructured accounts to be classified as 
standard has led to skewed incentives for banks/ borrowers to resort to restructuring 
to classify assets, even the un-viable ones, in the standard category and report lower 
NPA levels.  
11. Generally, there is a tendency to ask for relaxation in NPA regulations 
whenever NPA levels rise. However, the empirical evidence suggests the such 
relaxations lead to the opposite result. Past experience highlights that stringency in 
regulation pre-empts any slackening in credit appraisal and monitoring standards by 
the banks and forces them to be on a constant vigil against impending delinquencies 
in their asset portfolio. I would mention that the banks should, on the contrary, 
welcome stricter prudential norms as they aim to become banks of the future. 
Trends in asset quality 
(i) Trends in NPA ratios 
Let us me now turn to the trends in the asset quality of the banking sector. As I 
mentioned earlier, the introduction of prudential norms resulted in a significant rise in 
the NPA levels of banks during the early 1990s. Gross NPAs as a percentage of 
4 
 gross advances stood at 19.1 per cent as on March 1994. Thereafter, the ratio 
progressively declined during the period when the structural reforms were 
implemented and also through the “boom” years leading up to the global financial 
crisis. The historical trend in Gross and Net NPA ratios is indicated in Annex 1. The 
reduction in NPA levels could be attributed to several factors, including:  
• Introduction of prudential norms for asset quality and other regulatory 
initiatives in the 1990s encouraged improved risk management in banks 
contributing to improvement in asset quality;  
• As interest rates were falling, banks garnered substantial treasury profits 
which were utilized for writing off NPA accounts; 
• Overall good performance of the economy and concomitant rise in credit 
growth;  
• Abundant liquidity conditions;  
• Increased restructuring, etc.  
12. Post the onset of the Global Financial Crisis in 2008, the NPA ratios started 
increasing, indicating a marked deterioration in asset quality of the banking system. 
A closer scrutiny of the asset quality, however, reveals considerable divergence 
between the performances of various bank groups. 
13. Initially, the NPA levels of public sector banks (PSBs) and other bank groups 
displayed a divergent trend. While the Gross NPA (GNPA) ratio for PSBs stood at 21 
per cent in 1994; for new private sector banks and foreign banks, the same was 
between 1 to 2 per cent. Till 2003, while the GNPA ratio for PSBs declined gradually, 
it increased for other bank groups. During 2003-06, the NPA ratios across all bank 
groups showed a secular declining trend. Early on in the crisis (during 2007-09), the 
NPA ratios decoupled - the GNPA ratio of new private sector banks and foreign 
banks increased sharply while they continued to decline in case of PSBs. In fact, 
foreign banks witnessed the highest spurt in NPAs during 2009. The trend, however, 
reversed after 2009, when NPAs rose significantly for PSBs, while it declined for 
other bank groups.  
14. This divergent trend clearly indicates that the ability to manage asset quality 
across banks varies markedly and, in the post crisis years in particular, the concerns 
on asset quality are largely confined to the PSBs.  
15. PSBs share a disproportionate and increasing burden in case of NPAs among 
the bank groups (i.e. share in gross NPAs as compared to share in advances). The 
share of PSBs in gross NPAs has increased over the last decade and particularly 
5 
 since 2009 (Table 2). NPAs accounted for 85 per cent of the NPAs of the banking 
system in 2013 as compared to 75 per cent in 2003. During this period, the PSB’s 
share in total bank credit increased only marginally, from 74 per cent to 76 per cent. 
This is in sharp contrast to the performance of the other segments of the banking 
system, especially the new private sector banks, whose share in NPAs has fallen 
from over 14 per cent in 2003 to 8 per cent in 2013.  
Table 2: Share of GNPA among Bank Groups (in per cent) 
 
Bank Group  Mar-03  Mar-07  Mar-08  Mar-09  Mar-13 Sep-13 
PSBs 75.4 76.6 71.1 64.5 84.8 86.1 
 (74.0) (72.8) (72.5) (75.2) (76.2) (75.3) 
Old Pvt Banks 6.2 5.9 4.6 4.5 2.8 2.8 
 (6.2) (4.7) (4.5) (4.3) (4.6) (5.0) 
New Pvt Banks 14.2 12.5 18.7 20.3 8.0 6.8 
 (12.8) (16.2) (16.4) (15.0) (14.8) (14.7) 
Foreign Banks 4.2 4.9 5.6 10.7 4.3 4.3 
 (6.9) (6.4) (6.5) (5.6) (4.5) (5.0) 
 Note: Figures in brackets represent the share in total bank credit 
(ii) Beyond the Headline NPA numbers  
16. Any analysis based on the headline NPA numbers i.e., the gross and net NPA 
ratios, have limitations. These ratios do not reveal the actual dimension of problems 
of asset quality of banks. A 360-degree view of trends in asset quality requires the 
capture and analysis of more granular data – activity and segment wise - about the 
various aspects of NPA management viz., slippages, write offs, recoveries, 
upgradation, restructuring, etc.  
17. Till late 90s, the banks captured only basic data about asset quality i.e. gross 
and net NPA ratios. It is only following the regulatory nudge that the banks started 
collecting and reporting data on flow of NPAs (fresh accretions and recoveries) from 
2001 onwards. Further, it is only recently i.e. since 2009, that collection of more 
granular data on asset quality like segmental NPAs, write-offs, recoveries etc., has 
started, primarily due to regulatory impetus. Unfortunately, this initiative in banks was 
limited to collecting this data for the purpose of reporting to the regulator. Few efforts 
were made to analyse and use this data internally for improving the quality of internal 
credit management.  
18. Over the next few minutes, I will present an analysis of trends in asset quality 
and credit management of banks based on this granular data. I will then attempt to 
6 
 draw some inferences from this analysis about the quality of credit management in 
banks and how it has contributed to the recent trends in asset quality.  
(iii) Trends in Slippages and Recovery  
19. The flow of NPAs over the last decade shows that while the reduction in NPAs 
was to the tune of Rs. 4.9 trillion between 2001 and 2013, the accretions to NPAs 
were close to Rs. 6.3 trillion. If the entire period is split into two - 2001-2007 and 
2008-2013, some interesting differences emerge. While during the first period, 
accretions to NPAs and reduction in NPAs are largely matched (Rs. 1.6 trillion of 
accretions as compared to about Rs. 1.7 trillion of reductions), during the later period 
the position altered dramatically with accretions to NPAs far exceeding the 
reductions (about Rs. 4.7 trillion of accretions as compared to Rs. 3.2 trillion of 
reductions) (Table 3). 
Table 3: Trends in Slippages and recovery (` billion) 
  2001-2013 2001-2007 2008-2013 
NPAs at          604      604      505 
Beginning of the 
period  
New Accretion to        6248      1591      4657 
NPAs during the 
period 
Reduction in        4920      1690      3230 
NPAs during the 
period 
 Due to        1109      240      869 
upgradation  
 Due to write-off        2036      739      1297 
 Due to actual        1775      711      1064 
recovery  
NPAs at End of        1932      505      1932 
the period  
 
20. Slippages, i.e. fresh accretion to NPAs during the year, provide a better metric 
to assess the credit management system in banks. While the slippages reduced 
during early 2000s, they started rising significantly since 2006-07. Growth rate of 
slippages which was negative till 2005-06, turned sharply positive in 2006-07 
reaching a peak of 51.6 per cent in 2011-12. The net slippages (slippages net of 
recovery during the year) also showed the same trend. Contrary to the popular 
notion that the rising NPAs are a fallout of the global Financial crisis, the data 
suggests that the credit administration in the banks had started weakening and the 
asset quality had started deteriorating even before the onset of the crisis. Further, 
slippages exceeded reduction in NPAs, especially post crisis, as the ratio of 
reduction in NPAs to slippages fell dramatically – from about 105.3 per cent in 2001-
7 
 07 to 70.8 per cent in 2007-13. Year wise figures of slippages and reduction from 
2001 is indicated in Annex 2. 
21. Simultaneously with increased slippages, recovery efforts of the banks suffered 
compounding the asset quality concerns as evidenced by the increasing trend in the 
ratio of slippages to recovery and upgradation since 2006-07 and the relative large 
share of write offs in total reduction in NPAs of banks.The ratio of slippages to 
recovery and upgradation represents the extent to which banks have been able to 
reduce their NPAs through recovery efforts. The ratio for the banking sector as a 
whole deteriorated from a low of 125.4 per cent in 2005-06 to 264.1 per cent during 
2009-10 and remained elevated at 257.0 per cent in 2012-13. Recovery performance 
also varied widely across banks.  This is evident from the divergent slippage and net 
slippage ratio in different bank groups indicated in Annex 3.  
 
(iv) Trends in Recovery & Write-offs   
22. There is evidence of increased use of write offs by banks to reduce NPAs, 
which is a pointer to weaknesses in credit management. Write offs were initially 
introduced as a tool for banks to manage their tax liabilities on impaired assets. 
However, they subsequently emerged as a tool for banks to manage their reported 
gross NPA numbers. Write offs, in fact, contributed significantly to the reduction in 
the quantum of gross NPAs (in some years, write offs accounted for nearly 50 per 
cent of reduction) as compared to actual recoveries and upgradations. Write offs as 
a percentage of terminal reduction (reduction on account of write-offs and actual 
recovery alone) has consistently been above 50 per cent mark (Annex 4).   
23. These practices clearly engender moral hazard issues as they reduce the 
banks’ drive to improve recovery efforts. They also result in leakages in the recovery 
process. This is evidenced by the fact that, on an average, less than 10 per cent of 
the total amount written off (including the technical write off) is recovered (Table 4). 
Table 4: Write Offs 
 Recovery from Written?Off Accounts during the fiscal year ended   (Rs. mn) 
 Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar?
01  02  03  04  05  06  07  08  09  10  11  12  13 
All 
4,240  5,010  4,790  10,650  17,680  29,020  24,800  31,010  36,860  43,620  50,360  51,910  69,600 
banks 
PSBs 4,180  4,940  4,630  10,080  16,120  26,990  22,200  28,240  33,720  38,190  44,120  46,560  59,530 
OPBs 20  30  50  260  450  840  1,320  1,730  2,170  2,070  2,310  2,010  2,000 
NPBs 30  20  40  300  1,110  1,090  1,200  870  920  1,970  3,270  2,940  7,790 
FBs  0  10  60  0  0  100  80  160  40  1,390  660  400  290 
8 
  
Write?Offs of NPA during the fiscal year ended (Rs. mn) 
 Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar? Mar?
01  02  03  04  05  06  07  08  09  10  11  12  13 
All 
64,46 87,11 120,21 135,59 108,23 116,57 116,21 116,53 159,96 250,19 238,96 208,92 322,18
bank
0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0 
s 
PSB 55,55 64,28 113,08 111,85 177,94 155,51 270,13
94,480  80,480  87,990  91,890  80,190  69,660 
s 
0  0  0  0  0  0  0 
OPB
3,310  5,880  6,530  5,250  4,640  5,440  6,100  7,240  6,160  8,840  6,820  6,710  8,630 
s 
NPB
5,800  8,960  15,640  12,860  16,820  14,090  12,320  15,770  50,630  67,120  23,360  30,240  34,870 
s 
FBs  200  7,980  3,560  4,400  6,280  9,050  5,900  13,340  33,500  62,380  30,830  16,460  8,550 
 
24. Further bearing testimony to the poor recovery efforts of the banking system are 
the trends in the ratio of upgradation to slippages. Even in the ‘good’ times, the ratio 
was never more than 20 per cent – a clear sign of poor standards of credit and 
recovery administration as well as a certain amount of apathy on the part of banks in 
expending efforts to revive accounts. The spirit of good credit management is to 
revive genuine problem accounts and not to retain them as NPAs for an eventual 
write- off.  
25. Masked in the overall recovery statistics that I have so far discussed, are 
considerable divergences in trends across different bank groups. The new private 
2
sector banks and foreign banks recorded higher slippage ratio (gross and net) 
immediately after crisis but were able to arrest the increasing trend in slippages 
through focused attention on credit risk management including exit strategies. In 
recent years, the ratio has risen sharply for PSBs. This indicates that new private 
sector banks and foreign banks were able to manage their asset quality better than 
PSBs as they were quick in identifying NPAs, while PSBs resorted to retrospective 
restructuring to report lower NPAs initially. This practice eventually tipped the scale 
against the PSBs and thus, in hindsight, regulatory guidelines also contributed to the 
decline in the asset quality of the PSBs.  
26. The bank group wise trends in slippages are further re-enforced when the 
trends in slippages and fresh restructuring are examined. The ratio of slippages and 
fresh restructuring to advances rose sharply for the PSBs post crisis – from 5.2 per 
cent in March 2009 to 7.1 per cent in March 2013. The ratio reduced for foreign 
banks and new private sector banks and stood at a much more robust 1.8 per cent in 
March 2013.  
                                                            
2
 Gross slippage ratio = fresh accretion to NPAs during the year to standard advances at the beginning of the year 
Net slippage ratio = Slippage ratio net of recoveries 
9 
 27. It is, thus, clear that the weaknesses in credit and recovery administration that 
existed prior to the crisis, especially in the case of PSBs, were not dealt with in a 
timely manner. The crisis only exacerbated the problem.  
28. It is also evident from the above trends that the gross NPA numbers, by 
themselves, are not a major cause for concern. Viewed in conjunction with the trends 
in restructuring of advances, however, there are evident and growing concerns about 
the asset quality of banks in India. In order to better understand the underlying 
issues, let me now turn to an analysis of the trends in restructuring of advances. 
(v) Trends in restructuring 
31. Restructured accounts have garnered wide attention in recent times as the 
quantum of restructured accounts has increased sharply post-crisis. Concerns have 
emerged from various quarters about the quantum of “forborne” assets and their 
potential impact on the asset quality of banks. If we look back to the early part of the 
2000s, the growth rate in restructured accounts has showed a mixed trend. From 
2003 to 2008, the restructured advances ratio was much lower than the NPA ratio. 
There was, however, a sharp uptick in growth rate in 2008-09 due to the one time 
dispensation with regard to asset classification granted to borrowers by the Reserve 
Bank with the onset of the crisis. Thereafter, the growth rate of restructured accounts 
has remained relatively high with the ratio of restructured accounts to standard 
advances showing a secular increase and the restructured advances ratio remained 
higher than the GNPA ratio. As on March 31 2013, the reported GNPA ratio for the 
banking system was 3.4 per cent. However, the ratio of gross NPAs and restructured 
accounts to advances was much higher at 9.2 per cent.  
32. It is, indeed, appreciated that difficult times warrant some degree of forbearance, 
some hand-holding to performing and other-wise viable units in tiding over temporary 
difficulties. There is, however, sufficient evidence, anecdotal and otherwise, that 
restructuring is often used by banks for ‘evergreening’ problem accounts to keep the 
reported NPA levels low. Additionally, there are many instances of:  
• unviable units taking recourse to restructuring leading to a situation where 
deserving and viable units get overlooked, especially in the small-ticket 
segment; and  
• promoters not bringing in/ or being compelled to bring in sufficient equity in 
the project especially in the restructured accounts, which reduces their 
downside risks in the project. 
10 
 33. As in the case of the overall NPA ratios and recovery performance, there are 
significant bank group wise differences in restructuring. Share of different bank 
groups in gross advances, NPAs and the restructured standard advances of the 
banking system since 2002 is given in Annex 5.   In fact, the divergence in the asset 
quality of different bank groups is even more pronounced if restructured standard 
assets and cumulative write offs are considered along with NPAs, than if gross NPAs 
are looked at in isolation. To further analyse this trend, I would like to use a ratio 
namely “impaired assets ratio,” which is a ratio of gross NPAs, restructured accounts 
and cumulative write offs to total advances and which, I believe, is a more robust 
indicator of asset quality of banks. Between 2009 and 2013, this impaired assets 
ratio rose sharply from 6.8 per cent to 12.1 per cent in the case of PSBs. In contrast, 
the ratio fell for new private sector banks and foreign banks and stood at 5.3 per cent 
and 6.4 per cent respectively in March 2013 (Table 5).  
Table 5: Impaired Asset ratio 
Period PSBs Old Pvt. New Pvt. Foreign    
Banks Banks Banks 
Mar-09 6.8 6.8 6.6 6.5 
Mar-10 8.8 7.3 7.3 9.5 
Mar-11 8.1 6.1 5.5 7.2 
Mar-12 10.0 6.3 5.4 6.6 
Mar-13 12.1 6.8 5.3 6.4 
 
34. The  relative share of gross NPAs, restructured accounts and cumulative write 
offs  in total impaired assets of different bank segments (Annex 6) further re-
emphasizes the point I had made earlier – that banks which are quick in identifying 
and recognising NPAs are able to better manage their impaired assets. In March 
2013, gross NPAs constituted 29 per cent of impaired assets in the case of PSBs 
while restructured accounts and write offs constituted 52 per cent and 20 per cent, 
respectively. In contrast, the shares stood at 36 per cent, 22 per cent and 42 per 
cent for new private sector banks and at 45 per cent, 2 per cent and 53 per cent for 
foreign banks (Table 6). These figures clearly illustrate that in case of PSBs, 
restructuring was used extensively as a tool for NPA management. Such masking of 
NPA accounts reduces incentives for improved credit management, including 
recovering efforts.  
11 
  
Table 6: Share of GNPA, Restructured Accounts and Write Offs in Total Impaired 
Asset (in per cent) 
 GNPA Restructured Standard  Cumulative Write Off 
Advances 
PSBs 28.9 51.6 19.5 
Old Pvt. Banks 27.6 57.9 14.5 
New Pvt. Banks 36.1 21.5 42.4 
Foreign Banks 44.6 2.4 53.0 
 
35. The problems with regard to asset quality seem to be concentrated in the old 
generation banks -the PSBs and the old private banks and I would urge the 
management of these banks to be sensitive about this trend and be more willing to 
recognize the problem at the initial stages so that an early resolution of the NPA 
problem can be found. 
36. It is, thus, clear that a clear picture of asset quality across different bank groups 
can emerge only if restructured accounts and write offs are reckoned. As I 
mentioned earlier, write offs create adverse incentives in the system and hinder 
recovery efforts in the bank. In the case of restructured accounts, there is a clear 
need for a relook at the entire gamut of issues – identification of accounts as 
restructured, determination of the sacrifice, if any, associated, the regulatory 
treatment of accounts classified as restructured, etc. I will return to these issues a 
little later in my address. 
(vi) Trends in asset quality across segments 
37. Any analysis of asset quality of the banking system is incomplete without a 
thorough investigation of the trends in the different segments of the economy. The 
general expectation is that the impairments in large borrower segments should be 
lower as banks devote more resources for the administration of large ticket advances 
as compared to administration of small advances.  
38. An analysis based solely on gross NPA ratios would tend to prove the above 
hypothesis. Gross NPAs numbers suggest that asset quality is a greater concern in 
respect of the agricultural advances as compared to that of industrial advances. 
However, if we look at the ‘impaired assets ratio’, it shows that the asset quality is of 
a higher concern in the industries segment as compared to the agriculture/ retail 
segments and has deteriorated more significantly for this segment after the crisis. A 
12 
 bank group-wise data on ‘impaired assets ratio’ across various segments in given in 
Annex 7. 
39. Among the big-ticket advances, infrastructure finance has been affected 
significantly. Inadequate commercialisation of projects due to various regulatory, 
administrative and legal constraints and absence or insufficiency of user charges in 
many projects have put strain on the banks. That infrastructure projects in our 
country face such constraints is well known. Yet, it is deplorable that banks had not 
factored in such issues in their credit appraisal or ensured that contingency 
arrangements are in place for eventualities like inability to procure coal, gas or to 
acquire land for road projects.  
40. Advances to the medium and large segments account for about 50 per cent of 
total bank advances and of total NPAs indicating that the deterioration in asset 
quality is driven by the medium and large enterprises. This is also reflected in the 
‘impaired assets ratio’ which stands at 14.8 per cent for medium and large industries 
as compared to 10.6 per cent for micro and small enterprises as on March 2013. 
41. Even in cases of restructuring, there seems to be a distinct bias towards the 
large-ticket borrowers than the weaker segments of the economy (i.e. micro and 
small enterprises, agriculture and priority sectors). Statistics on restructured 
advances shows that the medium and large segments account for over 90 per cent 
of restructured accounts while the share of micro and small segments keeps 
dwindling over the years (Annex 8). Further, the large ticket accounts hold a major 
share in CDR cases. This runs contrary to the spirit of the allowing the facility of 
restructuring as economic downturn is more likely to impact the small borrowers who 
are more vulnerable to business cycles and hence may require restructuring to tide 
over the temporary problems, as compared to large borrowers. The ground reality is 
that advances to smaller borrowers, with genuine needs get overlooked and slip into 
NPA which enables building of a perception that the quantum of non-performing 
assets is more in the case of small borrowers and hence promotes a rush towards 
large-ticket advances, ignoring the basic fact that the lower NPAs amongst larger 
borrowers is primarily on account of extensive restructuring/ write offs of such 
accounts. In their scramble to lend to large borrowers, therefore, banks lose out on a 
massive business opportunity in terms of the small borrowers. 
13 
 42. One of the common myths about asset quality of banks is that directed lending 
has significantly contributed to the rising NPAs of banks, as the gross NPA ratio of 
credit to priority sector is higher than that of the non-priority sector. However, if the 
impaired assets ratio is considered, then the asset quality of credit to non-priority 
sector is a greater concern than in the case of the priority sector. This ratio in case of 
the non-priority sector has also deteriorated to a greater extent in the post crisis 
period.  
43. To summarise, I would say that the perception that agricultural advances or 
priority sector lending carry more credit risk than the non-priority sector is entirely 
misplaced and needs to undergo a change. The smaller borrowers are per se not a 
cause of stress to the banks; rather it is a bias against them that turns them into 
weak accounts.  
Study Conclusions & other issues 
44. So far, we have explored the trends and various facets of the asset quality of 
banks. Let me walk you through the broad ‘learnings’ that we can draw from our 
analysis. 
(a) Primitive Information Systems - At the outset I had highlighted how the 
evolution of information systems had not kept pace with the changing banking 
landscape. Improvements in information systems were not in keeping with the 
increase in asset size of banks and the increasing complexities in credit 
management. The lack of granular data on slippages, early indications of 
deterioration in asset quality, segment wise trends, etc., hampered timely detection 
of problem accounts and weakened banks’ credit risk management capabilities. As a 
result, banks failed to identify the reversal in trends in asset quality in the pre-crisis 
period. As you would all appreciate, a robust database containing granular 
information is an imperative for better credit management and hence as part of the 
Top Management of banks, you must drive your officers towards building up this 
database and also use the information for the early identification of problem 
accounts, trends in asset quality, etc. 
(b) Higher NPAs not only from the GDP slowdown – Undoubtedly, the macro-
economic environment has a significant influence on the asset quality of banks. The 
recent deterioration in the asset quality is almost concomitant with the deceleration in 
the country’s growth rate, re-emphasizing the oft quoted argument about the 
14 
 cyclicality of asset quality of banks and its linkages with the macroeconomic 
performance of the economy. However, a closer look at the trends in the growth rate 
of gross NPAs and in the slippages of Indian banks indicate that the seeds of recent 
deterioration in asset quality had been sown well ahead of the slowdown in 
economic growth, i.e. in 2006-08 when most of the asset quality indicators reached 
their most robust levels. Therefore, the current decline in asset quality cannot be 
solely attributed to the recent decline in the country’s macroeconomic performance. 
Besides, the deceleration in GDP growth rate, there are other factors/causal 
relationships which are responsible for the current state of the asset quality of the 
banking system. I will now touch upon some of these factors in depth. 
(c) Lax credit management - The analysis reveals that impairment in assets were 
an off shoot of the deficiencies in credit management that had crept in during the 
pre-crisis “good years”. Banks with higher credit growth in 2004-08 ended up with 
higher growth in NPAs during 2008-13 period. A bank wise analysis of credit and 
NPA growth indicates that the compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of NPAs 
during the period 2008-13 was highest in case of banks whose CAGR of credit was 
also higher during 2004-09. Thus, it was during the pre-crisis years that deficiencies 
in credit appraisal crept in, credit monitoring was neglected and recovery efforts 
slowed. Let me elaborate on some of these points with some specific illustrations 
about the deficiencies in credit appraisal.  
• Evidence suggests that the banks were not taking adequate cognisance of the 
build-up of leverage while sanctioning or renewing limits. In fact, banks’ credit 
appraisal processes failed to differentiate between promoter’s debt and equity 
and over time, promoters’ equity contribution significantly declined and 
leverage increased. In particular, there has been a significant increase in the 
indebtedness of large business groups in recent years. A study of ten large 
corporate groups by Credit Suisse has revealed that the share of these ten 
groups in total banking sector credit more than doubled between 2007 and 
2013 even while, the overall debt of these groups rose 6 times (from under 
Rs. one trillion to over Rs. six trillion).  
• Ironically, the banks were found to be lending more to sectors that had high 
impairments, pointing to possible lacunae in credit appraisal standards. For 
example, while the CAGR of credit for the period 2009-2012 for the banking 
15 
 sector was 19 per cent; the segments like iron and steel, infrastructure, power 
and telecom witnessed much higher credit growth despite the impaired assets 
ratio for these segments being significantly higher. 
• Indian corporates, operating in India and abroad, have been increasingly 
accessing international debt markets to raise capital. While this is presumably 
being done to take advantage of the low interest rate in the international 
markets, in an environment of fluid exchange rate markets, corporates run the 
risk of incurring losses from adverse movement in exchange rates for their un-
hedged exposures. The un-hedged exposures and an eventual increase in 
interest rates could put pressure on the corporates and eventually spill-over to 
their lenders. 
• Banks are not conducting adequate contingency planning, especially for 
mitigating project risks. While on the one hand, the stress tests/ simulation 
models run by banks do not employ extreme stress scenarios; the extent to 
which the borrower can withstand it and the haircut to be imposed by banks in 
such cases; on the other hand they also do not factor in possible eventualities 
like failure of gas based power projects to ensure supply of gas, failure to 
complete land acquisition for highway projects, failure to acquire 
environmental clearances etc. Banks definitely need to factor in such adverse 
situations and have a back-up/contingency plan in their appraisal process. 
• Restructuring was extended to companies that were facing larger problems of 
over-leverage and inadequate profitability pointing to possible lack of due 
diligence in assessing viability while restructuring. 
• Further, companies with dwindling debt repayment capacity were raising more 
and more debt from the system. These trends pose concerns for the asset 
quality of banks – on one hand, the ability of corporates to service debt was 
falling and on the other hand, with increased borrowings their exposure to 
interest rate risk was rising.  
A pointer to the potential deterioration in appraisal and credit management standards 
in banks is the increasing incidence of advance related frauds, especially large value 
frauds (over Rs. 500 million) in recent years. Over 64 per cent of the total amount 
involved in fraud cases reported till March 2013 were advance related. My 
16 
 assessment of the situation is that, in such cases more often than not, it is the failure 
of the credit appraisal and post disbursement supervision processes which results in 
accounts being classified as fraud. There appears to be a tendency on part of the 
sanctioning authorities to brandish their own credit appraisal failures as a fraud 
perpetrated by the borrower. The moral hazard risks associated with identifying 
business failures as frauds is that the lacunae in credit appraisal do not surface and 
fixing of staff accountability becomes a casualty. 
(d) Sub-optimal credit management in PSBs– Our analysis reveals that the 
weaknesses in credit management, which I have dwelled upon at length, were 
significantly more pronounced in PSBs. In fact, the wide divergences in the asset 
quality of PSBs and new private sector and foreign banks bears testimony to the fact 
that the economic downturn is not the sole reason for recent deterioration in the 
asset quality of banks as all bank groups were not affected to the same extent.  
PSBs suffer from some structural deficiencies related to the management and 
governance arrangements. Instances of lax credit management (credit appraisal, 
credit supervision, etc.) and poor governance and management standards which, 
though persisting even before the crisis, were not dealt with in time and eventually 
impacted much more emphatically than was anticipated. 
The private sector and foreign banks, on the other hand, were quick to identify the 
early threats posed by the slowdown and effectively managed them. This is 
evidenced by a sharp rise in the slippage ratios of private sector and foreign banks in 
the immediate aftermath of the crisis, but the deterioration was quickly arrested 
through improved credit management systems and more concerted recovery efforts. 
In contrast, PSBs failed to respond equally swiftly and have suffered far more 
significant deterioration in asset quality post crisis. Failure to acknowledge the 
problem as also inability to look for an early exit route at the incipient stage, used 
very successfully by some private sector and foreign banks, have likely exacerbated 
losses for PSBs. 
How resilient is our banking system? 
45. While I have so far dwelt on the problems that characterise the credit 
management in Indian banking system, let me count some positives. The first and 
foremost comforting factor is that we have thrived through much more challenging 
times in the past in so far as the NPA ratios are concerned. In fact, in March 1994, 
17 
 the NPA levels were much higher than the present level. The aggregate banking 
system GNPA ratio was 19 per cent in March 1994 and for PSBs was 21 per cent. 
Against that benchmark, the current position of NPAs in the banking sector is not 
alarming. In March 2013, the GNPA ratio was 3.4 per cent for banking system and 
3.6 per cent for PSBs. Even if we were to consider the impaired assets ratio, for the 
system as a whole it is much lower at 10.6 per cent while for the PSBs it stands at 
12.1 per cent.  
46. Another silver lining on the cloudy horizon is provided by the strong capital 
position of Indian banks. Our stress testing of the banks’ asset portfolio (by applying 
different static credit shocks, including shocks to banks’ restructured accounts) as of 
June 2013, has revealed that the system level CRAR would remain above the 
required minimum of 9 per cent. However, only under severe shock of 150 per cent 
on NPA, the Core CRAR would go down to 6 per cent.  
47. The relatively lower level of provision coverage ratio (PCR) of banks in India as 
compared to their global peers is a weak spot in an otherwise fairly resilient Indian 
banking system. The sad part is that this ratio has seen a declining trend in recent 
years. A study conducted in the Reserve Bank (covered in the Financial Stability 
Report of June 2013) assessed that, under stressed macroeconomic conditions, the 
current provision coverage of banks in India may not be sufficient to cover expected 
losses. The PCR presents a more dismal picture when restructured standard 
advances are also considered, as it stood at just 30 per cent in March 2013 down 
from 35 per cent in March 2009. Hence, it is essential the banks increase their 
provision cover from current levels and strengthen their balance sheets. 
48. Thus, on the whole while the banks will be able to withstand the present 
deterioration in asset quality, the rise in slippages and the quantum of restructuring 
coupled with low PCR levels is a source of worry and over a period of time the 
situation could pose grater concerns especially if timely corrective actions are not 
taken.  
Recommendations and Way Ahead 
49. Let me now turn to the way forward for policy makers and banks on the 
concerns regarding asset quality I have listed thus far. The recommendations that I 
am making can be broadly classified into two categories- one set for the short run 
and one set for the long-run. In the short run, the objective should be to address the 
issues with the existing stock of impaired assets in a time bound manner. The long 
18 
 run measures will have to deal with issues that are more deep-seated and hence, 
would require collaborative efforts from all the stakeholders. These involve 
improvements in systems and processes, in regulatory framework and legal 
infrastructure, etc.  
(i) Short-term measures 
Review of NPAs / restructured advances 
50. In the short run, an immediate review of the accounts classified as NPAs and 
those which have been ‘restructured’ needs to be taken up. It would be critical to 
assess the viability or otherwise of these accounts on a case-to-case basis. The 
accounts which are found viable would need to be supported through additional 
finance/other means in order to ensure turnaround while those found unviable should 
be taken up for prompt recovery/resolution, so that the loss given default of banks 
could be minimized.  
51. In accounts where restructuring is contemplated, it is essential that the decision 
is taken within a pre-stipulated time-frame. Further, it needs to be ensured that 
promoters assume their share of losses without resorting to further borrowing from 
the banking system or employ structured products for their contribution towards 
equity. If need be, new promoters should be brought on board to ensure that the 
down-side risks are equitably shared. 
52. As I mentioned earlier, all unviable accounts should be put under time-bound 
asset recovery drive, sale of assets to ARCs or under the SARFAESI Act, to protect 
the loss in economic value of the assets. Another option which needs to be explored 
in such cases is management/ownership restructuring and permitting banks to 
takeover units where promoters’ equity is low or non-existent (and hence the 
promoters have little interest in rehabilitating the unit); running the unit through an 
intermediary or agent and then disposing off the unit when it is sufficiently 
rehabilitated.  
53. I strongly feel that the mechanism of restructuring of small accounts needs a 
special mention in terms of corrective action needed. SMEs and other segments 
covered under the priority sector are an important segment of the economy as they 
provide employment to a large number of people. It is important that the viable 
businesses under these segments facing temporary problems are not discriminated 
against. The entire approach to restructuring has to be reoriented to show more 
compassion to the small customers. 
19 
 (ii) Long Term Measures  
Improved credit risk management  
54. The first line of defense against deterioration in asset quality of banks is the 
bank’s own credit risk management. If the asset quality profile of the banking system 
needs to be improved on a sustained basis, then sound and robust credit risk 
management system needs to be in place in the banks. Credit risk management 
comprises of different facets like credit appraisal, credit monitoring, efficient system 
of fixing accountability, etc. Let me touch upon the improvements required in each of 
these areas. 
(a) Enhance Credit Appraisal – My assessment is that the banks’ credit 
appraisal standards have slackened remarkably over the last few years. To arrest 
the rapid deterioration in their asset quality, the banks need to focus on certain 
aspects more rigorously than is currently the case. Let me list a few of them: 
• Group leverage: Trends in the leverage of the group to which the borrowal firm 
belongs; the growth in overall indebtedness of the group, particularly borrowings 
from the banking sector, over the last two/ three years must be closely examined. 
It is important that the leverage at the holding company level is also factored in 
the appraisal.  
• Source/structure of equity capital: One of the most crucial aspects in project 
finance is the source and structure of equity contributed by the promoters. As I 
mentioned a little earlier, focused attention needs to be given to this area. Banks 
need to ensure that the promoters’ contribution is funded through equity and not 
debt so that the promoter has sufficient skin in the game. Attention must be paid 
to the source of equity as, very often, the project is funded through structured 
borrowings by the promoters at the holding company level within the larger group 
and which is down streamed as equity in the subsidiaries. There is also a need to 
examine the borrowers’ ability to raise additional equity to tide over adverse 
situations. 
• Complex project structure - If the project structure is complex/ ring-fenced (as 
in a SPV structure), then the bank should take extra precautions while assessing 
such projects and, if necessary, prescribe additional equity requirements to guard 
its interests. 
• External constraints – Often projects get delayed or do not reach sufficient 
commercialisation due to factors beyond the control of promoters/ banks viz. 
20 
 regulatory, political and legal constraints like environment and other clearances, 
etc. As banks are taking increasingly larger exposures to infrastructure projects, 
they must conduct necessary sensitivity analysis and contingency planning while 
appraising the projects and build adequate safeguards against such external 
factors. 
(b) Need for quicker decision making - Timely decision making is crucial to the 
success of any project. The appraisal, sanction and disbursement decisions 
should be timely and fast. Similarly, additional limits/ concessions, if needed, 
should be sanctioned quickly in order to enable the business unit to smoothly tide 
over the problem.  
(c) Strengthen Credit Monitoring - An effective appraisal needs to be backed 
by efficient monitoring to ensure that the account remains standard and 
performing. In this regard, developing an early warning mechanism and a 
comprehensive MIS assumes an important role to enable regular viability 
assessment.  
(d) Enforce Accountability - No amount of rules and regulations would aid in 
addressing the issues at hand, if their enforceability is weak. Thus, accountability 
for lapses in credit risk management is as important as the management of credit 
risk itself. The present system is biased against lower rung officials as, in more 
cases than not, it is this section of staff that is held accountable for accounts 
becoming non-performing despite the loan sanction having been done at senior 
levels or even at Board level. The officials at junior level should be brought under 
the ambit of probe for accountability only if there is a clear cut case of deficiency 
at the monitoring/implementation level. In other words, the sanctioning authority 
must also share the burden of responsibility in case of failed or improper credit 
monitoring. People ask me whether it is practical for the Board/Top Management 
to monitor loans. My answer to that is if you wish to enjoy the authority you must 
also be willing to accept the responsibility. You may bring in a kind of mechanism 
which allows you to monitor the performance of loans that you have sanctioned. If 
you can’t do that, please abdicate this responsibility in favour of the branch 
managers/ lower level officials. The accountability framework should also 
encompass instances of delayed decision making or inaction especially when the 
delay results in disruption in a unit’s working or in its failure due to delayed 
sanction/ disbursal/ renewal/ restructuring. Accountability also needs to be fixed 
21 
 on CAs, certified valuers, lawyers, etc. who collude with the borrowers and 
submit false certifications to facilitate borrowers in availing bank finances. 
(e) Address corporate governance issues in PSBs – As I had mentioned 
earlier, there are some inherent structural weaknesses in the corporate 
governance arrangements in PSBs. These will need to be addressed through a 
slew of measures such as explicit ‘fit and proper’ criteria for appointment of top 
executives, instituting a system of an open, market-wide search for Chairman/ 
other top executives, review of the role of RBI / government nominee on the 
Board of PSBs, fixation of tenure of top executives of banks so as to ensure a 
sufficiently long tenure, market based remuneration for top executives, review of 
the incentive structure for the executives, greater accountability of the executives 
and of the Board, etc.  
Improved information systems 
55. As I have said earlier, information systems form the bedrock of credit risk 
management. Unless the risks are identified, it will not be possible to manage them. 
Any robust management system necessarily hinges on a strong information base. 
While the banks have made significant progress in this area, a lot still remains to be 
done. Let me illustratively talk of some of the further work needed in this area: 
• Efforts should be made to capture more exhaustive and granular data. For 
instance, an MIS for capturing common exposure across banks needs to be 
developed. Recently, RBI has initiated efforts in this direction.  
• The information system must enable timely detection of problem accounts, 
flag early signs of delinquencies; facilitate timely information to management 
on these aspects, etc. 
• An appropriate coordinating mechanism across departments within a bank 
and across banks must be developed.  
• And, most importantly, the information system of banks should be integrated 
into decision making, capital planning, business strategies, and reviewing 
achievements. 
Strong Regulatory Framework 
56. The onus on addressing the asset quality deterioration does not rest on banks 
alone and the policy makers also need to take a re-look at the extant regulatory 
framework for stressed assets. The review will need to address a few hard questions 
- Are extant instructions about the classification of accounts as impaired too stringent 
and prohibitive? Are viable units being classified as NPAs? Is the banks’ reluctance 
to extend support to accounts classified as non-performing accelerating the 
22 
 transformation of viable units facing temporary cash flow problems towards non-
viability?  
57. A thorough relook at the overall regulatory approach in the country is warranted. 
Regulations should be facilitative, practical and commensurate with the risks 
involved. At the same time, we must appreciate that it’s a tight-rope walk to balance 
the needs to ensure that viable accounts are supported and that banks are dis-
incentivized from ever-greening the advances portfolio. 
58. As I hinted earlier, one of the key areas where regulatory prescription needs 
realignment is that of restructuring. Global practices warrant that restructured 
accounts should be treated as non-performing. This is a practice which needs to be 
adopted in India as well keeping in view the extant realties. It is also suggested that 
simple rephrasing, rescheduling, refinancing, extension of tenure of loans should not 
be treated as restructured. Similarly, an account should not be treated as 
restructured if there is a no sacrifice involved on the part of the bank and the bank is 
satisfied about the realizable value of the collateral. Further, the accounts in respect 
of which interest is being serviced regularly should not be classified as an NPA. In 
particular, if the borrower continues to pay a rate of interest above the base rate of 
the bank, then a mere reduction in the rate of interest being charged from the 
borrower should not be a sufficient reason for classification of the account as 
restructured/non-performing. The discretion with regard to treatment of an account 
as restructured or not should be left to the Board of the bank, based on broad 
regulatory principles. 
59. Another area where reform is needed is technical write-off. The practice of 
technical write offs of NPAs engenders moral hazard and leakages in the recovery 
process and needs to be dispensed with. It is much better to pay tax than to distort 
the system with technical write-off. Further, as I said earlier, there is a need to 
increase provisioning requirements in line with international norms to ensure the 
resilience of the banking system 
60. The prevalent practices of restructuring accounts to treat them as standard and 
of technically writing off accounts are not uniformly used across all borrower 
segments. These practices result in the position of asset quality of banks being mis-
reported. Such mis-reporting, in turn, leads to mispricing of risks and inefficient 
allocation of resources impairing the overall efficiency of the banking system. Hence, 
my recommendations that all restructured accounts be treated as non-performing in 
23 
 line with global best practices and that the practice of technical write offs be 
dispensed with. If, however, these regulatory dispensations have to continue, then it 
needs to be ensured that these dispensations are made applicable to all segments of 
bank borrowers. Rules may need to be set out in this regard or, at the very least, 
some broad principles formulated.  
61. Across the world, regulatory frameworks are built on one of two approaches – 
rules based or principles based approach. In India, though we do not have a 
declared approach to the regulatory framework, the extant framework is built on an 
approach which is a blend of rules based and principles based approaches. Overall, 
the approach appears more discretionary. Although flexibility in regulatory 
prescription is sometimes coveted, arbitrariness in regulation would lead to the build 
up of ‘fault lines’ in the system. A uniform approach – either principle or rule based 
regulation – needs to be adopted and consistently followed so as to bring the 
necessary stability in credit risk management practices across banks and eliminate 
ad-hoc implementation processes. 
Reforming legal & institutional structures  
62. A facilitative financial sector infrastructure including robust a legal and recovery 
framework and an effective credit information systems can play a critical role in 
ensuring that the asset quality of banks remains healthy. On one end of the 
spectrum are mechanisms such as the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDRs) which 
are aimed at rehabilitating viable but temporarily distressed corporate advances. On 
the other end are mechanisms such as the Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) and the 
SARFAESI Act which provide a legal framework for dealing with unviable 
borrowings. In addition there are Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) which 
facilitate improved credit risk management by banks by sale of problem loans and 
creation of a secondary market for such loans. It is, however, sad to note that these 
frameworks are beset with their own set of problems. Let us critically examine these 
structures one-by-one.  
(a) Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism - There has been major 
increase in CDR references in the recent period and an exposure-wise breakup 
of CDR referred cases shows that big-ticket accounts had a dominant share. 
There is enough evidence, to suggest that the provisions of the CDR mechanism 
have not been used very judiciously or effectively. While the debtors and 
creditors seek the benefits of restructuring, they tend to avoid the painful 
24 
 sacrifices in terms of provisioning and promoters’ sacrifice. Such circumvention of 
norms not only camouflage the weakness in the credit portfolio of banks but also 
weaken their defense against expected losses. The inherent credit weaknesses 
of such accounts are further aggravated due to lower stake of the promoters. I 
would go on to add that the availability of standing regulatory forbearance in the 
matter of CDR has prompted banks to avoid using other means of credit 
management judiciously. 
To my mind, the CDR mechanism needs a thorough overhaul in terms of 
process, structure, administration and governance. Illustratively, 
• Viability of the unit must be established, without any cause for reasonable 
doubt, prior to restructuring. 
• Restructuring or exit must be approved within a definite timeframe. 
• Promoters’ stake in the project should be ensured upfront through core 
equity infusion (and not quasi/ debt) 
• An independent oversight and monitoring system should be in place, 
especially for large CDR cases, to ensure that the account does not slip up 
post restructuring. The CDR cell and the banks concerned should 
coordinate in this aspect.  
(b) Debt Recovery Tribunals (DRTs) & other legal provisions - There are 
concerns about the functioning of DRTs and the enforceability of legal provisions 
for recovery of loans. The legal system for recovery seems to be defaulter 
friendly. Inordinate delays hamper effective resolution even as the time lag 
erodes the value of recoverable assets. Concrete measures viz., setting up of 
more DRTs and DRATs, full-fledged computerization of processes, digitization of 
records, enforcing strict adherence to timelines, etc. would need to be taken to 
make these mechanisms more effective The recent amendments to the DRT Act 
vide the Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws 
(Amendment) Act, 2012 (which has been brought into effect from January 15, 
2013) are a step forward in this regard. In this context, I will urge the bank 
management to launch vigorous follow up of the suit filed accounts and hold 
periodic meetings and interactions with the DRT Chairs to resolve the issues. 
(c) Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs) - The Reserve Bank had 
encouraged the setting up of ARCs and put in place a regulatory framework for 
25 
 the same. However, the ARCs have not really taken off. Despite the accelerated 
increase in NPAs in banks, the incremental flow from banks to ARCs has 
3
significantly reduced from Rs 130 billion in 2008 to Rs 60 billion in 2012 . There 
is a need to review the functioning of the ARCs with a view to revitalizing them. 
Regulatory measures such as clarifying / standardizing the NPA auction process, 
valuation norms, etc., could be contemplated.  
(d) Credit Information Companies (CICs) - The first credit information bureau 
was set up in India about a decade ago with a view to assist in credit risk 
management of banks and financial institutions at various stages across their 
customer’s life cycle. However, the use of data from the CICs has remained 
restricted to the retail segment and that too mostly by the private and foreign 
banks.  
There is a need to leverage CICs not only for sanctioning purposes but also for 
monitoring and recovery. At the monitoring stage, CICs can furnish a 360 degree 
view of customers, thereby enabling portfolio risk assessment and early warning 
triggers to identify and address delinquency. At the recovery stage, CICs can 
help entities in reaching their not so easily contactable base, thereby improving 
recoveries. Let me list some steps to enable broad-based use of CICs: 
• Improve the quality of data captured by the credit bureaus and ensure that 
the data submitted by credit institutions is complete and timely. 
• Enlarge the information database of CICs by bringing more and more 
customer segments under their fold. 
• Collate specific information like details of mortgaged assets, previous 
defaults, recoveries, write-offs, involvement in frauds or other criminal 
activities, etc. 
• Share data with other CICs to enable a holistic view of the credit profile of 
the borrower. 
• Build elaborate databases on additional information not directly linked to 
the credit information which can be used by the lenders to study trend in 
an industrial sectors, geographic areas and also issue triggers/warnings to 
lenders on likely credit events. 
Key messages and measures 
63. Let me conclude my address by revisiting the key takeaways for all of us: 
(a) The present level of stressed asset as an outcome is not a large concern in 
itself but the extant processes, systems and structure of creation/ 
                                                            
3
 Source : Association of ARCs in India 
26 
 restructuring of stressed assets are a problem. The existing level of NPAs is 
manageable but if corrective actions to arrest the slide in NPA are not 
initiated quickly, the stability of financial system could be at risk. 
(b) Economic slowdown and global meltdown are not the primary reason for 
creation of stressed assets. In fact, the deficiencies in credit and recovery 
administration in the system involving banks, borrowers, policy makers, 
regulators and legal system have led to the present state of affairs. 
(c) Credit quality has a high positive correlation with the prudential norms and 
regulations prescribed by RBI. Lax, soft and flip-flop approach to regulation 
may have contributed to creation of NPAs and stressed assets in the system 
by not creating sufficient incentives for the banking system to recognize 
NPAs and make provisions for stressed assets.  
(d) Level of leverage of corporate borrowers, high credit growth, lack of equity 
and instances of advances related fraud cases are also highly correlated. 
These are the first order derivative of inadequate credit appraisal and 
recovery management.  
(e) Appraisal standards are lax for bigger loans both at the time of sanction as 
also restructuring while the banks tend to be very stringent for smaller 
borrowers. Also, restructuring and write off processes are highly biased 
towards bigger loans as compared to smaller loans, even though, the data 
suggests that credit risk is higher for big-ticket advances than small 
borrower. Banks need to be more sympathetic to small borrowers and be 
more stringent in their approach to big borrowers.  
(f) Banks following the process of recognizing NPAs quickly and more 
aggressively are able to better manage their asset quality 
(g) High pace of credit growth in certain segments has resulted in lower credit 
quality in those segments in  subsequent periods  
(h) Overall standard and quality of credit management and recovery 
management is very poor. 
(i) Time is of essence and timely action based on information needs to be 
taken everywhere.  
Conclusion 
64. To sum up, the issues that I have highlighted today require proper attention and 
concerted efforts by all stakeholders - regulators, policy makers, banks and bank 
27 
 customers. The first and foremost lesson for all of us is that regulatory forbearance is 
not a panacea for the ills that afflict the credit management environment in the 
banking sector. Sweeping the problems under the carpet is not a solution. We must 
be willing to face the situation, learn from our past mistakes and move forward.  For 
this journey to be successful, the banks would need to strengthen their credit 
appraisal standards and lay greater focus on the quantum of equity brought in by the 
promoters, the sources of equity and plan for contingency situations in case of large 
infrastructure projects. The appraisal and approval process for restructuring 
proposals needs to be improved while ensuring that the benefits of restructuring are 
also extended to the smaller borrowers. The CDR Mechanism has been grossly mis-
utilized and needs a thorough overhaul including setting up of an independent 
oversight body for approval of proposals as well as for monitoring. For the reasons 
that I have mentioned earlier in my address, regulatory guidelines on restructuring 
and technical write-off should be reviewed and these measures should be phased 
out for ensuring a stronger credit administration and recovery environment. Some 
concrete steps like careful examination of existing NPAs for determining further 
course of action - rehabilitation or recovery, would need to be taken in the short term. 
Accounts identified as viable will need to be quickly rehabilitated with support from 
the bank and the borrower including through infusion of new equity from new 
promoters. Above all, a robust accountability mechanism for all levels of hierarchy in 
the stakeholders – banks, borrowers, regulators, policy makers and the government 
at large – will have to be put in place to ensure that banks’ asset quality improves on 
a sustained basis. 
65. I would conclude by reiterating that my address today is not aimed at finding 
fault but an attempt to initiate a debate and encourage some soul-searching in the 
banking community about the past mistakes and what we need to do differently 
going forward. I believe the Top Management of banks present here, borrowers, 
regulators, policy makers and the Government functionaries, would reflect on the key 
messages that I have attempted to put across this afternoon and make whole-
hearted efforts to ensure that our banks emerge stronger out of the present crisis 
and are able to become the banks of the future. A quick and determined action is the 
need of the hour and I wish you all the very best in this endeavour. I once again than 
IBA and Bank of India for providing me this opportunity to share my thoughts with all 
of you. 
28 
 Thank you! 
Annex 1 
Bank Group wise Gross NPA Ratio and Net NPA Ratio* 
(in percent) 
  All Banks PSBs OPBs NPBs FBs 
 GNPA NNPA GNPA NNPA GNPA NNPA GNPA NNPA GNPA NNPA 
Mar 94 19.1 13.7 21.1 14.5 6.9 3.9 N.A. N.A. 1.5 -0.6 
Mar-95 15.3 10.5 17.1 11.4 7.4 4.1 2.2 0.9 1.6 -0.9 
Mar-96 13.9 9.2 15.9 9.9 7.0 3.7 0.8 0.5 1.8 -0.2 
Mar-97 14.3 9.5 16.4 9.6 8.3 4.7 2.9 2.5 3.6 1.0 
Mar-98 13.1 8.9 14.8 8.5 10.2 5.6 3.5 2.6 3.7 0.6 
Mar-99 13.3 9.0 14.6 8.0 13.0 7.8 4.6 3.5 5.0 0.9 
Mar-00 12.1 8.2 13.4 7.0 11.5 6.4 4.0 2.9 5.5 1.2 
Mar-01 11.1 6.3 12.0 5.5 11.9 6.7 5.4 3.2 6.7 1.7 
Mar-02 10.4 5.5 11.1 4.5 11.1 7.1 8.9 5.0 5.5 1.9 
Mar-03 9.1 4.4 9.4 3.7 8.9 5.4 10.0 4.7 5.3 1.8 
Mar-04 7.2 2.8 7.8 2.8 7.6 3.8 5.0 2.4 4.8 1.5 
Mar-05 4.9 2.0 5.4 2.0 6.0 2.7 2.9 1.5 3.0 0.9 
Mar-06 3.3 1.2 3.7 1.4 4.4 1.7 1.7 0.8 2.1 0.8 
Mar-07 2.5 1.0 2.7 1.1 3.1 1.0 1.9 1.0 1.9 0.7 
Mar-08 2.3 1.0 2.2 1.0 2.3 0.7 2.5 1.2 1.9 0.8 
Mar-09 2.3 1.1 2.0 0.8 2.4 0.9 3.1 1.4 4.3 1.8 
Mar-10 2.4 1.1 2.2 0.8 2.3 0.8 2.9 1.1 4.3 1.8 
Mar-11 2.3 1.0 2.2 0.8 2.0 0.6 2.3 0.6 2.5 0.7 
Mar-12 2.8 1.3 3.0 0.9 1.8 0.6 1.9 0.4 2.7 0.6 
Mar-13 3.2 1.6 3.6 1.0 1.9 0.8 1.8 0.5 3.0 1.0 
* Based on global operations 
PSBs: Public Sector Banks; OPBs: Old Private Sector Banks; NPBs: New Private Sector Banks; FBs: Foreign 
Banks. 
29 
  
Annex 2  
Slippages in the banking system 
(Rs. In crore) 
For FY NPAs at the New Accretion Reduction in NPAs at the 
ended beginning of to NPAs during NPAs during end  of the year 
year   the year  the year  
Mar-01 
60434 19064 15512 63986 
Mar-02 
63986 24606 17638 70954 
Mar-03 
70954 21556 23729 68781 
Mar-04 
68781 24191 28074 64897 
Mar-05 
64897 21552 27740 58709 
Mar-06 
58709 21471 28981 51199 
Mar-07 
51199 26632 27318 50513 
Mar-08 
50513 34621 28612 56522 
Mar-09 
56522 53133 40362 69293 
Mar-10 
69293 65162 49794 84661 
Mar-11 
84661 69598 56338 97920 
Mar-12 
97920 106740 62606 142054 
Mar-13 
142054 136446 85301 193200 
 
 
30 
  
Annex 3 
Bank Group wise Slippage and Net Slippage Ratios 
(in percent) 
All PSBs OPBs NPBs FBs 
Slippage Ratio banks 
Mar-01 4.6 4.7 5.5 4.4 3.3 
Mar-02 5.1 4.1 4.9 20.5 2.7 
Mar-03 3.7 3.6 3.8 3.9 3.5 
Mar-04 3.4 3.5 3.2 3.7 2.7 
Mar-05 2.5 2.5 2.2 3.4 1.8 
Mar-06 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.7 1.5 
Mar-07 1.8 1.8 1.8 2.0 1.5 
Mar-08 1.8 1.7 1.4 2.1 2.1 
Mar-09 2.2 1.8 1.9 3.0 5.5 
Mar-10 2.2 2.0 2.2 2.0 5.5 
Mar-11 2.1 2.2 1.7 1.3 2.2 
Mar-12 2.5 2.8 1.5 1.1 2.3 
Mar-13 2.7 3.1 1.8 1.2 1.8 
Slippage Ratio: Fresh accretion to NPAs during the year to standard 
advances at the beginning of the year 
Net Slippage All PSBs OPBs NPBs FBs 
Ratio Banks 
Mar-01 2.2 2.2 3.3 -0.8 3.1 
Mar-02 3.2 2.1 3.4 19.6 1.4 
Mar-03 1.7 1.6 2.2 2.7 1.6 
Mar-04 1.4 1.7 1.4 -0.3 1.2 
Mar-05 0.6 0.4 0.5 1.7 0.3 
Mar-06 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.7 0.9 
Mar-07 0.8 0.6 0.5 1.5 1.0 
Mar-08 0.9 0.7 0.5 1.8 1.6 
Mar-09 1.2 0.7 1.0 2.4 4.7 
Mar-10 1.4 1.2 1.1 1.5 3.9 
Mar-11 1.1 1.2 0.7 0.6 0.6 
Mar-12 1.5 1.8 0.6 0.5 1.5 
Mar-13 1.7 1.9 0.8 0.6 1.1 
 
Net slippage ratio is slippage ratio net of recoveries. 
 
31 
  
Annex 4 
Write offs as a percentage of Terminal Reduction* 
 
Reduction due to Reduction due Write off as a 
Write off  to Actual %age of 
Year (Rs. in crore) Recovery Terminal 
 (Rs. in crore) Reduction  
(1/ (1+2))  
  (1) (2) (3) 
Mar-01 6,446 7,894 45.0 
Mar-02 8,711 6,813 56.1 
Mar-03 12,021 7,916 60.3 
Mar-04 13,559 11,064 55.1 
Mar-05 10,823 12,710 46.0 
Mar-06 11,657 12,926 47.4 
Mar-07 11,621 11,725 49.8 
Mar-08 11,653 11,971 49.3 
Mar-09 15,996 14,755 52.0 
Mar-10 25,019 14,148 63.9 
Mar-11 23,896 18,818 55.9 
Mar-12 20,892 21,850 48.9 
Mar-13 32,218 24,882 56.4 
 
* Terminal Reduction: Reduction due to write offs + actual recoveries only  
 
32 
  
Annex 5 
Bank Group-wise share in Gross Advances 
 All Banks PSBs OPBs NPBs FBs 
 Gross Adv Gross Adv % to Gross Gross Adv % to Gross Gross Adv % to Gross Gross Adv % to Gross 
(Rs. in cr) (Rs. in cr) Advances (Rs. in cr)  Advances (Rs. in cr) Advances (Rs. in cr) Advances 
(2/1) (4/1) (6/1) (8/1) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Mar-02 680,925 509,368 74.8 41,738 6.1 79,201 11.6 50,618 7.4 
Mar-03 780,492 577,813 74.0 48,611 6.2 99,887 12.8 54,182 6.9 
Mar-04 902,026 661,975 73.4 57,908 6.4 119,511 13.3 62,632 6.9 
Mar-05 1,188,674 885,659 74.5 70,412 5.9 155,577 13.1 77,026 6.5 
Mar-06 1,550,826 1,134,173 73.1 85,154 5.5 232,536 15.0 98,964 6.4 
Mar-07 2,013,357 1,465,341 72.8 94,872 4.7 325,273 16.2 127,871 6.4 
Mar-08 2,508,239 1,819,428 72.5 113,404 4.5 412,441 16.4 162,966 6.5 
Mar-09 3,038,025 2,283,265 75.2 130,334 4.3 454,713 15.0 169,713 5.6 
Mar-10 3,545,534 2,733,993 77.1 156,392 4.4 487,713 13.8 167,437 4.7 
Mar-11 4,358,191 3,347,093 76.8 187,296 4.3 624,484 14.3 199,318 4.6 
Mar-12 5,159,649 3,943,503 76.4 232,918 4.5 748,500 14.5 234,727 4.6 
Mar-13 5,989,182 4,561,072 76.2 273,120 4.6 886,023 14.8 268,967 4.5 
 
Bank Group-wise share in GNPAs  
 All Banks PSBs OPBs NPBs FBs 
GNPA GNPA % to Total GNPA % to Total GNPA % to Total GNPA % to Total 
 (Rs. in cr) (Rs. in cr) GNPAs (Rs. in cr) GNPAs (Rs. in cr) GNPAs (Rs. in cr) GNPAs 
(2/1) (4/1) (6/1) (8/1) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Mar-02 70,954 56,507 79.6 4,635 6.5 7,032 9.9 2,780 3.9 
Mar-03 68,781 54,089 75.4 4,308 6.2 7,490 14.2 2,894 4.2 
Mar-04 64,897 51,541 79.4 4,392 6.8 5,951 9.2 3,013 4.6 
Mar-05 58,709 47,622 81.1 4,201 7.2 4,566 7.8 2,321 4.0 
Mar-06 51,199 41,371 80.8 3,740 7.3 4,032 7.9 2,057 4.0 
Mar-07 50,513 38,855 76.6 2,969 5.9 6,271 12.5 2,419 4.9 
Mar-08 56,522 40,457 71.1 2,557 4.6 10,428 18.7 3,080 5.6 
Mar-09 69,293 45,028 64.5 3,072 4.5 13,900 20.3 7,293 10.7 
Mar-10 84,661 59,927 70.8 3,622 4.3 13,985 16.5 7,126 8.4 
Mar-11 97,920 74,668 76.3 3,695 3.8 14,495 14.8 5,061 5.2 
Mar-12 142,054 117,269 82.6 4,200 3.0 14,297 10.1 6,288 4.4 
Mar-13 193,200 164,468 84.8 5,210 2.8 15,552 8.0 7,970 4.3 
 
Bank Group-wise share in Restructured Standard Assets (RSA)  
 All Banks PSBs OPBs NPBs FBs 
RSA  RSA % to Total RSA % to Total RSA % to Total RSA % to Total 
 (Rs. in cr) (Rs. in cr) RSA  (Rs. in cr) RSA  (Rs. in cr) RSA  (Rs. in cr) RSA 
(2/1) (4/1) (6/1) (8/1) 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Mar-02 9,820  4,212  42.9  765  7.8  4,839  49.3  4  0.1 
Mar-03 18,226  7,363  40.4  1,296  7.1  9,488  52.1  79  0.4 
Mar-04 17,774  9,276  52.2  1,405  7.9  6,953  39.1  140  0.8 
Mar-05 25,304  18,111  71.6  1,123  4.4  6,025  23.8  45  0.2 
Mar-06 17,872  11,893  66.5  660  3.7  5,219  29.2  100  0.6 
Mar-07 20,090  14,658  73.0  716  3.6  4,697  23.4  19  0.1 
Mar-08 26,642  19,739  74.1  1,358  5.1  5,528  20.8  18  0.1 
Mar-09 75,199  62,351  82.9  4,219  5.6  7,427  9.9  1,203  1.6 
Mar-10 139,488  126,224  90.5  5,548  4.0  6,941  5.0  773  0.6 
Mar-11 139,168  129,810  93.3  5,439  3.9  3,465  2.5  454  0.3 
Mar-12 218,963  203,637  93.0  8,253  3.8  6,837  3.1  236  0.1 
Mar-13 313,003  292,410  93.4  10,917  3.5  9,258  3.0  418  0.1 
 
33 
  
Annex 6 
Status of Impaired Assets 
(in percent) 
 Mar-09 Mar-10 Mar-11 Mar-12 Mar-13 
All GNPA 2.5 2.5 2.4 2.9 3.4 
Banks 
Rest Std Advs / Total Gross 3.2 4.3 3.5 4.7 5.8 
Advs 
(GNPAs + Rest Std 7.7 9.2 8.1 9.8 11.6 
Adv+Cum W/O) / 
(Gross Advs + Cum W/O) 
(GNPAs + Rest Std Adv) / 5.7 6.8 5.8 7.6 9.2 
Gross Adv 
PSBs GNPA 2.1 2.3 2.3 3.2 3.8 
Rest Std Advs / Total Gross 3.6 5.1 4.2 5.7 7.2 
Advs 
(GNPAs + Rest Std 8.0 9.5 8.7 11.0 13.4 
Adv+Cum W/O) / 
(Gross Advs + Cum W/O) 
(GNPAs + Rest Std Adv) / 5.7 7.4 6.6 8.9 11.0 
Gross Adv 
OPBs GNPA 2.4 2.2 2.0 1.8 1.9 
Rest Std Advs / Total Gross 3.3 3.7 2.9 3.5 4.0 
Advs 
(GNPAs + Rest Std 6.9 7.3 6.1 6.4 6.8 
Adv+Cum W/O) /(Gross 
Advs + Cum W/O) 
(GNPAs + Rest Std Adv) / 5.6 5.9 4.9 5.3 5.9 
Gross Adv 
NPBs GNPA 3.6 3.2 2.6 2.2 1.9 
Rest Std Advs / Total Gross 1.9 1.6 0.6 1.1 1.2 
Advs 
(GNPAs + Rest Std 6.6 7.3 5.5 5.4 5.4 
Adv+Cum W/O) /(Gross 
Advs + Cum W/O) 
(GNPAs + Rest Std Adv) / 5.5 4.8 3.3 3.2 3.1 
Gross Adv 
FBs GNPA 4.3 4.3 2.5 2.7 3.0 
Rest Std Advs / Total Gross 0.7 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.2 
Advs 
(GNPAs + Rest Std Adv+ 7.0 9.6 7.3 6.7 6.4 
Cum W/O) / 
(Gross Advs + Cum W/O) 
(GNPAs + Rest Std Adv) / 5.0 4.7 2.8 2.8 3.1 
Gross Adv 
 
34 
  
Annex 7 
4
Segment wise Impaired Asset Ratio (in percent) 
Agriculture Mar-09 Mar-10 Mar-11 Mar-12 Mar-13 
All Banks  5.4 5.7 6.6 7.6 8.2 
PSBs 6.0 6.3 7.3 8.6 9.2 
OPBs 3.6 3.2 3.5 4.0 4.2 
NPBs 2.7 3.3 3.2 2.6 2.6 
FBs 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 
 
Industries Mar-09 Mar-10 Mar-11 Mar-12 Mar-13 
All Banks 10.2 11.8 10.0 12.5 16.0 
PSBs 11.0 12.9 11.3 14.3 18.4 
OPBs 10.5 12.2 9.5 10.9 12.4 
NPBs 8.6 7.3 4.1 5.0 5.9 
FBs 3.3 3.6 2.8 3.5 4.1 
 
Services Mar-09 Mar-10  Mar-11 Mar-12 Mar-13 
All Banks  4.6 5.6 5.1 8.1 10.0 
PSBs 5.0 6.2 5.9 9.6 11.9 
OPBs 5.5 6.1 5.4 6.1 6.6 
NPBs 3.6 3.4 2.3 3.0 3.1 
FBs 2.7 2.8 2.5 3.0 3.0 
 
Retail Mar-09 Mar-10 Mar-11 Mar-12 Mar-13 
All Banks  7.0 8.2 6.9 6.3 5.5 
PSBs 5.7 5.3 4.5 4.6 4.1 
OPBs 3.6 3.9 3.0 2.2 1.9 
NPBs 8.0 11.5 10.5 9.1 7.7 
FBs 13.0 23.7 22.4 19.3 16.7 
 
Others Mar-09 Mar-10  Mar-11 Mar-12 Mar-13 
All Banks 8.2 12.9 13.0 12.6 9.2 
PSBs 8.1 14.0 14.7 14.8 11.8 
OPBs 7.9 6.9 6.2 5.7 3.4 
NPBs 9.1 4.8 3.6 3.0 3.3 
FBs 22.4 14.9 8.8 3.5 2.6 
 
                                                            
4
 (GNPAs + Rest Std Adv+Cum W/O) /(Gross Advs + Cum W/O) 
 
35 
  
Annex 8 
Segment-wise share in Restructured Standard Assets 
( in per cent) 
  2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
Agriculture   4.5 4.4 4.9 3.6 2.9 
Industries  66.6 67.4 66.8 68.8 78.0 
(of which) 
Micro 2.0 1.3 1.1 0.9 0.6 
Small 5.6 4.6 4.7 2.2 1.7 
Medium 9.0 6.2 6.8 4.0 3.6 
Large 49.9 55.4 54.2 61.7 72.1 
Services   9.4 10.0 11.9 18.5 16.5 
(of which) Micro 0.8 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 
Small 2.1 1.2 1.4 0.8 0.7 
Medium 1.9 1.2 1.5 0.9 1.6 
Large 5.2 7.0 8.6 16.4 13.7 
Retail   6.2 3.4 3.0 1.7 0.9 
Others  13.3 14.9 13.4 7.4 1.7 
 
Note: 1.Figures are for domestic operations unless otherwise stated. 
 
36 
 