 
INDIA-OECD-WORLD BANK REGIONAL 
CONFERENCE  ON   FINANCIAL 
EDUCATION 
       
 
 
Dr.  Deepali Pant Joshi 
Executive Director 
Reserve Bank of India  
 
? RBI Governor Dr Subbarao set the tone for this conference 
by providing  us the analytical framework. 
 
? He explained how in the wake of the financial crisis our 
efforts had gathered greater salience . 
 
? He also explained how the equation of financial literacy 
from the demand side and financial inclusion  from the 
supply side work in tandem He  pointed to the numerous 
challenges, in the Indian context, liberalised Know Your 
Customer norms with a unique identity number would help 
spur financial inclusion .Banks however must treat it as a 
business opportunity and not an obligation thrust on them. 
  
 
  
 
? Dr .K.C. Chakrabarty brought into very sharp focus how 
financial literacy, financial education and financial 
stability are inextricably linked and form part of a 
continuum.  
 
? Mr. Onno Ruhl ,India country director of the World 
Bank explained the seminal work of the World Bank in 
addressing issues of building financial capability 
through financial education and also referred to  the 
work of the RBI in this regard. 
 
? Ambassador Boucher  expressed how In October 2011, G 
20 finance Ministers agreed to new principles on 
financial consumer protection developed by an OECD 
led task Force integrated with financial inclusion and 
financial education policies.  
 
  
? During the Financial crisis, people who did not know any better 
borrowed beyond their means ,not in Africa, not in Nigeria ,Papua 
New Guinea ,Japan ,India but in the USA because appraisers 
inflated the value of properties that prospective buyers were 
interested in. 
 
? Borrowers were led to believe that they had undertaken a standard 
fixed rate mortgage only to learn later that their mortgage was a 
complicated variable rate contract which with their income streams 
they could not honour . 
 
? Brokers, mortgage companies etc., took the financially illiterate 
borrower for a ride risky lending practices proliferated. 
 
? There was no CONSUMER PROTECTION  different jurisdictions 
had their own sets of lending policies  
? A large part the financial crisis was a result of  financial 
illiteracy and lack of financial capability. We are 
meeting to ensure that this does not  happen again this is 
the first commitment we must make and pledge ourselves 
to. 
 
? Appropriately our introductory session dwelt on 
developing National Strategies for Financial education 
OECD/INFE principles and practical examples from Asia 
and the Pacific. 
 
? Ms. Flore-Anne of the  OECD set the tone. Country 
experiences were shared by Mr G.P.Garg, Mr. Pungky 
Purnomo from Indonesia, Ryoko Okazaki from Japan 
shared the South, South East Asian and Asian experiences 
and as Dr. KCC explained  Helena Kolmanova  balanced 
the picture through  the European perspective. ? It is a truism that whatever gets measured gets done that 
statistics and empirical experience alone hold certitudes 
the rest are platitudes so fittingly Dr. Urjit Patel capably 
steered the session on developing surveys to measure 
Financial literacy and Capability. Surveys as a 
diagnostic tool can inform policy. 
 
? Valeria Perotti, social protection specialist of the World 
Bank spoke on Measuring Financial Capability in Low 
and Middle Income settings and Adele Atkinson 
competently walked us through International 
Comparative measures of Financial literacy and evidence 
from the OECD/INFE Measurement pilot. 
 
? Douglas Randall of the World Bank expounded on the 
FINDEX in which several of our countries have 
participated. ? The third fascinating session was on financial literacy and 
financial inclusion Findings and experience from - Asia and the 
Pacific region. 
 
? Flore Anne Messy OECD capably moderated the session where 
Ryoko Okazaki, Director head of Promotion of Financial 
Education Group Central Bank of Japan Ms Rufina Peter, Senior 
research officer Papua New Guinea made her presentation . 
 
? She explained how difficult it was to run the questionnaire in two 
languages Tok Pisin and Hirin Motu in Papua New Guinea 
imagine how in India we manage with 22 official languages and 
398 living languages the mind boggles but we need to do this. 
The last engaging presentation of the day was from Temitayo  
Adebiyi, Principal Statistics officer National Statistics office, 
Nigeria. 
 
? This morning we have had a series of hands on sessions Richard 
Hinz and Flore Anne Messy provided us a valuable and insightful 
Introduction to the program Knowledge products and website of 
the Financial Literacy and Education Trust fund.  
 
 
? There is currently limited evidence and little consensus on the types of 
programs which are effective in raising the capacity for and level of 
financial capability. 
 
? Effective impact evaluation is essential but often serves as a forgotten 
half in this context the presentations made by Richard Hinz, Trust Fund 
Program Manager ,World Bank OECD High level Principles for 
evaluation of financial education programs were particularly valuable. 
 
? Adele Atkinson Policy analyst of the OECD presented the OECD High 
Level Principles for the evaluation of financial education programs and 
Joanne Yoong from the National University of Singapore presented a 
toolkit for evaluation of financial capability Programs in Middle and 
Low Income countries. 
 
? This was followed by the session on Youth Developing financial skills 
and Competencies OECD /INFE guidelines on Financial Education in 
schools and PISA financial literacy.  ? Financial education in schools, innovative tools, examples and 
evaluation findings was presented by Ms Amara Sriphayak ,Bank 
of Thailand, Ms. Luciana, Consultant ,World Bank gave us 
extremely valuable insights. 
 
? The session on Women empowerment through Financial 
Education, especially close to the heart  was moderated by Mr. 
Prashant Saran, whole time member, SEBI and there was valuable 
experience sharing through presentations by Ms.Chiara, 
Consultant, OECD and  Ms.Sushma Kapoor  of  the UNWOMEN. 
 
? The session on Innovative methods for financial capability 
enhancement ,in which Doorstep banking and financial 
education in India were presented by Mr.Leopold Sarr of World 
Bank was very useful. We all enjoyed Prof. Billy Jack, Associate 
Professor, Georgetown University presentation on Comic Books. 
 
 
 ? We thank Florentina Mulaj of the World Bank for the serial 
melodrama to improve debt management of South Africa 
and Martin Kanz  of the Economic Development Research 
Group of the World Bank for sharing the experience on 
Lotteries and Savings in Nigeria. 
 
? We thank all the speakers for acquainting us with the range 
of evaluation of new methods and tools to enhance 
financial awareness and capability evidence suggests that 
innovative methods can bring positive outcomes on the 
target audience .The hardcore and asset less poor who are 
hard to reach due to low literacy levels and Geographical 
Locations . In sum, through the cross country  experience  
sharing  of the conference we have learnt a lot. ? Some of you may also have visited our stalls and picked up 
some comics to take back . 
 
? We have covered a lot of ground but with distance still to go. 
Building financial capability through financial literacy is a key 
component of the financial Inclusion process. On this we are 
all agreed Every country has to tread its own path to financial 
inclusion and literacy depending on its particular situation 
literacy levels, per capita income, levels of financialization of 
the economy.  
 
? We have all reached consensus on the need for financial 
literacy and  on National strategies engaging all stakeholders 
including Central and State Governments, financial regulators 
civil society public private partnerships etc.,  
 
? We have agreed that financial literacy, financial education 
lead to customer protection which leads to  financial stability.   
? You have come to India to the mystic East so I will give you a mantra,  
Our  collective global goal is higher growth leading to inclusive and 
sustainable development. Our Finance Minister terms this the ‘mool 
mantra’ of Growth.  
 
? Economic growth is essential but growth with equity is an 
imperative. 
 
? Ladies and gentlemen, We must unhesitatingly embrace the need to 
build financial capability which leads to growth as the highest goal. 
It is growth that will lead to inclusive development without growth 
there will be neither development nor inclusiveness. 
 
? The finance minister, presenting the Indian Budget quoted  Stiglitz 
said “There is a compelling moral case for equity but it is also 
necessary  if there is to be sustained growth. A country’s most 
important resource are its people”. You will all agree it is financially 
literate, financially educated and  financially included people. ? At the end of the day ,there will be no dissent  that it has been a 
great conference .We have indeed covered a lot of ground but 
several challenges remain, with distance still to go.  
 
? Our first Prime minister Jawaharlal  Nehru  often recalled the 
words of  Robert Frost  
            “The woods are lovely dark and deep 
but I have promises to keep  
    and miles to go before I sleep  
     and miles to go before I sleep”.   
 
? As  Dr. Subbarao explained “A part, indeed an important part ,of 
the mandate of Central Banks is financial stability and an 
essential prerequisite for financial stability is financial literacy 
and the central bank has unique leverage in providing financial 
literacy”. 
? We all agree on the need to  build financial capability of our 
people. We need to empower people. Now it is the time to get 
down to do it and together  we know we can.  THANK YOU 
                       
 
 
 
 
                         deepalipantjoshi@rbi.org.in 