Address by Smt. Usha Thorat, Chief General  Manager, Reserve Bank of India on Development  of Gold Market in India    Speech of Smt. Usha Thorat, Chief General Manager, Department of External Investments and  Operations, Reserve Bank of India at the World Gold Council, New Delhi, on Saturday, August 2,  1997.   Development of Gold Market in India  In the last year's conference organised by the World Gold Council as also this year's, a number of  issues have been raised which would lead to the conclusion that gold could play a very significant  role with a more open policy on gold, rationalising tax laws pertaining to gold, ensuring quality  control and allowing the financial sector to meet adequately the needs of this sector in terms of  savings, financing and hedging products. I will therefore confine myself to the need for  development of financial markets/instruments in gold and the steps that are necessary to facilitate  the development of such a market.   I will try to make my presentation in the form of answers to few questions which are often raised.   If imports are further liberalised and taxes reduced, will the consumption of gold increase  enormously as has happened in the period since the NRI route was opened up?   This question is not unfounded as the appetite for gold in India is prodigious. This is partly due to  the cultural factors but mainly due to economic reasons viz. as a liquid safety net and hedge  against inflation and due to a significant part of the demand for gold being unaccounted money.  The rationale for a more freer regime as advocated by the Committee on Capital Account  Convertibility is that despite rigid controls, the appetite to hold more gold is fulfilled. Thus, rather  than driving the market underground, having a well regulated and functioning market will facilitate  the gold economy to come on its own. Gold has its own value, but more than that, the important  linkages of gold with the real and the external sector, which encompasses a whole array of  economic activities, enhances its role which it could play in the overall development of the  economy. Simultaneously, the long term strategy should be to ensure that the rupee is stable in  terms of its internal and external purchasing power- thereby diminishing the demand for gold as  an inflation hedge as has been amply shown by the global trends. The Bank for International  Settlements (BIS) Annual Report for 1997 notes that as inflationary expectations have fallen  around the world, not least in the US, the price of gold has shown less and less sensitivity to the  movements in the US$/DM exchange rate. Secondly, as income levels increase there is bound to  be some increase in the demand for gold and this is the phenomenon we have been witnessing  of late. It is critical in such times that the financial markets reaches out to all sections of society  offering both savings and loan products in a hassle free manner; this will further ensure that gold  is not held in physical form as a liquid safety net. Thirdly, the liberalisation of the economy , the  move towards capital account convertibility (CAC) for residents, the convergence of the tax  regime to international levels and stricter enforcement of the easier tax laws will go a long way in  curbing that part of the demand for gold which is for evading controls. The answer to the question  therefore is that we cannot rule out some increase in the demand for gold on opening up,  however, the advantages to the economy far outweigh the outflows of foreign exchange that  would take place. Some outflows at this stage may counter the capital inflows that are taking  place.  Why is the development of financial market in gold necessary to ensure that the industry  fulfils its due role in the economy?   Financial markets in gold have developed in the world after the freeing of controls over the  physical movement or holding of primary gold and this happened mainly after the world moved off  the era of the US dollar's convertibility into gold. The increase in gold prices in the seventies  made new mining technology cost effective. The business cycles in the different countries, the  inflation rates and the movement in the exchange markets led to volatility in the price of gold  leading to a natural demand for derivative products. The derivative markets are used by mining  companies and dealing banks to support hedging operations and to finance exploration and  extraction activities; by jewellers, refineries and manufacturers to fund their operations and by  commercial banks and dealers who operate in these markets.   The London Bullion Market Association (LBMA) recently reported that the clearing turnover in  gold in the London market in late 1996 was equivalent to about US $11 billion per day. Most of  the trading was spot with a significant forward and option market. The high trading volume  reflects the propensity of gold producers to lock in their output prices by selling their gold forward  . The lack of an upward trend in gold prices may spur such selling but so does the less  speculative desire by producers to reduce the volatility in their cash flows in order to improve their  access to credit. The banks which buy forward from the producers hedge themselves by  borrowing gold and selling in the spot market. The central banks are the major lenders of gold  accounting for 75 per cent of the gold loaned estimated at around 2,750 tonnes at the end of  1996. All this ensures that the final product that reaches the consumer is priced most efficiently  and is not too volatile.   What role can we expect the financial markets in gold to play in India?   Ultimately, the development of the gold market should ensure that the final customer is provided  a price for the gold close to the international price. The customer should be able to liquidate her  holdings very quickly with very little loss of value other than the movement in the spot price in  perfectly legitimate deals. She should be able to borrow against gold at very low margins and at  rates aligned to formal markets. There should be products as good as gold which may not result  in any delivery of gold but offer all the features of gold viz. a liquid asset which serves also as a  hedge against inflation. All this require the growth of a financial market in gold A concomitant  development of the cash market is the growth of the derivatives market. A person planning to  buy/sell gold in future would like to buy an option or a future to lock in on the prevailing price  without parting with any cash at time of the contract - other than the futures margin or the option  premia. For the jewellery manufacturer the development of financial and derivatives market in  gold will enable him to hedge himself against the uncertainty of the price of his raw material viz.  as gold also provides him with working capital finance. For the banks lending to such a jeweller  the risk on account of uncertainties in the cash flow of the jewellery manufacturer due to price  fluctuation is reduced if the borrower takes advantage of such hedging products.   How do we go about developing the financial market in gold ?   Phase I   The liberalisation in the policy on gold with the objective of developing a transparent and well  regulated gold market as suggested by the Committee on CAC needs to be seen along with  development of the financial products related to gold and the integration of the other financial  markets in the country viz. money, securities, forex and capital markets with that of gold market.  In this context, it would be useful to examine the Phase I recommendations. I am sure that these  could be discussed in detail during the course of the workshop planned for tomorrow.  1. The Authorised Dealers (ADs) could be allowed to offer gold-denominated  bonds/deposits and loans carrying a nominal rate of return. This would enable an investor  to get the benefit of having invested in gold besides earning a reasonable rate of return.  The settlements of these deposits could be done in rupee terms only. There is no  prohibition on offering such a product at present. This product is on the lines of the dollar  denominated savings and loan products recommended by the Committee. The question  is how do the banks hedge themselves . To the extent that the deposits and loans are not  matched the banks would need to hedge the gold /rupee risk by splitting into the  dollar/rupee risk and the gold /dollar risk and it would be necessary to allow banks to  hedge the gold/dollar risk in the international markets and the rupee /dollar risk as  normally done and within the prudential norms stipulated by RBI.   2. Considering the vast volumes of private gold holding in the country, schemes could be  formulated to attract this gold in the form of either gold, dollar or rupee deposits carrying  corresponding interest rates. The settlement would be in the rupee equivalent of gold or  dollar on the maturity date. Where the investor chooses he could have the delivery in  gold as well. Banks should be able to deploy the gold so mobilised either by way of  gold/gold denominated loans to the industry or swap into dollar or rupees for lending or  investing in these currencies. When lending these resources in either rupee or foreign  currency form, banks open themselves to the risk of gold price fluctuations and banks  would therefore be an important player in the derivatives market. There is also the need  for instituting effective risk management systems in banks for gold and gold related  products on the lines of currency/interest rate risk management.   3. Gold Accumulation Plans (GAPs) could provide interesting savings instrument especially  for Indian middle class. This could be operated on the lines of those in Japan, which  could encourage the small investors to invest in physical gold without the at tendant  problems of storage and security. The typical GAP envisages monthly deposit of  predetermined amount of rupees by the depositors against which physical delivery of  gold is given on maturity. Many jewellers in India offer this product and allow the  depositor to purchase jewellery from them. This at present provides working capital  finance to jewellers but the management of the price risk by the jeweller makes it  hazardous at times. GAPs can add a versatile financial instrument to the gold market,  besides, the market will get a tremendous boost in terms of liquidity by regular purchases  and sales. In order to render GAPs attractive to the small investor, it is essential to keep  the minimum investment at a reasonably small amount for each GAP contract. To make  the scheme popular, banks could be asked to operate the scheme in their rural branches  from where the major part of demand for gold emanates. The GAPs should be liquid so  that for very small margins the depositor is able to borrow against these GAPs at low  interest rates.   4. ADs could also offer gold loans to jewellers which would provide them necessary working  capital as well as act as a hedge against a fall in the price of gold and they could have  significant interest savings that are associated with them, given low rate of interest on  gold and also less volatile than other interest rates. Banks could be liberal to grant loans  against gold bonds/gold linked deposit.   Phase II   In Phase II, it would be natural to expect the financial market to be developed further and the  derivative as also the forward market to come into existence.   The forward market in gold is not new to India . In the aftermath of World War I, there existed an  active gold and silver market in India -both physical and financial- and gold and silver options and  futures were actively traded in the Bombay Bullion Exchange . Banks were involved in this market  for providing storage, finance and safeguarding the reputation of the members of the exchange.  Mr. Shantilal Sonawala, a former President of the Bombay Bullion Association, remembers that  Grindlays Bank and Bank of India used to be quite active and the Zaveri Bazaar branch of Bank of India boasted of a spacious vault. The banks used to be active not only in financing but buying  and selling bullion on behalf of their clients. They acted as commission agents. In a thesis for  MCom submitted to the Bombay Univer sity in 1954, Mr. Sonawala gives a detailed description of  the bullion market where delivery could be either ready or forward, the minimum lot was 250  tolas, good delivery restricted to bars with specified foreign bearings and later markings of the  Indian mints as also those of the Bullion Exchange refinery were also accepted. The usual period  of the forward contract was one month with an option to the seller, on payment of specified  penalty, to carry forward the delivery. Members of the Board of the Exchange and the Marketing  Committee constituted the Clearing House Committee which supervised the settlement delivery  auction in case of failure to give or take delivery. The exchange functioned smoothly till 1943 .  The Bullion Exchange had a four storeyed building with a trading ring and shops for members,  spacious vaults and a refinery for melting and assaying of gold. It is gathered that traders from  London, China and New York took advantage of the market which played a crucial role in  supporting the London market during the silver crisis in 1935. The problems began when disputes  started between merchants and the Board and in 1947 the Bombay Forward Contract Control Act  was passed and made applicable to the bullion market. The Bullion Exchange Ltd went into  voluntary liquidation and the Bombay Bullion Association Ltd was formed in January 1948 and  recognised as the only association to deal in futures. The association had 486 members by 1949  and had representatives from government and Reserve Bank of India on its Board. The secular  rise in gold prices, shortage of gold stocks and the ban on options led to severe crises in the  forward market and with the ban on forward trading in 1962 and with the introduction of gold  control, the financial market went into oblivion.   I have dwelt at a little length on the history of the futures market in India only to show that there  are well established foundations and practices that could be built upon. As the policy on gold gets  liberalised it would be necessary to regulate the gold market and facilitate the development of a  smoothly functioning transparent cash and futures market with well laid down procedures for  membership, price fixing, settlement, delivery, centralised clearing and settlement in an  exchange, code of conduct for members and so on . It would be useful to examine the by-laws of  the Bombay Bullion Association Ltd sanctioned by the then Government of Bombay under the  Forward Contract Regulation Act 1947 with which the market is familiar and which could be  adapted so as to plug any loopholes and suit the present global practices.   The Government had appointed a Committee with Shri Kamal Nayan Kabra as Chairman to  examine the feasibility of introducing forward trading in some select commodities, including gold  and silver. The Committee submitted its report in September 1994. The Committee has  recommended introduction of forward trading in about seventeen commodities including silver but  not gold. It is understood to have felt that forward trading in gold may be considered later, after  watching for some time the performance of forward trading in silver. It may be noted that Forward  Contract Act , which prohibits forward trading and options, will have to be suitably amended if  banks have to actively deal in these products.   What should be the ingredients of a well regulated forward or futures market/exchange ?   The ingredients of an efficient futures exchange could be:  - match local needs for bar size and quality  - have standardised contracts (bar size, quality, brands, delivery/settlement dates)  - reliable clearing and settlements systems and efficient warehouse facilities (located in all the  major Indian trad ing centres)  - agreements /documents to reduce counter-party and financial settlement risk   - provide cash, futures and options contract   - provide sufficient liquidity on both the buy and sell side  - report turnover and open interest figures daily  - allow both residents and non residents to operate in the market  An efficient and freely tradable exchange in India could attract natural business from South East  Asia, Australia, and the Middle East due to its time zone position. It will also bring in participation  from the major market centres of Zurich, London and New York. There are tremendous  possibilities for Mumbai to develop in a major financial market in gold.   Other Issues linked to development of gold market   Although not directly linked to the development of a financial market there are some other issues  related to gold which also need to be examined as they have a relevance to the gold economy  and therefore the gold market. These relate to taxation , facilities for refining and ensuring  standard quality.   Tax Issues   The present tariff structure for import of gold needs to be rationalised since there is a large  variation between the tariff applicable for normal import (72.5%) as against 4 to 5 per cent under  the NRI route and 14 to 18 per cent under the SIL scheme (including SIL premium). Such a  variation has resulted in a situation where the entire legal trade is undertaken through the NRI  route. The rationalisation of the tariff structure should be undertaken based on following  parameters:   1. The rate of tariff should be such that there is an incentive to resort to legal imports and  not avoid/evade duty.   2. the tariff rate should yield reasonable revenue.   3. The rate should not be so low that India become a conduit for supply to neighbouring  countries.   4. The tariff should be such that there is built-in -incentive to use the imported gold for  exports.   5. While fixing the rate of tariff, emphasis need not be given on payment in foreign  exchange.   As regards sales tax, the present incidence of such tax varies from state to state, which leads to  shift in trading activity between states and also is the root cause of many malpractices in the  trade and discourages official transactions of trades. There is a need for a uniform sales tax all  over the country with separate tax slab on bullion and jewellery. There should be no sales tax for  sales through canalising agencies.   The gamut of direct taxes in the form of Income tax, Wealth tax and Gift tax acts as a deterrent to  officially declaring the transactions. There is a need to rationalise these taxes if gold banking in  India is to develop. The objective of such taxes should be such that along with revenue  generation, they should not drive the gold out of the official channel. Gold should be treated as  any other financial asset in the matter of wealth and capital gains tax. The anomaly in the capital  gains tax which is levied every time there is a sale or an exchange of personal jewellery needs to  be looked into.   Melting/Refining/Assaying   At present, gold is mainly refined in Bombay where a few refineries like the India Government  Mint and National refinery are active. Some private refineries are also operating elsewhere with  limited capacity. As none of the refineries are LBMA recognised there is a need to upgrade and  also increase the refining capacity. The standardisation of the refining process at the refineries  can be entrusted with the India Government mint. Establishment of new refineries in the private  sector with modern technology could be considered for which assistance of reputed foreign  refineries could be sought.  Hallmarking of jewellery   Hallmarking is a method by which samples of manufactured jewellery are subjected to a quality  check and the approved lots are stamped within the official mark to certify the caratage as  assayed. Hallmarking is compulsory in many western countries as well as in South East Asian  countries. As our jewellery is not hallmarked, these are subjected to detailed purity checks  resulting in delayed realisation of export proceeds. For the domestic market hallmarking will  ensure consumer protection. Thus hallmarking of jewellery both domestic and for export should  be made mandatory.   Storage and Custody   At present under the scheme of import of gold by canalising agencies the import is required to be  utilised through a Customs bonded warehouse for the following purposes viz. supply of gold to  manufacturer-exporters of jewellery, sale of gold to holders of SIL, and sale of gold to returning  NRIs. In addition to this banks could be allowed to stock and store gold, as it would be less  cumbersome than the bonded warehouse system of storage.   I have raised several issues for discussion which I hope would help in initiating a debate on the  policy measures that are required in development of a vibrant gold market in India. The country  needs to use to its advantage the fact that we are the largest consumer and are favourably  placed to develop a vibrant market in gold.   