Presentation by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor,  RBI at J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of  Management Department of Accounting &  Information System Northwestern University,  Illinois on May 12, 1997    Presentation by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI at J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of  Management Department of Accounting & Information System Northwestern University, Illinois on  May 12, 1997   Financial Sector Reforms in India - Recent Trends  Professor Bala and friends,   1. It was with great pleasure that I accepted the invitation of Professor Bala to visit Kellogg  School. I could not come last month for an international seminar but Prof. Bala took a  promise that I shall do so at the earliest; and here I am. I consider this both as a privilege  and as an opportunity : a privilege to be in this prestigious school, and an opportunity to  present recent trends in financial sector reforms in India.   2. I shall begin with a brief but factual account of the perform ance of Indian economy in the  last three years to illustrate the positive impact of economic reforms in general; and the  reforms in the financial sector in particular. This would be followed up with a review of the  financial sector reforms in terms of objectives, ownership and control, competition,  regulation and policy environment. There would then be a detailed update of reforms  attempted this year (1997-98) through the budget as well as the monetary and credit  policy announcements. In particular, I would focus on elements of continuity, contextual  response and change in the monetary and credit policy.   Indian Economy : Recent Trends   3. The growth in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the last three years ranged from 6.8  to 7.2 per cent and current year (1997-98) should be no exception. While growth in  industry averaged 10.4 per cent in the last three years, that of agriculture was 2.5 per  cent inspite of a negative growth in 1995-96. Gross Domestic Savings as a percentage of  GDP continued to rise from 24.9 per cent in 1994-95 to 25.6 per cent by 1995-96.   4. Gross Fiscal Deficit of Government of India as a percentage of GDP has come down  from 6.1 per cent to 5 per cent in the last three years and is estimated to go down further  to 4.5 per cent this year. The internal debt of the government as a percentage of GDP is  also down correspondingly. The rate of inflation as measured by Wholesale Price Index  went down from 10.4 per cent in 1994-95 to 5.0 per cent in 1995-96 but has jumped  again to 7.3 per cent in 1996-97. In the current year, we expect that it will be down to  around 6.0 per cent. Consistent with this, broad money growth is targeted to grow only by  15 to 15.5 per cent this year. Growth in non-food credit, however, was sluggish at 10.1  per cent in 1996-97 but we expect it to move towards a figure of over twenty per cent,  closer to the very high actuals in 1994-95 and 1995-96.   5. Growth of exports and imports in SDR terms averaged 13.3 per cent and 17.5 per cent  respectively in the last three years, but the performance last year was below average at  9.6 and 10.7 per cent. In the external sector, Current Account Deficit as a percent of GDP has averaged at a little over one per cent. The exchange rate has been under pressure  on occasions but overall while nominal exchange rate vis-`-vis US dollars exhibited a  steadily depreciating trend, the real effective exchange rate has been appreciating during  the last three years.   Financial Sector Reforms : A Review   Objectives   6. The major objectives of the financial sector reforms, as elaborated by Dr. Rangarajan,  Governor, RBI fall under the three broad categories viz.   i. measures aimed at removing the external constraints bearing on the profitability  of banks,   ii. measures aimed at improving the financial health of banks by introducing  appropriate prudential norms and   iii. measures aimed at institutional strengthening including improving the  competitiveness of the financial system.   However, for convenience these measures can be related to issues of ownership,  competition, regulation and policy stance.   Reforms in Ownership and Control   7. The thrust of reforms in this area relates to privatization and restructuring. Public sector  banks have been permitted diversified ownership by law subject to 51 per cent holding of  Govern ment/RBI/SBI. IFCI and IRBI were converted into public limited companies. The  Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 was amended to allow IDBI to raise  capital up to 49 per cent of its paid up capital from the public. Legal amendments have  been made to induct private participation in the Board of Directors. As a part of  restructuring efforts, weak public sector banks were recapitalised through budgetary  support.   Reforms to Increase Competition   8. New private sector banks have been established and Local Area Banks have been  licensed to instill a greater element of competition in the financial system. There is a more  liberal policy of permitting branches of foreign banks. In the area of interest rate, the  administered structures were dismantled, both on the deposit and lending side. The  lending rates were rationalized to two categories and on the deposit side, the Reserve  Bank of India (RBI) prescribes only one rate in the 30 days to one year category and that  too in the form of 'not exceeding 9.0 percent'. Further, credit norms have been liberalized  and banks now have more freedom to open new branches/upgrade existing extension  counters.   Reforms in Regulation   9. Prudential norms have been introduced based on objective criteria for income  recognition, asset classification and provisioning. The Basle Committee framework for  capital adequacy has been adopted. A Board for Financial Supervision has been set up  for exercising integrated supervision both, on-site and off-site over banks, financial  institutions and finance companies. Besides, several steps have been taken to improve  the audit system in general. Non-banking financial companies have been brought under  more effective supervision of RBI.  Reforms in Policy Environment   10. The Indian banking system operated on a high level of reserve requirements for a long  time. Progressive reduction has brought down the Statutory Liquidity Ratio from 37.5 per  cent to 25 per cent on an incremental basis and the Cash Reserve Ratio, including  incremental CRR from 25.0 per cent and 10.0 per cent. As I mentioned earlier, there is  near full deregulation of both deposit and advances interest rates. The financial sector is  now operating in a more open and more market oriented environment. Government debt  is now mostly at market rates. Foreign exchange rate is also market-determined.   Financial Sector Reforms : An Update (1997-98)   11. The budget of 1997-98 and the monetary policy for the first half of 1997-98 are  considered landmarks in the process of economic reform in India. In the budget of 1997- 98, there are some elements of great relevance to the financial sector, while the  monetary policy announcement that followed has been described as a `big bang' in  financial sector reform.   Budget   Ways and Means Advances   12. A historic reform related to the financial sector was the abolition of the system of ad hoc  Treasury Bills and the introduction of the system of the Ways and Means Advances. The  ad hoc Treasury Bills emerged as a mode of financing the Government's deficit in the  mid-1950s. The ad hoc Treasury Bills, which were meant to be temporary, gained a  permanent as well as cumulative character. It became an attractive source of financing  Government expenditure, especially since it was available at an interest rate pegged at  4.6 per cent per annum since 1974.   Under the new system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA), financial limits have been  fixed to accommodate the temporary mismatches in Government receipts and payments.  Interest rates on the WMA would be at market related rates. The process of elimination of  ad hoc Treasury Bills was in three stages. In the first stage between 1994-95 and 1996- 97, limits were set for the yearly increases in ad hoc Treasury Bills. In the second stage,  i.e., for two years beginning April 1997-98, overdraft would be permit ted beyond ten  consecutive days, but at a cost. In the final phase, i.e. after the transition of two years, no  overdraft will be permitted beyond ten consecutive days. The new system gives more  autonomy to the central bank to conduct its monetary policy.   Other Measures   13. Many other measures having significant implications on the financial sector were  announced. The Budget commenced the phasing out of interest tax. It removed the Tax  deduction at source on Government Securities, which had hitherto distorted pricing in the  secondary markets. The Government announced the launching of Capital Indexed  Bonds. A committee has been set up to draw the road map for capital account  convertibility. It also acknowledged that in India's progress towards a more open  economy, the regulations governing foreign exchange transactions need to be  modernised. In view of this, the budget proposed to replace the exist ing Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act 1973 with a Foreign Exchange Management Act.   Monetary and Credit Policy : Issues  14. In the backdrop of the performance during 1996-97, four major issues had to be  addressed by the monetary policy for 1997-98.   First, what should be the order of increase in broad money growth? Should M3 be  targeted at all ?   Secondly, what should be the approach towards large capital inflows in case it occurs ? If  nominal exchange rate is allowed to appreciate, what would be the impact on exports ?  On the other hand, if an interventionist policy is pursued, the resultant expansion of  money supply would need to be sterilized. But, there are limits to sterilization; both in  terms of costs and availability of securities.   Thirdly, the prevailing level of interest rates did not reflect the stance of monetary policy.  The sizeable reduction in the cash reserve ratio did not impart reduction in lending rates.  Under the circumstances, what measures could be taken to bring interest rates down ?   Fourthly, on the issue of credit dispensation and credit flows, what could be done to  correct the sluggish growth in non-food credit by banks. Can credit flow enhancement be  a target at all ?   Monetary and Credit Policy For 1997-98   15. There are elements of continuity, contextual response and more important, significant  changes in the recent half yearly monetary and credit policy.   Continuity   a. As Governor of the RBI, Dr. Rangarajan stated, the basic objectives of monetary and  credit policy continue to be the same. The stance of this policy also continues to be  maintaining reasonable price stability and ensuring availability of adequate bank credit to  support growth of output in the real sector.   b. Often we used to mention in the policy statement the important measures that are kept  unchanged. This time we did not: But there are many features including CRR and SLR on  domestic liabilities which remain unchanged. The general thrust of financial sector  reforms continues and will continue over the period through series of measures that will  be announced from time to time. This is the normal practice.   c. The process of reduction in sector specific refinance has been carried further. Over the  past few years, we have been gradually moving away from refinance to banks against  export credit, investment in Government Securities, etc.   d. The increase in the proportion of loan system signifies conti nuity. Until recently, banks  were extending working capital finance to corporates through a system of cash credits.  There has been a gradual shift from the cash credit system of financing to the loan  system.   e. The general approach continues to be gradual. We have always recognized the need for  a cautious step-by-step approach rather than a rapid deregulation.   Contextual Response   a. The rate of inflation at 7.3 per cent during 1996-97 was a matter of concern. The current  policy tries to respond by revising the target for growth of M3 downward. As against the  target of 15.5 - 16.0 per cent for 1996-97, the actual performance was 15.6 per cent. The  target for 1997-98 was scaled down to 15.0 - 15.5 per cent.   b. To the extent, the slow growth of non-food credit - or credit choke - is related to capital  markets, advances against shares have permitted. Banks have been allowed to extend loans to corporates against shares held by them to enable such corporates to meet the  promoters' contribution to the equity of new companies in anticipation of raising  resources. Changes in the credit delivery system were effected to give banks more  autonomy and operational flexibility.   c. In the area of lending rates, measures were taken on a number of fronts, especially  through rationalization and signaling, to reinforce the downward movement that has  already taken place in the short end of the market.   d. The possibility of continued capital inflows was recognized and as stated in the policy,  would be a factor in regulating money supply.   e. The policy continues to be exporter-friendly. The policy rewards exporters who bring back  their proceeds quickly. Interest rates for usance bills up to 90 days have been prescribed  at `not exceeding 13 per cent. Previously it was fixed at 13 per cent. Exporters can now  extend trade related advances out of EEFC accounts up to $ 3 million per account  without prior approval of the RBI.   Change   a. The policy seeks greater market orientation in the financial sector by empowering banks  with greater operational flexibility. RBI has moved out of microregulation. Now banks are  given total freedom on consortium arrangements and methodology of assessing working  capital requirements. No doubt, prudential guidelines will continue to be prescribed by the  RBI. These measures signify changes in the relationship between the RBI and banks.   b. Borrowers have also been empowered to reinforce marketisation. These measures have  changed the relationship between the banker and the borrower. Borrowers can choose to  go through a single bank or multiple banks or take the syndication route. Access to  commercial paper is freer now.   c. Macromanagement by the Reserve Bank has been emphasized. The bank rate will  emerge as a signal of the stance of monetary policy and determine the rate at which  funds will be available to the system from the RBI. Interest rates on domestic term  deposits (maturity of 30 days and up to 1 year) and NRE deposits, RBI refinance rates  and the rates at which RBI provides liquidity support to Primary Dealers have all now  been linked to the bank rate.   d. Integration of money market, Government Securities market and forex markets has  commenced. Measures towards this end include exemption of CRR/SLR on inter-bank  liabilities, permission to Authorised Dealers (ADs) to borrow from and lend in overseas  market, permission to ADs to book forward cover on the basis of past performance,  permission to undertake rupee/forex currency swaps, allowing repos in all Government  Dated Securities, reverse repos for all SGL account holders, reducing the minimum  period of Commercial Paper (CP), etc.   The integration of the domestic and foreign exchange market could lead to increased  volatility in the domestic market as the impact of exogenous factors could be transmitted  to the domestic market. However, the proposals for deepening and widening the forex  market such as allowing forward cover based on business projections, development of  rupee-forex swap markets have strengthened the market participants with additional  instruments to hedge risks and reduce volatility.   e. Extensive consultations with market participants were held both formally and informally  before finalising the policy. Further, as a signal on ongoing consultations, a Committee  for Money Markets has been constituted, similar to the Technical Advisory Committees  on Forex and Government Securities Markets. Significantly, it signals a difference in  relationship between the Reserve Bank and market participants at the informal level.   Big Bang :  In conclusion, it would be useful to explore why the recent policy is described as a `big bang'.  After all, as in the case of any Monetary Policy, there has been a combination of Continuity,  Contextual response and Change. But, there are some significant features which have led  observers to describe them as institutional and structural reforms and these relate to changes in  relationships. First, the policy changes the relationship between RBI and banks from micro  regulation to macromanagement. Second, it changes the relationship between banks and  borrowers by giving greater choice to borrowers among banks and among the modes of financing  their requirements. Third, to the extent, the process of integration has started, it changes the  relationship between different market participants. Finally, the relationship between the RBI and  market participants is changed by expanding and reinforcing the consultative process.   Through the various reform measures so far, we have laid down the foundation for a more  efficient financial system. Need for further changes is recognized and for example, a Committee  on Capital Account Convertibility has been appointed. The cumulative experience provides us  with the necessary confidence to grapple with the future challenges and our success so far  makes us go ahead with a sense of optimism.   