, respected Dr.  I may quote Dr.  control " out of borrowed funds. 1 Wadhwani On the specific issue of whether inflation is dead, I would readily agree with Dr.  , of Course, revenue deficit and financial returns on assets created immediate and critical issues are banker, the chances of their running into any unanticipated problem are relatively less. The most borrowings are approved by the Centre and Reserve Bank of India is their debt-manager and their domestic Governments, since they are not allowed to resort to external borrowings,  strong as in many other countries. Similarly, with regard to the fiscal deficit of State at floating rates. Hence, the link between fiscal deficit and external sector is not as direct and as through domestic saving and Government does not resort to external commercial borrowings or account deficit of less than 2 per cent of GDP. Over 90 per cent of our investments are financed However, the fiscal deficit must be viewed in the context of high domestic saving and a current policies is critical, since fiscal dominance is evident although GDP is high and inflation rate is low. coordination between monetary and fiscal some fiscal constraints. At our stage of development  the Reserve Bank of India to pursue its legitimate objective of price stability of course, within It is a matter of satisfaction that government has been extending necessary support to enable institutions that entrench low inflation remains an important part of the policy agenda." to take the sometimes difficult decisions necessary to achieve that end. Hence, designing a monetary phenomenon and keeping inflation low depends on whether there is the political will us here and with which I readily agree, for understandable reasons is that "Inflation is, ultimately, Another important point made in the conclusions of the paper which is of special relevance to inflation hurts the poor the most. There can be no better anti-poverty programme than inflation In a society in which a very large segment of the population has no hedge against inflation, Rangarajan that "Price stability as an objective also has social justice dimensions. In fact, our current approach to monetary policy reflects the same sentiment. In this context, where monetary policy has kept inflation low and aggregate demand stable."  (1998) - "On average, the poor are much better off in countries Romer and Romer concluded (see  inflation for its own sake, but because it might help boost growth - a recent cross-country study  says: "Of course, we do not desire low Wadhwani I will start with the conclusion where Dr.  selective, basically relating to Indian situation relevant to some of the points made by him. combination of theory and practical policy are impressive. My comments would therefore be Inflation dead' is bound to be another landmark speech. Its breadth and depth as also the 'Currency Puzzles' in September won wide acclaim. Needless to say, his presentation today on 'Is Wadhwani, whose lecture in London School of Economics on satisfaction to me to meet Dr.  I am thankful to Dr. Rakesh Mohan for giving me this, opportunity. It is a matter of personal Mohan and friends. Wadhwani, Director General Rakesh Sushil Singhji Jaswant Honourable Shri  "Is Inflation Dead" - Some Comments*  Dr.   on role of 2 actual inflation rates were consistent with the ranges indicated in the policy. inflation rate would be less than the last year's level, i.e., 4.8 per cent. In the last 5 years, the year, it was indicated in April at 5 per cent and in the October Review it was indicated that the indicated explicitly or implicitly an acceptable level or a range of inflation rate. For the current trends towards lower inflation. The statements of monetary policy from time to time have cent till two years ago, appear to be veering round now to 3 to 5 per cent, recognising the global view among intellectuals on tolerable levels of inflation in India which centred round 5 to 6 per Thanks to these developments and promise of domestic regulatory reforms, the consensus of similar pressure, for example, in telecommunications area. have led to rather more competitive product market conditions." In India also, we see beginnings of industries including gas, water, telecom, electricity, airports, rail, the docks and broadcasting Government action in price stability, i.e., "Privatisation and/or regulatory changes in a whole host Wadhwani In addition I would invite your attention to a statement by Dr.  domestic market." competitive pressures might be contributing to improved price competition of industries in the industries". I also said: "positive productivity shocks in the post liberalisation period due to technologicial innovation and reduced mark up in domestic inflation through cost saving  with sharp decline in world manufacturing prices could be contributing to lower manufacturing in August 1999. Let me quote: "Increased import competition due to trade liberalisation coupled to subdue inflationary pressures. I had made a reference to some of these in a lecture on inflation intensified product market competition". We find similar competitive pressures operating in India Wadhwani's paper on "The role of Of particular interest to India is the section in Dr.  consider them. inflexibilities in the context of lowered inflation should be initiated. I hope NCAER would Wage  Our labour markets in India are admittedly very different but some studies on labour markets, and Wadhwani has also elaborated the structural improvements in the U.K. Labour market. in China. Briefly stated, we in RBI cannot afford to be complacent on the inflation front. in most parts of Asia, except a leading business newspaper indicates that inflation is seen as rising Reuters poll of Thursday in and dampen relatively higher inflationary expectations. Incidentally, a  We, in India, are still in the task of ensuring price stability essentially to consolidate the gains avoid increase in inflation are different from fight to lower inflation. Wadhwani to preemptive actions such as those mentioned by Dr. However, it is obvious that  nations are sacrificing increasing amount of economic growth in their fight to lower inflation. and the conduct of monetary policy in conditions of low inflation'. The study argues that industrial context, it is useful to refer to a BIS Working Paper No.82 of November 1999 on 'Sacrifice ratios in this year, have been aimed at preventing an increase in inflation rather than reduction. In this preemptive rate increases, three not believe that inflation is dead. Similarly, the Federal Reserve's  occasions in the spirit of early, pre-emptive action; suggesting that the committee, at least, does mentioned by him, in the United Kingdom, interest rates were raised by 25 basis points on two that one cannot be complacent about inflation and that central bankers still have a job to do. AsSmart Cards.  3 However, the success may not be attributed only to our superior knowledge or wisdom and conduct of monetary policy. competition in the economy and reform measures in the financial sector, particularly successful kind of durable reduction in the inflation rate is to be seen in the light of both increased in the first half of 1998-99, the average inflation rate increased to 6.9 percent in 1998-99. This During 1997-98, this rate declined further to 4.8 per cent. However, due to some supply shocks rate was brought down significantly from 10.9 per cent in 1994-95 to 6.4 per cent in 1996-97. of high growth during 1994-97 where the output growth exceeded 7 per cent, average inflation successful on both growth and inflation fronts, it is important to mention that even during the fact I cannot help but place on record the fact that in recent years we have been reasonably benefit from scholarly presentations such as these. inflation-targeting. We in RBI will Continue to analytically on approaches to core inflation and  we have put out a discussion paper on universal banking last year. On inflation, we are working aggregates relating to money, credit and liquidity. As regards banks, recognising the global trend, constituted a third working group last year and we have redefined and enlarged the relevant definitions and the RBI is no exception. On the meaning and measurement of money, we these need to be dealt with in the specific context. Of course, central bankers keep revising these banking business and vice versa? How do we measure inflation? Do we include asset prices? All electronic and now 'e' banking. Similarly, what is a bank when banks do non- are : what is money and how is it measured, given becoming contextual to the country. Questions  Inflation. Scope and meaning of each of these three is changing and they are in some ways Central bankers all over the world are concerned with three things, money, banks and inflexibilities and rigidities in the financial sector. fiscal situation, interest rate  in our context, due recognition must be given to the risks and trade-off in sequencing, given the and inflation targeting. On the specific issue of inflation targeting, which appears to be preferred, since mid-nineties. At an analytical level, we in RBI are studying both the issues of core inflation shift in focus is undoubtedly an outcome of the progress achieved in reforming financial sector greater integration of various markets to facilitate the use of instruments of monetary control. The RBI in the management of liquidity in the economy. Secondly, the shift is also to bring about maneuverability for the shift is towards institutional changes aimed at securing greater degree of  Jalan, the focus of monetary policy is shifting. Firstly, unchanged, as indicated by Governor Dr.  Further, in the recent years while the stance of monetary policy has remained by and large of capital flows has also emanated as a major concern of policy. neutralising the inflationary impact of growing fiscal deficit, management of liquidity arising out March 1999. While in the earlier regime, monetary policy had to address itself to the task of total reserve money during 1991-94 (average of end-March figures) to 53.2 per cent at end- emerged as the dominant source of reserve money expansion rising from about 21.4 per cent of determined exchange rate system the net foreign exchange assets (NFA) of the Reserve Bank has With a gradual opening up of the economy and switchover to a market reserve money.  In the context of monetary policy, we must recognise a recent development in regard toperhaps an above-average dose of luck, to get our forecasts right." * Comments on the paper "Is inflation Dead" by Dr. Sushil  Bank of England at National Council of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi on December 17, 1999 4 Wadhwani, Member, Monetary Policy Committee, Thanking you. sure that the markets will continue to challenge us and we will need all our collective skill and  when he said in an earlier lecture "I am Wadhwani in this context, I cannot help agree with Dr. 