March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Finance for Industrial Growth* RAKESH MOHAN It is indeed a privilege and an honour whom the lecture is named. The theme of for me to deliver the Mohan today's lecture is to examine the adequacy of Kumaramangalam Memorial Lecture here at finance for growth in the Indian context with a the Administrative Staff College of India. special focus on industry. Mohan Kumaramangalam was one of the I. Introduction most distinguished public servants of his Finance is a crucial ingredient for generation. His untimely and unfortunate economic growth. In this lecture, I propose death in a plane crash in 1973 deprived India to examine the adequacy of the availability of a worthy son. A leftist in his student days of finance for fuelling growth in the late in England, Mohan Kumaramangalam was a 1990s, a period during which Indian leading light of Mrs. Gandhi's cabinet. His economic growth has tended to slow down, enduring contribution was to create the particularly in the industrial sector. Although concept of a holding company of allied public I am concerned with overall economic sector units, with a degree of autonomy from growth, my focus in this lecture is on the the red tape of direct government control. It financing of industrial growth. is entirely appropriate that the Steel Authority of India, which was his brainchild as minister The way we think about the modes of for steel, has instituted this lecture in his financing industrial development has been memory. Whereas it is primarily my current changing over the years (Levine, 1997). The interest that prompted me to choose the initial literature focused on the need to theme of today's lecture, "Finance for develop extensive financial systems that could Industrial Growth", I would imagine that this tap savings and then channelise the funds so theme would have been close to his heart. generated to a wide spectrum of industrial activities. It has been realised gradually that It is, of course, risky to talk on this subject the mode of provision of industrial finance is in front of Mr. Narasimham, Chairman of the as important for fostering industrial growth as Administrative Staff College of India, who has is the quantum of funds. Cross-country been a former Governor of the Reserve Bank experience suggests that economies that and also author of the most influential reports have mature financial systems for allocating on the financial sector. So my talk today is funds efficiently among competing uses tend really about marrying the interest of today's to grow faster. Well-functioning banks, Chairman and Mr. Kumaramangalam after Dr. Rakesh Mohan is Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India. He is grateful to Partha Ray, Indranil Sen Gupta * and A. Prasad of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance. 319March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 financial institutions and other financial In this background, I propose to examine intermediaries such as venture capital funds if financing is now forming a constraint in the promote technological innovation and growth process. To do this, I will first review industrial growth by providing risk capital and the alternative approaches to financing funds to those entrepreneurs who have the patterns as they exist in different countries and highest probability of developing new as they have evolved. I will then trace our products, production processes and own history and briefly review reforms in the competitive production facilities. The Indian financial sector in India. I will, thereafter, financial sector reforms of the 1990s, largely examine the performance of banks and guided by the two excellent reports authored financial institutions in recent periods. It is in by Mr. Narasimham (1992, 1998), have been this context that I propose to look into how designed to adapt the Indian financial system the major contours of the financing pattern of to the new realities of an open competitive Indian industries have changed over time. economy in a globalising world. What are the key stylised facts of the financing of Indian industries? What has been The key objective of India's economic the nature and dimension of changes that reforms initiated in the early 1990s was to have occurred in the financing pattern in the accelerate growth. The reform process of the recent period? Has Indian industry been 1990s did help to accelerate overall economic credit-starved? Have the financial growth over that of the 1980s, but only intermediaries done their task? I will finally put marginally (RBI, 2003). Real gross domestic forward some ideas for discussion for further product (GDP) grew at 5.9 per cent during improvement of the financing system. the reform period (1992-93 to 2002-03), higher than that of 5.6 per cent in the pre- The rest of the lecture is formally reform period (1981-82 to 1990-91) (Table 1). structured as follows. As a perspective, Growth in both industry and agriculture has Section II takes a look into the framework of been slow after the initial burst in the 1990s, corporate financing in India. Sections III and although growth in the tertiary sector has IV delve into the pre-1990s and post-reform accelerated somewhat (Acharya, 2002). model of industrial finance in India. Section V is essentially futuristic in nature and discusses Table 1 : Sectoral Growth in the 1980s and 1990s the options of long-term finance in India. Sector 1981-82 to 1992-93 to 1994-97 1997-2002 1990-91 2002-03 Concluding observations are presented in 1 2 3 4 5 Section VI. Agriculture and Allied Activity 3.5 3.3 4.6 1.9 II. Framework for Corporate Financing Industry 7.9 6.3 10.8 4.0 To set the stage, let me start with the Manufacturing 7.6 6.7 12.2 3.8 basic framework of corporate financing. Services 6.4 7.5 7.9 8.0 Corporate entities raise capital from either GDP 5.6 5.9 7.5 5.5 Source: Central Statistical Organisation a) internal sources, essentially retained 320March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 profits, or b) external sources. External funds based, because the lenders are few and are accessed from sources outside the firm large. At the risk of broad generalisation, through the issue of equity capital and debt bank-based systems tend to be stronger in instruments. Equity capital can be raised from countries where governments have taken a the firm's promoters or the capital market that direct role in industrial development, such as taps institutional investors, mutual funds and Germany, in the 19th century, and Japan, East retail investors. Debt can be raised through Asia, South-East Asia, China and India, in the th floatation of corporate bonds or borrowing 20 century. from banks and non-bank financial The basic point of partition between the intermediaries. An important aspect of the two systems is that in the one case, corporate growth process that has been widely entities interact with the intermediary, say a discussed in recent times is the type of the 'bank', whereas in the other, they directly financial system that is most conductive to approach the "public" for finance. This growth. Seen from this standpoint, most of the distinction between a 'bank-based' and a systems of industrial finance in developed 'market-based' system is not a water-tight countries can be grouped into two clear compartment; on the contrary, it has become systems. At one end is the Anglo-American blurred in recent years with the model of market-based finance where financial institutionalisation of the sources of finance markets play an important role and the role all over the world. The blurring of the of the banking industry is much less distinction has emanated from the gradual emphasised. At the other extreme is the spread of universal banking, spanning the Continental/Japanese model of bank-based entire range of financial services across finance, in which savings flow to their commercial banking, insurance and securities productive uses predominantly through (investment as well as underwriting). This has financial intermediaries such as banks and been fortified by the emergence of institutional other financial institutions, and the capital investors, in the capital market, including market is less important for the raising of mutual funds, which, for example, have an funds. asset base of as much as 70 per cent of GDP Most of the industrial financing systems in the US. have evolved endogenously from their own There are also historical reasons for this particular circumstances of economic history emerging convergence. A number of - and have their own success story to tell or countries, including the USA segregated otherwise. The market-based system is banking and securities trading in their financial relatively impersonal because the sources of licensing laws as it was believed that direct funds could actually be atomistic household commercial bank involvement in corporate savers, directly or indirectly through mutual securities would involve significant conflicts of funds, pension funds or insurance funds. The interest. It was only recently that the US bank-based systems are more relationship- 321March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Financial Services Modernisation Act of 1999 Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (2000) for repealed the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, details] outstripping bank credit offtake. Equity which had prohibited commercial banks from markets, especially in the G-4 markets and underwriting, holding or dealing in corporate the East Asian tigers, also grew explosively - securities, whether directly or through although much slower than that of the bond securities affiliates. A number of emerging market. Corporate bond markets remain market economies, such as Argentina (1991), underdeveloped in most emerging markets Chile (1997-98), Indonesia (1995) and since they are more difficult to develop than Malaysia (1991) have also recently liberalised equity markets. restrictions governing banks' exposures to the III. The Pre-Reform Model of Industrial capital markets. Finance in India Beyond the partition based on risk How did India fare in the domain of characteristics, it will be recognised that the industrial finance? The Indian economy, like need for diversification of the financial most of the former colonial economies, structure is also driven by the demand for adopted a path of planned development after funds of different tenors. Banks, for example, Independence. This was, in a sense, dictated are a natural source of working capital by the compulsions of contemporary political because their resource base essentially economy. While there was a wide consensus emanates from the economy's transaction that economic growth could only spring from processes, and the funds available with them large-scale industrialisation, in consonance are of a short-term nature. Bond markets are with the contemporary big-push theories of relatively more flexible because they can economic development, it was thought that mediate both the short-term corporate funds firms lacked the resources to finance such as well as long-term household saving. rapid growth. The strong preference for self- However, in the absence of developed capital reliant growth in view of the mercantilist roots markets, there arises a need for specialised of colonialism, reinforced by faith in the nation financial institutions - the so-called - building capacity of the polity shaped by the development financial institutions - which successful freedom movement - led to a state- provide project finance. led development strategy during the 1950s. The process of corporate financing is This preference was also reinforced by the changing all over the world. There has been, perceived success of the State led Russian for example, a sharp jump in market-based model, that was so visible in the immediate financing during the 1990s driven by a post-World War II period. combination of financial liberalisation and high The industrial financing strategy adopted growth. Private bond markets grew especially in the 1950s centred around the Government rapidly, jumping 500 per cent between 1980- as the primary entrepreneur in the economy. 85 and 1992-97 by one estimate, [see The state-led development initiatives had two 322March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 distinct avenues, viz., a) direct investment to provide a cushion to DFIs by from the government budget (such as in case offering guarantees on bonds issued of irrigation projects, construction of dams, by them along with special access to and railways), b) public enterprises (such as concessional funds from the Reserve the steel plants - "the temples of modern Bank. India") often funded by budgetary provisions, l Corporate entities could supplement and government guaranteed bonds. This was these forms of funding by resource reinforced by the channeling of public saving mobilisation from the capital market, by an elaborate banking network to the but this also needed government "socially productive" uses by an elaborate approval within the constraints of the mechanism of directed credit programmes and credit allocation process. concessional interest rates for "priority A natural corollary of the planning sectors". process was then the conscious adoption of As a result, the role of the financial a model of the bank-based mode of financing system was restricted to the channelling of as against a model of market-based financing, resources from the savers to the users in line which was adopted in some emerging with the "socially productive" pattern of countries. Although the capital markets in resource allocation, charted by the planning India were among the oldest in Asia, the role process. The emphasis, thus, lay in building of equity as a mode of financing was not a financial system with a widespread network, considered as important because of the not only in terms of the geographical spread limited attraction that risk capital was and socio-economic reach but also in the perceived to have for projects with a long functional sense, in terms of specialised forms gestation lag. of finance, through developmental finance There can be little doubt that the basic institutions. The resultant financing strategy for objective of developing an extensive financial industrialisation, as it then emerged, rested network was, by and large, fulfilled by the on four building blocks: early 1990s, especially following the spread l Banks would provide short-term of the branch bank network following the working capital, with appropriate bank nationalisations of 1969 and 1980 allocations for the priority sector. (Table 2). l Development Finance Institutions The corporate financing strategy, as it (DFIs) would provide medium- to evolved, was, however, inextricably linked to longer-term funds for the corporate the fiscal position, because of the assumption sector. that public investment would eventually l Since banks had a readymade access generate surpluses for the social good. As to cheap resources by way of banking fiscal deficits began to enlarge, the entire transactions, the Government sought financial system began to be geared to 323March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 2 : Progress of Commercial Banking Table 3 : Ownership Pattern of Banks (in 2001) in India Country Per cent of Total Bank Assets Government Owned Indicator June June March March March 1969 1980 1990 2000 2002 India 80 1. Number of South Korea 30 Scheduled Thailand 31 Commercial Banks Indonesia 44 of which: 73 148 270 297 293 Malaysia 0 Regional Rural U.K 0 Banks  73 196 196 196 Germany 42 Other Scheduled Canada 0 Commercial Banks  75 74 101 97 U.S.A 0 2. Number of Bank Offices 8,262 32,419 59,752 67,868 68,195 Source : Levine (2001). 3. Per Capita Deposits (Rs.) 88 494 2,098 8,542 11,008 Thus, the difficulty was that the Indian 4. Per Capita financial system, though extensive, was Credit (Rs.) 68 327 1,275 4,555 5,927 5. Population per Bank limited in its ability to allocate resources Branch (thousand) 64 21 14 15 15 efficiently. A number of structural bottlenecks Source : Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India, RBI. emerged in the process. First, a combination funding the Government's budgetary needs. of an administered interest rate regime and Banks' statutory liquidity ratio, originally a directed credit controls prevented proper prudential requirement for solvency, was pricing of resources. Second, most financial steadily raised to provide a captive market intermediaries remained confined to markets for public debt. Although interest rates were relating to their area of operation because initially kept artificially low, even at the cost of balance sheet restrictions, leading to of financial repression, to contain the interest market segmentation. Finally, there was the cost of public debt, the return on government problem of missing markets, especially at the securities was steadily raised to enhance shorter end, with caps even on the inter-bank their attractiveness to the market. As it got rate. Hence, although the Indian banking increasingly difficult to get voluntary system has grown tremendously, it has a long subscriptions even at higher rates of return, way to go. Even relative to other developing the Government resorted to a large-scale countries, the ratio of bank assets/GDP for monetisation of the fiscal deficit by the end- India continues to be low (Chart 1). 1980s. Concomitantly, the Reserve Bank had The role of banks as financial to raise reserve requirements in order to intermediaries can, therefore, be expected to contain the inflationary impact of deficit grow significantly in the years to come. financing. By the early 1990s, statutory pre- Surprisingly, the population serviced by a emptions of banks amounted to over 60 per bank branch is also much higher in the cent of deposit mobilisation. This process Indian case than in many other countries was accentuated by the Government (Chart 2). ownership of banks (Table 3). 324March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 It is against this backdrop that financial At the heart of financial reforms lay the sector reforms were initiated in the early need to contain the propensity of the 1990s. There was clearly the need to reduce Government to preempt resources from the role of Government in the allocation of financial institutions through fiat. The 1990s resources in the economy. As this process saw three fundamental changes in the would unfold, a competitive environment was relationship between the fisc and the financial sought to be created in the financial sector to system. First, the Government securities market enhance the allocative efficiency of financial was transformed to a market-determined price markets as a whole. Such financial sector discovery process by switching over to an reforms would then accelerate the overall auction mechanism for sale. This enabled the economic growth process. rest of the segments of the financial markets 325March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 to price off this market. Second, the reduction IV. Sources of Finance for Indian in the statutory liquidity requirements to the Industries during the 1990s minimum of 25 per cent of demand and time It is now instructive to review the financing liabilities freed resources of the banking system patterns for industry during the 1990s. The for credit. However, public sector banks general impression that has gained ground is presently continue to hold about 40 per cent that bank finance for industry has gone down. SLR bonds voluntarily. Third, the phasing out A closer look at the major sources of industrial of the process of automatic monetisation of the finance as a proportion of GDP (Table 4) brings fiscal deficit, rendered a sense of autonomy to out clearly the following stylised facts. First, the Reserve Bank and enabled it to gradually banks have kept up their credit to industry. Not cut reserve requirements to the current level only has there been an increase in the of 4.5 per cent. proportion of conventional credit to GDP, in addition there has also been resource flow in The traditional model of industrial the form of investments in non-SLR instruments financing thus began to crumble by the mid- - such as commercial paper, corporate bonds 1990s. The dismantling of the administered and equity. Second, financing from FIs to structure of interest rates allowed the 1 industry has clearly fallen. The decline has emergence of market-based interest rates so been sharper in recent years because of the that resources could be allocated by market conversion of ICICI into a bank as well as the signals. Besides, the gradual withdrawal of problems besetting Industrial Finance restrictions on both the assets and liabilities of Corporation of India. The key change that took the banks and non-bank financial institutions place in the late 1990s is the virtual collapse of enabled them to optimise their portfolios across the capital market as a source of industrial instruments of varying risk and tenor according finance. Correspondingly, as might be expected, to their commercial judgment, consistent with the demand for debt from the DFIs also fell, the process of price discovery. Further, which was compensated to a certain extent, by concessions, such as availability of government the participation of banks in subscribing to bond guarantees and central bank funding for issues and other debt instruments of corporate financial institutions, were gradually phased out entities through the private placement route. The in the process of market integration. By the late exuberance of investment activity in the mid- 1990s, therefore, the Indian financial system was 1990s also led to the creation of over capacity enabled to develop in such a way as to compete in industry, including some uncompetitive in the increasingly open economy. capacity that led to erosion of profits which, in 1 In order to obtain DFIs support to the industrial sector, estimates of sanctions and disbursements of DFIs, being in gross terms (i.e., without taking account of the repayments), may have been misleading. Instead, we have taken the investments and loans and advances of the major DFIs. In particular, in order to arrive at an estimate of DFIs support to industrial finance, we have added the following items, viz., investments & credit to industrial concerns by IDBI, equity investments, debentures & loans and advances of IFCI; investments in bonds & equity and Rupee and foreign currency loans of ICICI, credit by IIBI (since investments are negligible); loans & advances and investments (including government securities in absence of break-up) of SFCs; and loans & advances to industrial concerns and commercial investments of SIDBI. 326March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 4 : Major Sources of Industrial Finance turn, perhaps explains the poor performance of (as percentage of GDP at current market prices) the stock market during this latter period. With Year Banks the recovery of corporate profits in 2002-03 and Non-SLR Capital Total its continuation in 2003-04, the stock market has Credit Investments DFIs Market 1970s 1.8 0.3 0.1 2.2 recorded high growth since May 2003. With the 1980s 2.7 0.7 0.6 4.0 prevailing low interest rates, and a recovery of 1990s 2.6 1.0 1.2 4.8 1992-93 to 1996-97 2.9 1.0 1.9 5.8 the stock market, we can now expect some 1997-98 to 2001-02 2.7 0.7* 0.6 0.2 4.2 increase in industrial investment demand. * Non-substantial prior to mid-1990s. 1. Banks' support includes conventional credit in the form of loans and Overall also, non-food credit has increased advances and bills rediscounted. 2. Capital market support to the industrial sector has been taken to be new as a proportion of GDP in the past few decades capital issues by non-Government public limited companies (i.e., ordinary reflecting both the demand for credit per se as shares, preference shares & debentures) and their ordinary shares. Source : Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy 2002-03, RBI. well as an acceleration in the process of monetisation with the spread of branch banking. Thus there is reasonable evidence, at least This ratio continued to increase during the post- in the aggregative sense, to suggest that Indian reform period as well though it had fallen industry has not been starved of bank credit in somewhat in the early 1990s, even though the recent years. A related question is the adequacy process of monetisation is now more or less of finance is across all sectors. Were there any complete (Chart 3). This, in turn, suggests that specific sectors that did not get adequate there has been no credit constraint as far as finance? The picture is really no different when 2 we look at the sectoral numbers (Table 5) . industry is concerned during the late 1990s. 2 The demand for credit, when seen as an essential input to the production process, has to be linked to the value added. While for aggregate non-food gross bank credit, GDP at current prices would be the appropriate normalisation factor, for credit going to agriculture and industrial sectors, as well as, to the SSI sector, we have tried to capture their appropriate contribution in value added. For credit going to the agricultural and industrial sectors, we have taken GDP (at current factor cost) originating in agriculture and allied activities and manufacturing. As far as GDP originating in the SSI sector is concerned, there is no readymade estimate  therefore, we have taken the GDP originating in unregistered manufacturing and added to it the contribution of the SSI sector in organised manufacturing as revealed from the Annual Survey of Industries [Mohan (2001)]. 327March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 5 : Sectoral Distribution of Non-food commercial sector and increasingly, the rest Gross Bank Credit of the world. With the increase in fiscal deficit (as per cent of relevant GDP) of the Government in the late 1990s, at a Year Agricultural Industrial SSI Credit/ Non-Food macro level, we could not expect an overall Credit/ Credit/ SSI GDP Gross Bank Agricultural Manu- Credit/GDP reduction in banks' subscription to SLR bonds. GDP facturing GDP However, if there had been buoyant private 1 2 3 4 5 sector credit demand we would have 1980s 10.0 65.6 38.9 19.9 observed hardening of real interest rates, 1990s 9.2 68.4 43.8 20.6 rather than the softening that has been 1992-93 to 1996-97 8.9 65.9 42.4 20.1 observed in the last 2-3 years. 1997-98 to 2001-02 10.0 71.9 45.3 21.6 The more serious issues in the flow of Source: (1) Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy 2002-03, RBI, for resources to industry in the late 1990s thus sectoral deployment of credit data. centre around the problem of the gradual (2) National Accounts Statistics, CSO for manufacturing and agricultural GDP. shrinkage of development financial institutions, (3) Author's calculations for SSI-GDP. as a sector, on the one hand and the The correct way to evaluate adequacy lacklustre performance in the functioning of of the trend in sectoral credit is to look at it the capital market, on the other hand. There as a proportion of sectoral value added. is also the issue of corporate profitability which Insofar as the sectoral credit trends are might have affected the latter phenomenon. concerned, the above data indicate that the Comparison of Banks and FIs fall in the agricultural credit- agricultural GDP ratio during the 1990s has been arrested in The process of financial sector reform recent years. In fact, as a ratio to has changed the operating environment in manufacturing GDP, credit to the industrial which the financial institutions, banks and non- sector has experienced a steady upward bank intermediaries operate. Until the early trend. Interestingly, contrary to popular 1990s, the role of the financial system in India impression in terms of the ratio to its GDP, was primarily restricted to the function of credit to the SSI sector has exhibited a steady channeling resources from the surplus to increase. deficit sectors. Reforms in the financial sector created a deregulated environment and It might still be argued that reduction in enabled relatively free play of market forces. the SLR stipulations from about 38.5 per cent It also altered the organisational structure, to 25 per cent should have spurred a larger ownership pattern and domain of operations quantum of bank credit than what has been of institutions and infused greater competition. achieved. At the same time, while the In order to appreciate the consequential reduction in statutory pre-emptions does impact on the resource flow, it is useful to enhance credit availability, the actual supply study the impact of financial sector reforms is contingent on credit demand and banks' on each segment of financial intermediaries. own allocations across the Government, the 328March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 6 : Banking Sector Performance In the case of banks, there have been, (Per cent of assets) in particular, three clear elements of change. Variable G-3 (1999) First, banks now have greater operational India (1999) countries flexibility and functional autonomy in terms of Public Sector New Private Banks Sector Banks pricing and resource allocation. Second, the 1 2 3 4 strengthening of prudential norms has resulted Spread 2.8 2.0 2.0 in the clean-up of balance sheets of banks, Other income 1.2 1.5 1.0 and reinforced financial stability. Third, the Operating cost 2.7 1.7 1.8 Loan Losses 1.0 0.8 0.3 banking sector is facing increased pressure Net Profits 0.4 1.0 0.8# of competition, from both within the banking # Refers to pre-tax profits. system, with the emergence of new banks and Source : Report on Currency and Finance, 2001-02, Report on Trend and from other intermediaries and to some extent, Progress of Banking in India, 1999-2000, RBI. from the capital market. Financial Institutions There is very little doubt that the The operating environment of DFIs banking sector has recorded improvements underwent a radical change in the 1990s. DFIs in profitability, efficiency (in terms of are facing new challenges both on the asset intermediation costs) and asset quality in the and liability sides. Concessional sources of 1990s. Within the commercial banking funds have dried up and financial institutions system, public sector banks however, are raising resources including short-term funds continue to have higher interest rate spreads at market related rates. On the asset side, the but at the same time earn lower rates of distinction between banks and DFIs is getting return, reflecting higher operating costs. blurred as both are offering long and short- Private sector banks, on the other hand, term financing. Further, both banks and DFIs appear to have lower spreads as well as together face competition from market based lower operating expenses comparable to the modes of financing. banking system in G3 countries (Table 6). At The difficulties faced by the DFIs in the the same time, asset quality is weaker so late 1990s are reflected in a gradual that loan loss provisions continue to be shrinkage of their balance sheets. Lending by higher. This suggests that, whereas there is the DFIs has fallen continuously over the last greater scope for enhancing the asset quality 5-7 years. This has led to a growing body of of banks in general, public sector banks, in opinion that DFIs are intrinsically particular, need to reduce operating costs uncompetitive, especially because of a legacy further. Although higher administrative of high-cost long-term liabilities and poor asset expenses are often explained away by the quality. A closer look at the balance sheets large branch network, it should be borne in suggests a mixed bag. mind that banks in the G-3 countries actually The most striking feature is that the have a lower ratio of population per branch profitability of DFIs as a group remains, by ratio (see Chart 2). 329March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 and large, comparable to that of banks (Chart degree of manoeuverability enabling them to 4). This is essentially because operating costs cut interest expenses faster in a scenario of of DFIs are lower than that of banks, because declining interest rates. Another issue is that these financial institutions do not have a wide while interest income for DFIs is typically higher branch network. than that of banks because of the longer tenor This advantage of low operating costs is, of commitments, the spread between the two has been narrowing in recent years with the however, largely neutralised by the fact that drying up of the demand for project finance as their interest costs are higher than banks (Chart 5). While it is true that interest costs well as the emergence of alternate sources of longer-term funding. Together with the rigidity are likely to be always higher because DFIs in interest expenses, this has been squeezing raise longer-term funds, the shorter tenor of the banks liabilities allows them a far greater the profitability of DFIs. An interesting fact is 330March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 of roles: banks were to fund working capital that the operating expenses of new private requirements while DFIs (and to the extent sector banks are comparable to that of the possible, the capital market) were to cater DFIs. This suggests that financial institutions to longer-term financing needs of the are likely, sooner than later, to face a challenge economy. The downscaling of operations of from new private sector banks whose interest DFIs, together with sluggishness in the costs are much lower (Chart 6). capital markets in recent years has created It is thus not entirely obvious, a gap at the longer end of the institutional conventional wisdom notwithstanding, that financing spectrum in the Indian economy. DFIs cannot be competitive. There is no doubt This inevitably brings us to the possible role that, with no access to current deposits, their that banks could play in bridging this gap. average cost of funds will always be higher The tenure of funds provided by banks than that of banks. But this is compensated either as loans or investments depends by lower operating costs since they typically critically on the overall asset-liability position. do not need a large branch network. But as An inherent difficulty in this regard is that banks continue to cut down their own since deposit liabilities of banks often tend operating expenses, DFIs will also have to to be of relatively shorter maturity, long-term gradually reduce their operating costs further lending could induce the problem of asset- in order to maintain their commercial viability. liability mismatches. The maturity structure of This underscores the need for DFIs to pay commercial bank deposits in 2002 shows that greater attention to their non-performing less than one fifth is of a tenor of more than assets, and to address legacy issues. three years, and less than 7.0 per cent for Bank Financing of Long Term Assets private banks (Table 7). The traditional model of corporate On the asset side, nearly 40 per cent has financing was based on a clear-cut partition already been invested in assets of over three 331March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 7 : Maturity Profile of Bank Liabilities analysis of the relative roles of banks and (Percentage share in Total Liabilities) financial institutions in term lending for financing Maturity SBI Nationa- Foreign Indian Total growth suggests that there is a greater need Range lised Banks Private Banks Banks to think about the future of DFIs. The structure  1 2 3 4 5 6 of their relative costs suggests that, if the Up to legacy problems of DFIs are addressed they one year 19.3 35.5 61.9 56.5 37.8 Over one year may not be intrinsically uncompetitive in their to 3 years 59.4 47.5 17.6 36.8 46.1 financing operations. They will have to improve Over 3 years 21.3 17.0 20.5 6.7 16.1 their operating efficiency through the use of TOTAL 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Source :  Statistical Tables relating to Banks in India, RBI. technology and other means in order to bring down operating costs further. Their comparative years maturity, mostly in investment advantage in relevant skills for appraising instruments, primarily SLR bonds. Only about projects will continue to give them an edge 10 per cent is invested in loans and advances over commercial banks in their operations. (see Table 8). They will also need to diversify their operations In view of the large demand by the to take advantage of the new opportunities Central and State Governments for funds for offered by the opening of the capital market long-dated government paper, there is little and use of new investment techniques around flexibility left for extension of longer-term credit instruments. by banks to infrastructure, industry, agriculture Banks also have some capacity to invest and other productive sectors. Any larger in longer term assets, but this capacity will investment by banks in longer term assets remain highly limited until the fiscal deficit could result in asset-liability mismatches. This remains as high as it is and Government Table 8 : Maturity Profile of Bank Assets demand for investment in long dated bonds (as percentage share of Total Assets) remains high, even though they are of course Maturity SBI Nationa- Foreign Indian Total tradable. Some enhancement of their capacity Range lised Banks Private Banks Banks to invest in infrastructure, industry and  1 2 3 4 5 6 agriculture in longer gestation projects can be Loans and enhanced by allowing a limited recourse to advances 44.1 53.5 58.4 52.3 51.1 longer term bond issues. Up to one year 19.0 21.9 38.3 25.9 23.1 Over one year V. Capital Markets to 3 years 14.5 17.9 11.9 19.0 16.8 Over 3 years 10.6 13.7 8.1 7.4 11.2 The Indian capital market began to Investments 55.9 46.5 41.6 47.7 48.9 expand in the late 1980s (Table 9). This was Up to one Year 9.1 3.9 18.8 14.8 8.5 Over one year abetted by wide-ranging reforms in the capital to 3 years 11.3 6.0 9.7 10.7 8.6 markets, in terms of reviving the process of Over 3 years 35.5 36.6 13.1 22.3 31.7 price discovery, enhancing transparency and TOTAL 100 100 100 100 100 improving trading and settlement practices. Source : Statistical Tables relating to Banks in India, RBI. 332March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 9 : Capital Market Indicators While there was a sharp increase in (Percentage of GDP) market capitalisation as a percentage of GDP Year BSE Market New Equity Issues during the 1990s, the share of capital issues Capitalisation to GDP, a measure of resource mobilisation 1 2 3 1980s 9.2 0.2 by the capital markets, followed an inverted 1990s 37.0 0.7 U curve during the 1990s. The spurt in 1992-93 to 1996-97 37.8 1.1 capital issues beyond 1.0 per cent of GDP 1997-98 to 2001-02 33.8 0.1 during 1993-96 could not be sustained with 2002-03 23.1 0.01 Source : Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy 2002-03, RBI. the onset of the economic slowdown in the latter half of the 1990s. As a result, capital The reforms in the capital markets during the issues, especially equity issues, dwindled to 1990s in terms of market microstructure and the 1970s' levels (as a proportion of GDP) transactions have ensured that the Indian in the latter half of the 1990s. In fact, public capital market in particular is now comparable capital issues by non-Government public to the capital markets in most developed limited companies declined to 0.2 per cent markets. The early 1990s saw a greater of GDP during 1998-2002 from 1.9 per cent willingness of the saver to place funds in during 1992-97 and 0.6 per cent during the capital market instruments, on the supply side 1980s. Besides, public equity issues by non- as well as an enthusiasm of corporate entities Government public limited companies to take recourse to capital market instruments declined to 0.1 per cent of GDP during 1998- on the demand side. The size of the capital 2002 from 1.1 per cent during 1992-97 and market is now comparable to other developing 0.7 per cent during the 1980s. countries but there is still a long way to go. It The market for corporate debt is still in is important to note that developed economies the process of development in the Indian with bank-based systems, such as Germany economy, as is the case with most and Japan, also have capital markets with developing economies. The private substantial market capitalisation in relation to placement market has emerged as an GDP (Table 10). important source of resource mobilisation in Table 10 : Capitalisation of Stock Markets the Indian debt market. The first steps in (Percentage of GDP) development of the debt market have been Economy 1990 1999 taken through development of the 1 2 3 government securities market. The issue of Japan 98 105 Germany 22 68 government bonds through auction, and their UK 86 203 active trading by banks has led to the USA 53 182 emergence of a sovereign yield curve. Steps Indonesia 7 45 Malaysia 110 184 have also been taken, though still in their Thailand 28 47 infancy, to enable active trading of India 12 41 government securities in the stock Source : World Development Indicators, 2001. 333March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 11 : Pattern of Sources of Funds for exchanges. As this market grows and as Indian Coporates steps are taken to regulate the private (Per cent of total sources of funds) placement market, the corporate bond Item 1985-86 to 1991-92 to 1992-93 to 1997-98 to market will also develop. Creditworthy 1990-91 2000-01 1996-97 2000-01 corporate borrowers will then be able to raise 1 2 3 4 5 1. Internal Sources 34.1 35.7 31.3 43.1 longer term funds for financing their growth. 1. External Sources Of Which 65.9 64.3 68.7 56.9 After the exuberance of the stock market a) Equity capital 7.0 16.1 20.5 12.8 in the mid-1990s and its decline thereafter, a b) Borrowings 36.2 32.0 33.2 28.3 large number of individual investors took flight Debentures 10.3 6.2 5.2 6.1 From Banks 12.7 10.0 10.7 9.4 to safety in bank deposits, safe retirement  From FIs 8.4 9.5 8.3 9.8 instruments and insurance. It remains to be c) Trade dues & seen when and how fast such savers return other current liabilities 22.5 15.9 14.8 15.3 to the capital market so that it performs its Total 100 100 100 100 intermediary function efficiently. Note : Data pertains to Non-government Non-financial Public Ltd. Companies. VI. Pattern of Industrial Finance among Source : Report on Currency & Finance, 1998-99, RBI for data up to 1997-98 and articles on "Finances of Public Limited Companies", Indian Corporates RBI Bulletins (various issues) for subsequent years. Having run through the supply side of interesting trends emerge. The share of the story, let me now turn to the demand side equity increased in the 1990s. Besides, there of industrial finance in India. An interesting was a shift to equity from debentures, shift in the pattern of financing of the Indian especially during the mid-1990s when the corporate sector needs to be highlighted in equity issues commanded a large premium this context (Table 11). During the 1980s to in the public issues markets. The share of mid-1990s, internal sources as a percentage capital market-based intermediaries has of total sources of funds ranged between 30- increased somewhat pulling down the debt- 35 per cent, while during recent years it has equity ratio. The overall share of borrowings, increased to more than 40 per cent; in fact at about one third, remains, by and large, for 2000-01, the proportion of internal intact. There has been a greater reliance on sources touched nearly 60 per cent. internal resources during the downturn during Correspondingly, there has been a reduction the latter half of the 1990s. It is not clear at in the reliance on external financing. this stage whether this trend would change with an upturn in the capital market. The question, however, remains as to whether this reflects the effect of substitution It is now appropriate to arrive at broad of internal sources for external sources or generalisations from the sources side of the scale effect of an external constraint. In financing. First of all, bank credit has terms of external funding, a number of increased, but only marginally; the important 334March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 12 : Composition of Financial Savings aspect is that it has not gone down contrary Portfolio  of Indian Households to general belief. Second, banks continue to (Per cent of Financial Savings) prefer investing in government securities Item 1970s 1980s 1990s 1992-93 1997-98 despite the reduction in SLR requirements. to to 1996-97 2001-02 Third, flows from DFIs have reduced, but they 1 2 3 4 5 6 may not be uncompetitive intrinsically. While 1. Currency 18.8 16.1 11.9 12.5 10.0 their interest costs are high, they have 2. Net Bank Deposits 32.7 22.8 27.0 25.9 31.4 managed to curtail operating costs. Finally, the 3. Social Security 41.0 47.8 44.2 39.4 54.2 a) Life Fund 12.1 10.3 11.8 11.0 14.4 contraction in the capital market during the b) PF & Pension last 5 years has been dramatic. Overall, Fund 26.3 23.8 21.9 20.5 23.9 corporates have depended more on internal c) Net Claims on Govt 2.6 13.7 10.5 7.9 15.9 sources of financing during the second half 4. Non-Bank Saving of the 1990s. Instruments 7.4 13.3 17.0 22.3 4.4 a) Net Non-Banking Deposits 1.1 3.7 5.6 9.9 1.9 VII. Supply of Funds b) Shares & debentures 2.0 5.3 8.2 9.5 4.0 Household financial savings are the c) Units of UTI 0.6 3.0 4.4 3.9 0.2 main source of funds in the Indian financial d) Trade Debt 3.7 1.3 -1.2 -1.0 -1.7 system. Private savings performance, at about 5. Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 25 per cent of GDP, has been reasonably Memo Item: impressive by international standards, perhaps Household Financial Saving (as % of GDP with the exception of some of the East Asian at current market prices) 4.6 6.8 10.0 10.2 10.4 countries. Reflecting the gradual willingness Source : Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, 2002-03 to invest in risk capital since the 1980s, the Notes : 1. Net Bank Deposits = Bank Deposits - Bank Advances - Loans & share of financial scrips amounted to almost Advances from Co-Op Non-Credit Societies 10 per cent of total household saving by the 2. Net Non-Banking Deposits = Non-Banking Deposits - Loans & Advances from Other Financial Institutions. mid-1990s (Table 12). The late 1990s, 3. Net Claims on Govt = Claims on Govt - Loans & Advances from Govt. however, witnessed a reversal of this process, 4. Saving in Trade Debt is "Change in Trade Dues in respect of sundry creditors minus changes in loans and advances to sundry debtors", with a flight to the safety of bank deposits and from the Company Finance Studies. social security. The present indications are VIII. Options for Longer Term Finance that we can expect this continuing shift to life insurance, pension funds etc, although there Against the backdrop of the discussion could be a return to the capital market if it on various aspects of financing patterns, does well for some time. As regards the other sources of funds, maturity structure of assets sources of saving, the fiscal deficit continues and liabilities of banks and DFIs, it is apposite to act as a drag, leading to negative public to discuss the options available for financing sector dissavings, which pull down the overall investment for growth. There are, of course, savings of the country. many sources of project finance available: 335March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 banks, insurance companies, DFIs, pension requirement of funds going to social securities funds, leasing companies, investment augurs well as a potential source of productive management companies and individuals. It is investment. perhaps useful to begin by exploring the A second set of options centre around options available within the existing possible innovations within the existing institutional framework and then turn to other institutional framework. Banks (and FIs) could possible innovations. play an innovative role in project finance by Existing Institutional Framework utilising and improving on their appraisal expertise. This could be achieved through We have already observed that the longer-term credit enhancements, take-out maturity structure of the liabilities of banks is financing, special purpose vehicles (SPVs) essentially short-term in nature. On the asset and guarantees of corporate bonds. A typical side, they already hold large volumes of long- long-term project faces the highest risk in term government paper, which is in tradable initial years and cash flows usually stabilise form. The composition of assets suggests that after 5-7 years. The basic idea is that banks banks are less averse to taking on interest and FIs can take initial risks through medium- rate risk than credit risk. Given the portfolio term lending and as cash flows become choice, it seems to make sense for banks to secure, the loans could be securitised, and keep the maturity of their loans short. It is sold to those institutions that have a longer- therefore necessary to change the perception term liability structure. Another option is the of banks regarding credit risk. An added set marketisation of a mix of loans, such as, of institutional sources of finance is emerging Jumbo Mortgages. This kind of securitisation with the increasing magnitude of funds flowing of all kinds of assets is especially appealing to mutual funds, insurance and pension. The because it can encompass even loans to size of the mutual fund industry in the Indian relatively small-scale industries. The basic economy is still very small as compared with philosophy is for banks and DFIs to take on that of developed countries. Contractual the initial risks and thereafter package the savings are yet another source of project risks into different baskets to match varying finance. There are two sets of completely risk appetites in the market. opposing views on the investment of such savings. The first, advocates higher return and There is, of course, some long-term hence advocate investment in the equity bank lending that is already being extended. market, while the proponents of safety-first A new competitor to project finance is advocate investment in gilt-edged securities. emerging in the form of housing loans. Both sets of arguments are equally strong - Current indications are that housing finance and the international experience does not is likely to keep increasing, especially as the provide a definitive guide one way or the default rate is still relatively low. Clearly, banks other. At the same time, the increasing seem to prefer interest rate risk to credit risk, 336March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 and as long as the fiscal deficit is high, this Information Bureau as a credit registry is also option will always be available to them. likely to reduce information asymmetries and cut down on transaction costs such as project What does the future hold for project appraisal. finance from the DFIs? In the Indian case, ICICI is already a bank, but presumably has Development of the Corporate Debt Market the expertise to do project financing. IFCI is A necessary condition for the process in great difficulty. IDBI is in process of of asset securitisation is the evolution of a restructuring. A number of financial institutions deep and liquid corporate debt market. As I are still in the business of long-term project have already mentioned, the corporate debt financing: IDFC for infrastructure and SIDBI market has not fully developed in the Indian for funding small-scale industries. A serious context, though there is some activity in recent rethinking needs to be done about the future years, especially in the private placement of these DFIs. DFIs as has been observed segment. earlier, are not intrinsically non-competitive. If Several pre-conditions for the evolution their legacy problems can be sorted out, it is of a successful corporate debt market are now possible to evolve a future role for them. India in place. These include a well-functioning is not yet at a stage where it can fund growth market for government securities, well exclusively out of market-based approach. developed infrastructure for retail debt, a liquid There is very little alternative and it is money market, an efficient clearing and too early to give up the bank / DFI-based settlement system, a credible credit rating financing for industrial investment at the system and a formal regulatory framework. At present juncture because markets are not the same time, the lack of good quality deep enough to securitise loans. There are issuers, institutional investors and supporting other developments that are creating a more infrastructure continue to constrain market enabling environment for a long-term credit development. There is also the need to culture. There are several ways in which enhance public disclosure, standardise creditors rights are being strengthened, which products, put in place effective bankruptcy should go a long way in mitigating the risks laws and use technology to reduce transaction of large-scale project financing. These include costs further. initiatives such as the setting up of Debt Market Based Financing Recovery Tribunals (DRTs), the introduction of Corporate Debt Recovery(CDR) mechanisms A final set of possibilities hinge around and the emergence of asset reconstruction a shift in emphasis towards a market-based companies following the passage of the approach. Could the capital markets provide SARFAESI Act, 2002. It is hoped that all this the long-term funds to industry by directly would make securitisation of assets easier. tapping the long-term savings potential in the Besides, the institution of the Credit economy? Indian households are typically risk 337March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 averse and there has been a massive flight equity markets mainly because of better to the safety of bank deposits and contractual opportunities in the debt markets. Further, saving instruments. At the same time, the insurance companies and pension funds continuing increase in the saving rate of could be tapped, with appropriate risk households suggests that there is no supply management. Investment funds - a category constraint in terms of financial resources of non-banking financial companies in the available. Indian context - also provide an avenue for channeling funds into the stock markets, The challenge is really to harness these although the very logic of investment savings into risk capital. In a country like India, management carries an inherent bias for where a large number of retail investors enter operations in the secondary market rather the equity markets directly, there is great than the primary market. Venture capital potential to develop institutional intermediaries funds with specialisation in certain regions to tap these funds. In contrast, the investor and certain sectors provide another profile in most developed countries is relatively possibility, although in the Indian case thus more institutional, with mutual funds and far, their portfolio is still not very large and pension funds often accounting for a large often carries a preference for later-stage proportion of the trade. This effectively means projects with a smaller gestation lag rather that investors in India bear far more risks than than projects at the absolute initial stages. their counterparts in developed economies, who are able to spread their risk profile by IX. Conclusions say, buying units of a large mutual fund, with It is now time to take stock of where we the necessary technical expertise of stand. While reviewing the trends in industrial investment management. The emerging pool finance during the last three decades, certain of institutional investors in the equity markets, stylised facts stand out: therefore, needs to tap the savings potential l Bank credit to industry and agriculture much more effectively. The Unit Trust of India has increased as a proportion of their was able to successfully perform this respective sectoral GDP - but not as assignment of transforming household saving much as it might have compared with into equity financing till excessive returns the size of the reduction in SLR. eroded its very sustainability. l Given the current maturity profile of The expansion of the mutual fund their assets and liabilities and the industry thus becomes a target candidate for existing fiscal deficit, banks' ability to higher resource mobilisation from the capital lend in the medium- and long-term markets. The size of the mutual fund industry seems to be limited. in the Indian economy is still very small as compared with that of developed countries. l DFIs are not intrinsically uncompetitive Besides, mutual funds have been exiting the but they need to clean up their legacy 338March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 of bad debts, emphasise their Ian Domowitz, Jack Glen and Ananth strengths and enhance their market Madhavan, (2000), "International Evidence on orientation. Aggregate Corporate Financing Decisions". Mimeo, (Washington DC: World Bank). l Adequate savings are available in the economy. The issue is to channel Government of India, (1991), Report of the them for investment for growth. Committee on the Financial System (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham), Reserve The Indian financial system, thus, needs Bank of India. to look at new ways of doing business, in terms of knowledge-based banking and better Government of India, (1998), Report of the management of information. It is necessary Committee on Banking Sector Reforms to tailor the new institutional funds to long- (Chairman: Shri M.Narasimham), New Delhi. term investments. Besides, the next stage of Ross Levine, (1997), "Financial development industrial financing would depend on an and economic growth: Views and Agenda". accelerated development of the bond market Journal of Economic Literature, Volume 35 facilitating the securitisation of corporate pp. 688-726. lending. Rakesh Mohan, (2002), "Small Scale Industrial In terms of the broad framework of Policy: A Critical Evaluation", in Economic industrial financing, it is clear that there is Policy Reforms and the Indian Economy, ed. sufficient room for a greater role for market Anne Krueger, Oxford University Press, New financing. At the same time, this does not Delhi. mean that the Indian economy is ready for a Rakesh Mohan, ( 2003), "Developing the shift to a market-based system of finance. The Corporate Debt Market in India". Presentation panacea to the present challenges in industrial at the 3rd Invest India Debt Market Round financing hinges on the ability to design an Table, May 6. available at http://www.rbi.org.in. appropriate mix of the bank- and the market- based systems of financing. Reserve Bank of India, (2003a), Report on Currency and Finance 2002-03 Reserve Bank References of India. Shankar Acharya, (2002), "Macroeconomic Management in the Nineties." Economic and Reserve Bank of India, (2003b), Report of Political Weekly, 37, No.16. pp. 1515-38. Trend and Progress of Banking in India, various issues Reserve Bank of India. James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio. Jr., and Ross Levine, (2001), The Regulation and Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, (2003), Supervision of Banks around the World: A Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists New Database, Washington DC: World Bank. NewYork: Crown Business. 339