January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Banking and Trade Finance* K.J. UDESHI I am indeed privileged to be invited to open and India has become much more inaugurate this conference and especially so, integrated with the world economy. The as this is the first time that the International economy has also become more resilient to Chamber of Commerce Banking Commission shocks, both domestic and external. Meeting is taking place in India. The The Indian economy has emerged as contribution made by ICC in standardisation one of the fastest growing emerging market is well-known but perhaps what is not so well- economies and the Indian banking sector is known is that the ICC also contributes to perceived, as being the best performer in making business policy by publishing policy Asia. The robustness of the banking sector is statements and reports and laying down witnessed by a consistent rise in Return on guidelines, goals and rules. This conference Equity, strong earnings momentum, improved would, therefore, provide a forum for loan book quality and unrealised gains on interaction between Indian bankers and treasury portfolios. There are some structural corporates and their counterparts from other factors that could drive credit growth, namely, parts of the world. It is also an excellent the emergence of consumer loans, the opportunity to project Indias potential in the shrinking of spreads on alternate assets and banking and financial sector. Kudos to a higher risk appetite because of stronger Mr. Kanwar for having arranged this foreclosure norms and statutory support for conference in India. enforcement of creditor rights. The Indian financial sector reforms The Reserve Bank has initiated a host launched a decade ago have transformed the of measures to liberalise the financial system. operating environment of the financial sector The movement has been on four broad from an administered regime to a competitive parameters  reducing if not eliminating price market based system. The reforms are an on- controls, reducing quantity prescriptions, going process. There is increasing evidence reducing barriers to entry and increasing of strong inter-linkages between markets. In competition and moving to international the macro economic and financial spheres, standards of income recognition and inflation has been contained, external debt accounts. indicators have vastly improved, the exchange rate is flexible and the country is free of It may be of interest to the ICC Banking financial repression. The trade account is Commission that India has been closely * Inaugural Address by Smt. K.J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India organised by International Chamber of Commerce, at New Delhi on December 9, 2003. 107January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 The Narasimham Committee on Banking associated with various standard setting Sector Reforms (1998) had observed that a bodies and has been taking active part in the legal framework that clearly defines the rights work of several key international institutions and liabilities of parties to contracts and devoted to the task of developing and provides for speedy resolution of dispute is a promoting implementation of financial sine qua non for efficient trade and standards and codes. Although we are not a commerce, especially for financial member of the Financial Stability Forum intermediation. Several legislative initiatives (FSF), we were one of the countries specially have been undertaken in the banking and requested to help its Task Force on the financial sector. Implementation of Standards and subsequently, the Follow Up Group on The bills introduced in Parliament for Incentives for Implementation of Standards. amendment of the Banking Regulation Act will encourage foreign banks to set up The Reserve Banks Standing subsidiaries and attract foreign investors. Committee on International Financial Historically, foreign banks have always been Standards and Codes (Chairman: Dr. Y.V. allowed to operate in India and have enjoyed Reddy) has assessed Indian regulations national treatment and a level-playing field. against international best practices in order With a view to developing trade and payment to facilitate positioning of international financial relationship, we have encouraged foreign standards and codes in relevant areas of the banks from other countries which did not have financial system in India and to guide the historic links to establish branches in India. I overall process of implementation of may add that the WTO commitment on appropriate changes in respect of various banking services has been fulfilled. segments of the financial system. India is one of the countries that has sought participation A critical issue of increasing international in the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector concern is the question of money laundering. Assessment Programme (FSAP). As part of The impact of money laundering is now the Reports on Observances of Standards beginning to extend from economic crimes to and Codes (ROSCs), Indias compliance in international terrorism. As financial respect of standards and codes has already transactions grow more complex, it becomes been assessed in respect of six codes, viz., more difficult for banks to maintain a customer Monetary and Financial Policy Transparency, profile. The challenge, therefore, is to ensure Fiscal Transparency, Banking Supervision, that banks know their customers without Securities Market Regulation, Payment and hindering the smooth flow of financial Settlement System and Corporate transactions. Governance. Currently, assessment is being The Reserve Bank has issued several undertaken with regard to Special Data guidelines to banks and non-banking financial Dissemination Standards. companies to implement the Know Your 108January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Customer principle. The basic aim is to post-shipment credit above 90 days. In the prevent banks being unwittingly used as the context of globalisation, however, what one channel of funds derived from criminal activity needs to keep in mind is that even though or financing terrorism. The guidelines relate finance is a critical ingredient of production, to identification of depositors and institution what matters even more is the demand for of systems and procedures to control financial the product and its competitiveness on quality frauds, identify money laundering and considerations. Finance can only act as a suspicious activities and scrutinise / monitor facilitator when these two preconditions are large-value cash transactions. satisfied. This is vindicated by the recent surge in growth of exports of automotive In India, recognising the paramount role components and C.D. Roms. of exports in the overall growth process of the economy, the Government of India and the The initiative with regard to the setting Reserve Bank of India have, over time, taken up of an Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) in several measures to ensure adequate flow of the banking sector for the benefit of the credit towards export related activities. The exporters and importers bears mentioning. important measures include rationalisation and EDI provides several benefits to the liberalisation of export credit interest rates, corporates such as operational efficiencies flexibility in repayment/pre-payment of pre- and cost savings by elimination of paperwork, shipment credit, simplification of procedures logistical benefits by better scheduling and relating to exports (like direct despatch of reduced stockholding etc., and strategic shipping documents and enhancement in benefits through competitive advantage and normal period for realisation of export access to new markets. Under the EDI project, proceeds), flexibility to banks to source foreign one of the major benefits for the exporters is currency funds for granting pre-shipment that the RBI has abolished GR forms for credit in foreign currency (PCFC) and export export transactions. The exporters can now bill rediscounting (EBR) scheme and fill up a common Statutory Declaration Form introduction of a transparent reporting system (SDF) for the customs from where the data for export credit interest rates. relevant to the banks and the RBI can be extracted. Presently, EDI is working at 23 ports At present, exporters have the option covering 80 per cent of exports. Under the to avail of pre-shipment and post-shipment EDI project, bank branches at 114 export credit in foreign currency from banks in India. intensive centers identified by the Ministry of In order to encourage competition among Commerce are to be provided connectivity banks and also to increase flow of credit to with the customs authorities. the export sector, the Reserve Bank of India has liberalised interest rates on local The Reserve Bank has provided the currency export credit effective May 1, 2003 enabling conditions for promotion of trade and for pre-shipment credit above 180 days and investment, both domestic and international, 109January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 by ensuring adequate liquidity, a competitive As the Indian economy opens up, there interest rate regime measures to encourage is general need for better risk management decentralised decision making and ease through proactive building of investment procedures in the credit delivery systems and fluctuation reserve (IFR), provisioning in most importantly financial stability in the midst respect of problem assets, putting in place of a world economy beset by uncertainty and systems that monitor unhedged external recessionary trends. It is now necessary for liabilities along with measures to contain such market participants to have enough risks, active use of available derivatives and confidence to make investment decisions. the development of markets for risk management products. And what would banks need to do ? Along with the risk-based internal audit, Banks need to continue to adequately finance the banks must also put in place proper risk activities that are of crucial importance to management architecture, strengthen the MIS growth. The fostering of entrepreneurship in and Information Technology, address HRD new industrial activities, in the emerging issues and set up compliance units. These services sector and other non-traditional steps will enable a smooth transition to the activities, will all require proactive financing. risk-based supervision which is currently being Banks need to bear in mind that risk is implemented in India. The risk-based not merely compliance with regulatory supervision provides incentives to the banks guidelines. The regulatory guidelines can at for adoption of more sophisticated risk best represent the minimum requirements management techniques and this together which the Supervisor expects each bank to with sound corporate governance should lead achieve. Through efficient risk management to the creation of a banking system which is systems they can create value for themselves world class. by making the best use of their capital which The Reserve Bank, on its part, would would by itself be a source of competitive continue to ensure financial stability, advantage to them besides generating strengthening of prudential norms with the positive externalities for a sound and stable strategy of convergence of international best banking system. The sophisticated banks practice, consistent with our specific needs, as have to set their own standards for risk also progressive strengthening of the management depending on their risk appetite, supervisory framework. Accordingly, the focus the products, the portfolios and the markets of our policy initiatives would be on streamlining in which they operate. While Reserve Bank banking operations in order to reduce would like banks to optimally manage credit transaction costs, infusing flexibility into the and market risks, operational risks should be system, upgrading risk management systems, eliminated totally. As Walter Wristan said enhancing the level of compliance by banks Banking is the business of accepting, with accounting standards, operationalising managing and transforming risk. 110January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 consolidated accounting practices and last and has been set up by Governor Dr. Y.V.Reddy most important of all, providing the public with which, through a consultative process, will a financial system they can trust. endeavour to simplify and rationalise the regulatory regime to move towards a clear While there is substantial progress in the and unambiguous framework. financial sector reforms initiated in 1991, the accent at the present time is on In another initiative, Standing implementation of the reforms at the grass Committee on Procedures and Performance roots level. In this context, the endeavour is Audit on Public Services provided by the to facilitate ease of transactions by the Reserve Bank is being set up to bench mark common person, further broadening of the the current level of services and to enhance consultative process and continued emphasis the timeliness and quality of these services. on the institutional capacity to support growth The Committee will also coordinate with the consistent with stability. Furthermore, the credit Ad hoc Committee on Customer Services delivery system is being strengthened to being set up by each bank. These initiatives ensure that financing gaps do not constrain would, it is expected, bring about a the acceleration of growth. significant improvement in customer service in the financial sector. In line with the philosophy underpinning the Basel Accord, it is our attempt to move The central objective of financial reforms banks to a risk-based supervisory system is to attain a significant improvement in the where we enforce a certain discipline on efficiency of financial intermediaries and the market players with strong self governance endeavour of the Reserve Bank would be to standards which are transparent to the provide a regulatory framework in which market, their investors and customers. economic agents can perform their activities To face the increasing challenges and in an optimal manner. In this endeavour, the complexities in the context of globalisation Reserve Bank would approach issues in a and risk management, a Standing Technical collaborative manner, and in this, seek the Advisory Committee on Financial Regulation hand of market participants. 111