November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Agricultural Credit in India: Status, Issues and Future Agenda* RAKESH MOHAN INTRODUCTION: H ISTORICAL O VERVIEW OF EARLY ATTENTION TO AGRICULTURAL CREDIT AGRICULTURAL CREDIT IN INDIA These problems began to engage the attention of even the British colonial government as early as the 1870s: RISK IN INDIAN FARMING the practice of extending institutional credit to agriculture Settled agriculture in India has had a long history can be traced back to that period when farmers were because of the fertile plains of Northern India irrigated provided with such credit by the Government during by the Indus, the Ganga-Jamuna river systems and the drought years. Thinking to do with credit cooperation Brahmaputra in the East. Southern India has its own began in the latter part of the nineteenth century. Finally, river systems and has, moreover, been characterised by the Cooperative Societies Act was passed in 1904 and its impressive history of sophisticated water management cooperatives were seen as the premier institutions for systems: perhaps among the most developed historically. disbursing agricultural credit. For some decades, that As a consequence of this natural fertility and abundant is, since long before the organisation of the Reserve Bank, availability of water, ironically, population density grew great faith has been placed in India in the potentialities early in India, and along with that different degrees of of the cooperative organisation to serve the credit needs poverty. of the country, especially of the rural sector (Reserve Despite the existence of these river systems, Bank of India, 1970, p.68). The early years of the agriculture in India has always been heavily dependent twentieth century were characterised by continuous on the monsoons and has hence been an inherently risky official attention to the provision of rural credit: a new activity. At different times we have also had onerous Act was passed in 1912 giving legal recognition to credit rural tax systems under different empires, most recently societies and the like (a precursor of micro-finance); under the British. Indigenous systems of credit had to the Maclagan Committee on Cooperation in India issued develop as a consequence of seasonal needs and a report in 1915 advocating the establishment of provincial fluctuations in order to facilitate smoothing of cooperative banks, which got established in almost all consumption pattern of farmers over the year. With provinces by 1930 thus giving rise to the 3-tier the intermittent failure of the monsoons and other cooperative credit structure; the Royal Commission on customary vicissitudes of farming, rural indebtedness Agriculture further examined the program of rural credit has been a serious and continuous characteristic of in 1926-27; Sir Malcolm Darling submitted another report Indian agriculture. Because of the high risk inherent in on cooperative credit to the Government of India in 1935, traditional farming activity, the prevalence of high just before the founding of the Reserve Bank of India. interest rates was the norm rather than an exception, This continuing concern reflected the intrinsic problems and the concomitant exploitation and misery that often of extension of rural credit which, to some extent, find resulted. Development of rural credit systems has resonance even today. It was then reported that in many therefore, been found to be intrinsically very difficult provinces credit overdues to these credit cooperative and, as we will see, an issue of continuing official institutions constituted 60 to 70 per cent of the concern for over a century. outstanding principal due. * Lecture delivered by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, the then Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India on February 5, 2004 at the 17th National Conference of Agricultural Marketing, Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing, Hyderabad. He is grateful to Dr. Y.S.P. Thorat, then Executive Director, Asha P. Kannan, A. Prasad, Partha Ray, T. Gopinath and Arun Vishnu Kumar of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance. 993November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 It was in 1935 that the Reserve Bank was founded: co-operatives had a vital role in channelling credit to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 is unusual among the farmers and therefore summed up that, Co- central banks to have specific provision for attention to operation has failed, but Co-operation must succeed. agricultural credit. Section 54 of the Act enjoined the The Committee, apart from visualising cooperatives Reserve Bank to set up an Agriculture Credit Department as an exclusive agency for providing credit to which was to have an expert staff to advise the central agriculture, urged a well defined role for commercial government, state governments, state cooperative banks, banks in delivering credit for agriculture in specialised and other banks; and to coordinate RBI functions for areas, such as marketing, processing, storage and agricultural credit. Section 17 of the Act empowered it warehousing. Towards this end, it recommended to provide agricultural credit through state cooperative establishment of the State Bank of India and through banks or any other banks engaged in the business of it, extension of commercial banking facilities to rural agricultural credit. and semi-urban areas. Thus, concern with the Among the first activities of the Reserve Bank in inadequate extension of agricultural credit had a agricultural credit were two studies in 1936 and 1937. significant role in the founding of both the Reserve It was found that almost the entire finance required by Bank of India and transformation of the Imperial Bank agriculturalists was supplied by money lenders and that of India into the State Bank of India. cooperatives and other agencies played a negligible part. THE P ERIOD OF SUBSTANTIAL C HANGE: 1960S TO THE During the period between 1935 and 1950, the Reserve 1980S Bank was very active in continuing the attempt to re- invigorate the cooperative credit movement through a The inadequacy of rural credit continued to engage variety of initiatives. Besides providing financial the attention of the Reserve Bank and the Government accommodation to the cooperative movement, the RBI throughout the 1950s and 1960s. The Agricultural played a central role in the task of building the Refinance Corporation (ARC) was set up by the cooperative credit structure, which gradually evolved Reserve Bank in 1963 to provide funds by way of into two separate arms, one for short term credit and refinance, but credit cooperatives still did not function another for long term credit - a structure that still exists too well. today. The continuing intense concern with the Consequently, the All India Rural Credit Review provision of rural credit continued in the post war years: Committee (Chairman: Shri B. Venkatappiah) was set more than half a dozen committees were appointed up in July 1966 to, inter alia, review the supply of between 1945 and 1950. Despite all these efforts, even rural credit in the context of the Fourth Five Year Plan by 1951 the provision of credit through cooperatives in general, and the requirements of the intensive remained meagre with only 3.3 per cent of the programmes of agricultural production in different parts cultivators having access to credit from cooperatives, of the country, in particular, and to make and 0.9 per cent from commercial banks. Furthermore, recommendations for improving the flow of agricultural the funds supplied by the money lenders were subject credit. After a comprehensive review, the Committee to high interest rates and other usurious practices and recommended that the commercial banks should play a accordingly, legislation on money lending was advocated complementary role, along with co-operatives, in to check such malpractices. extending rural credit. The social control and the The foundation for building a broader credit subsequent nationalisation of major commercial banks infrastructure for rural credit was laid by the Report in 1969 (and in 1980) acted as a catalyst in providing of the All India Rural Credit Survey (1954). The momentum to the efforts of leveraging the commercial Committee of Direction that conducted this survey banking system for extending agricultural credit. The observed that agricultural credit fell short of the right outreach of banks was enlarged considerably within a quantity, was not of the right type, did not serve the relatively short period of time. The concept of priority right purpose and often failed to go to the right people. sector was introduced in 1969 to underscore the The Committee also observed that the performance of imperative of financing certain neglected sectors like co-operatives in the sphere of agricultural credit was agriculture. The channelling of credit to the priority deficient in more than one way, but at the same time, sectors was sought to be achieved through the 994November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 stipulation that a certain proportion of the total net bank among others things, agriculture. NABARD took over credit be deployed in these sectors by specific target the entire undertaking of the ARDC and the refinancing * dates . Decentralised credit planning through the Lead functions of the RBI in relation to state cooperatives Bank Scheme was also introduced, under which, each and RRBs. NABARD is the Apex institution which has district was placed with one of the commercial banks been entrusted with a pivotal role in the sphere of policy (called the district Lead Bank) to spearhead the credit planning and providing refinance facilities to rural allocation for, inter alia, agricultural lending. In order financial institutions to augment their resource base. Since to emphasise the developmental and promotional role its inception, the NABARD has played a central role in assigned to the ARC in addition to refinancing, the providing financial assistance, facilitating institutional Corporation was renamed as the Agricultural Refinance development and encouraging promotional efforts in the and Development Corporation (ARDC) by an area of rural credit. NABARD also administers the Rural amendment to the Act in 1975. Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), which was set up in 1995-96; the corpus of RIDF is contributed It was also the case that the 1950s and 1960s had by scheduled commercial banks to the extent of their been characterised by a big industrial push with inadequate shortfall in agricultural lending under the priority sector attention being given to agriculture. It was the 1965- targets. NABARD has been playing a catalytic role in 1967 drought that brought matters to a head and micro-credit through the conduit of Self-Help Groups focussed concentrated attention to agriculture. The Green (SHGs). Revolution then followed in the late 1960s and 1970s necessitating adequate availability of credit that could THE PERIOD OF INTROSPECTION AND REFORMS: 1991 TO enable the purchase of inputs such as fertilizer, high THE PRESENT yielding varieties of seeds, pump sets for irrigation, and the like. Notwithstanding the impressive geographical spread, Despite all these efforts, the flow of credit to the functional reach and consequent decline in the influence of informal sources of credit, rural financial institutions agricultural sector failed to exhibit any appreciable were characterised by several weaknesses, viz., decline improvement due mainly to the fact that commercial in productivity and efficiency; erosion of repayment banks were not tuned to the needs and requirements of ethics and profitability. On the eve of the 1991 reforms, the small and marginal farmers, while the co-operatives, the rural credit delivery system was again found to be on the other hand, lacked resources to meet the expected demand. The solution that was found involved the in a poor shape (R.V. Gupta Committee, 1998). establishment of a separate banking structure, capable The Report of the Committee on the Financial of combining the local feel and familiarity of rural problems System (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham, 1991) characteristic of co-operatives and the professionalism and provided the blue print for carrying out overall financial large resource base of commercial banks. Following the sector reforms during the 1990s. Furthermore, recommendations of the Narasimham Working Group weaknesses in the performance of rural financial (1975), Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) were set up. Thus, institutions since 1991 resulted in setting up of various by the end of 1977, there emerged three separate committees/working groups/task forces to look into their institutions for providing rural credit, which is often operations such as: The High-level Committee on described as the multi-agency approach. Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks (R. V. Gupta, 1998), Task Force to Study the Functions of Following the recommendations of the Committee Cooperative Credit System and to Suggest Measures to Review Arrangements for Institutional Credit for for its Strengthening (Jagdish Capoor, 1999), Expert Agriculture and Rural Development, the National Bank Committee on Rural Credit (V.S. Vyas, 2001), and The for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) was Working Group to Suggest Amendments in the Regional set up in 1982 for providing credit for promotion of, * At present, scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs), are expected to ensure that the priority sector advances constitute 40 per cent of  net bank credit and within the overall lending target of 40 per cent, 18 per cent of net bank credit goes to agricultural sector. To ensure that the focus of banks on direct category of agricultural advances does not get diluted, lendings under indirect category should not exceed one-fourth of the agricultural sub-target of 18 per cent, i.e., 4.5 per cent of net bank credit. 995November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Rural Banks Act, 1976 (M.V.S. Chalapathi Rao, 2002). RRBs; introduction of prudential accounting norms and These committees/working groups/task forces made far- provisioning requirements for all rural credit agencies; reaching recommendations having a bearing on agricultural increased refinance support from RBI and capital credit. While the Capoor Task Force suggested adoption contribution to NABARD; constitution of the Rural of a Model Co-operative Act, setting up of a Co-operative Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) in NABARD Rehabilitation and Development Fund at NABARD and for infrastructure projects; introduction of Kissan Credit Mutual Assistance Fund at the state level, the Vyas Card (KCC) and stipulation of interest rate not exceeding Committee (2001) recommended restoration of health of 9 per cent for crop loans up to Rs.50,000 extended by Primary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACs) by the public sector banks. scrapping the cadre system, selective delayering of co- SUMMING UP operatives credit structure and integration of short and long-term structures. The Chalapathi Rao Working Group Thus, concern with the inadequacy of agricultural (2002) had, in addition to suggesting diversification of credit has had more than a century of tortuous history. the business of RRBs, recommended introduction of The agricultural credit system (Chart 1) as it has capital adequacy norms for RRBs in a phased manner, emerged, has been a product of both evolution and along with the RRB-specific amount of equity based on intervention and symbolises the systems response to the risk-weighted assets ratio. the stimuli from continuing dissatisfaction with credit The financial sector reforms formed an integral part delivery. The concern for food security and the need of the overall structural reforms initiated in 1991 and for building up buffer stocks, which guided the Green included various measures in the area of agricultural credit Revolution, created both enhanced and diversified type such as deregulation of interest rates of co-operatives, of credit requirements for agricultural production. In and RRBs; deregulation of lending rates of commercial India, a supply-leading approach to the institutional banks for loans above Rs. 2 lakh; recapitalisation of select development for agriculture credit has been followed. Chart 1:  Structure of Agricultural Credit System in India GOVERNMENT OF INDIA RESERVE BANK OF INDIA NABARD COMMERCIAL RURAL CO-OPERATIVE REGIONAL RURAL BANKS CREDIT  INSTITUTIONS BANKS LONG-TERM CREDIT SHORT-TERM CREDIT STRUCTURE STRUCTURE STATE CO-OPERATIVE BANKS STATE CO-OPERATIVE AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS DISTRICT CENTRAL CO-OPERATIVE BANKS PRIMARY CO-OPERATIVE AGRICULTURE AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS PRIMARY AGRICULTURAL CREDIT SOCIEITES DEPOSITORS AND BORROWERS 996November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 ASSESSMENT OF PROGRESS IN AGRICULTURAL CREDIT continuously since the 1950s, and even as a proportion of total GDP until the 1980s. There was indeed a fall in Agricultural credit clearly started to grow after bank the mid 1990s, but has again risen now (Table 1). It is nationalisation (Chart 2), and it has been growing true, however, that agricultural credit has indeed fallen continuously since then. With all the concerns and as a proportion of total credit. skepticism expressed, the difficult and continuous The existing agricultural credit system is geared to changes in institutional credit have indeed borne fruit. the needs of foodgrains production: with the share of Over the years there has been a significant increase in foodgrains production falling as a proportion of total the access of rural cultivators to institutional credit and, agricultural production, it is all the more creditable that simultaneously, the role of informal agencies, including agriculture credit has not fallen as a proportion of money lenders, as source of credit has declined. agricultural GDP. With the share of agriculture in GDP According to the All India Debt and Investment Survey falling continuously, from 36 per cent in 1981 to 29 per 1991-92, the relative shares of institutional agencies in cent in 1991 and 22 per cent in 2001, it is to be expected the total cash debt of rural cultivators increased from that the share of agricultural credit would also fall as a 31.7 per cent in 1971 to 63.2 per cent in 1981 and proportion of total credit, unless this trend is corrected further to 66.3 per cent in 1991. by increasing commercialisation of agriculture. Nonetheless, recent years have again been characterised by a concern over the falling share of The age old problem of rural credit has been the agricultural credit as a proportion of total credit. This is excessive reliance of borrowers on money lenders and indeed true, but is this the correct metric to look at the other informal sources that have entailed usurious progress of agricultural credit? What would be more interest rates and exploitation. It is quite remarkable relevant is to evaluate agricultural credit as a proportion how long it has taken to really substitute institutional of agricultural GDP; or short-term credit as a proportion credit for informal money lending channels and how of the value of inputs; or long term credit as a proportion tortuous the process of change has been: change of of private investment. any significance took over 50 years from the beginning of serious attention in the 1930s to the 1980s (Table As might be expected, the share of agricultural value 2). It was the nationalisation of banks in 1969 and added has been falling as a share of total GDP. Hence subsequent spread of rural bank branches that has really credit to agriculture may also be expected to fall as a made a difference in reducing, finally the share of proportion of total credit, assuming relative stability in money lenders in agricultural credit. the share of purchased inputs as a proportion of value added. What is interesting is that the share of agricultural Table 1: Ratio of Direct Agricultural Credit (Disbursements) to credit as a proportion of agricultural GDP has been rising Agricultural Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Total GDP and Total Credit  (Per cent)  Agricultural Credit/ Agricultural Credit/ Agricultural Agricultural GDP Total GDP Credit / CS 1950-51 0.5 0.3 n.a 1960-61 3.3 1.3 n.a. 1970s 5.4 2.1 10.8 1980s 8.3 2.6 8.5 1990s 7.4 2.0 6.4 2001-02 8.7 2.0 5.5 n.a. : not available. Note : 1. Agricultural Credit : Direct credit for agricultural and allied activities extended by Co-operatives, Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks. 2. Total GDP and Agricultural GDP are at factor cost and at current prices. 3. CS  Other banks credit to commercial sector (outstanding) proxy for total credit. Source: Report on Currency and Finance: Various Issues and Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy: 2002-03. 997November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 2: Relative Share of Borrowing of Cultivator Households from Different Sources (Per cent) Sources of  Credit 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 Non Institutional 92.7 81.3 68.3 36.8 30.6 of which    Money Lenders 69.7 49.2 36.1 16.1 17.5 Institutional 7.3 18.7 31.7 63.2 66.3 of which    Cooperative Societies / Banks 3.3 2.6 22.0 29.8 35.2 Commercial Banks 0.9 0.6 2.4 28.8 35.2 Unspecified     3.1 Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 Source: All India Debt and Investment Survey and RBI Bulletin, February 2000. As documented in the last section, it has taken drastic rural credit continues to be extended by them and hence action ranging from the formation of cooperatives to it is essential that they be revitalised and put on a sound bank nationalisation, setting up of RRBs and the like. business footing. The Indian record of extension of rural credit is quite a There has been increasing expression of concern on story of institutional innovation. the extension of agricultural credit in the 1990s. There The remarkable feature of agricultural credit has actually been continuous growth in the number of extension in India is the widespread network of Rural accounts in all size-wise categories in the case of Financial Institutions (RFIs). Following the first phase commercial banks (Chart 3). of nationalisation of commercial banks in 1969, large It is probably the case that the introduction of Kissan scale branch expansion was undertaken with a view to Credit Cards (KCCs) has also aided this process in the creating a strong institutional base in rural areas. At recent years. But it is equally true that the share of small the time of nationalisation in June 1969, the total number farms in total credit appears to be falling to a certain of rural offices of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) extent (Chart 4). was 1,833, which then increased significantly to 32,406 This trend needs to be analysed carefully and is a by March 2003. The number of co-operative institutions good topic for further research. Are larger farmers catering to agriculture went up from 95,871 in end- becoming more productive and commercial with higher June 1980 to over 1,10,000 at present. The share of intensity of bought-out inputs, thus requiring higher the rural branches of scheduled commercial banks levels of credit? Or are small farms becoming unviable, (including RRBs) in total increased sharply from 22 making it difficult for banks to finance them? Or, are per cent in June 1969 to 47 per cent by March 2003. The main story in the expansion of rural credit in the 1980s and 1990s has been the ascendancy of commercial banks, along with RRBs, with a corresponding fall in the share of cooperatives (Table 3). This is reflected in the increasing concern in recent years over the effectiveness, governance and financial health of rural cooperative banks. Just under half of Table 3: Decadal Average Share of Institutions in Direct Agricultural Credit (Disbursements)  (Per cent) Co-operatives RRBs Commercial Banks 1970s 79.5 2.3 21.0 1980s 55.9 5.3 38.9 1990s 51.5 6.2 42.3 2001-02 44.0 11.0 45.0 Note : Direct Agricultural Credit (disbursements) from 1975-76 for RRBs and 1971 - 72 for commercial banks. Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy: 2002-03. 998November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 5: Private Capital Formation and Share of Long-Term Credit (Rupees crore) Year Private Sector Investment Proportion (%) Capital Formation Credit 1980-81 2,843 1,335 47.0 1990-91 8,402 4,208 50.1 1998-99 19,311 13,264 68.7 Source: Pant  Joshi (2003). second best, we can look at agricultural credit as a proportion of net state domestic product (NSDP). The Southern states stand out with a substantially higher share of agricultural credit (Tables 6 and 7), followed by the Northern and Central regions. Whereas the ratio for the Southern region increased during the latter part of the 1990s, it remained stationery for the Northern, Central and North-Eastern regions. It is also notable that the Southern States have a much more active cooperative movement (not covered in the data reported here), and banks becoming more risk averse and hence reluctant hence their share of agricultural credit is likely to be to lend? even higher. The low share of the Western region is There is some evidence to the contrary. Available surprising, but could be because of the very active role data suggest that agricultural credit has been rising in of cooperatives in this region. The East and North-Eastern recent years as a share of both the value of inputs or regions clearly get a very low share. the value of output (Table 4). Moreover, long-term Some information is also available on a per capita credit as a share of private investment has also been basis and, as may be expected the Southern region really rising in the 1990s (Table 5). Thus, it is probably fair stands out in terms of exposure to agricultural credit. to say that the agricultural credit effort has not really The per capita extension of agricultural credit in the been slackening in the 1990s. It is also possible that Eastern and North Eastern regions is extremely low with credit intensity going up in this fashion it could, (Table 8). Since these data pertain to commercial banks, ironically, also lead to greater risk on the part of the puzzle before us is why should such stark borrowers because of greater indebtedness. differences exist between regions? Given that Punjab, Haryana, and Western UP are the centres of the green REGIONAL DISTRIBUTION revolution, one would have expected a higher intensity of agricultural credit in the Northern region and why Among the striking features of the agricultural credit do public sector banks, with similar management and scene in India are the wide regional disparities in the disbursement of agricultural credit by scheduled staff, behave so differently between regions? If it is possible for banks to do direct lending for agriculture commercial banks (excluding RRBs). The correct way in the Southern States, why not in the other regions? to evaluate the performance of agricultural credit is to And why should the differences be so large? Incidentally, look at the ratio of agricultural credit to state agricultural it is notable that the rural stress that has emerged in value added. It is difficult to obtain these data. So, as a Table 4: Gross Value of Outputs, Value of Inputs and Short-Term Credit (Rupees crore at 1993-94 prices) Year Gross Value of Outputs Value of Inputs Short-term Credit Short-term Credit as Percentage to Value of inputs Value of outputs 1993-94 2,04,874 27,413 9,752 35.6 4.8 1996-97 2,32,833 30,735 13,330 43.4 5.7 1998-99 2,45,413 34,566 14,642 42.4 6.0 Source : Pant  Joshi (2003). 999November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 6 : Region-wise Ratio of Agricultural Credit to Table 8: Region-wise Trends in Agricultural and Allied Sector  Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) Credit Per Capita (Per cent) (Rupees) Regions 1991-95 (Average) 1996-2001 (Average) Regions 1991-95 1996-2001 Northern 60 153 Northern 0.7 1.0 North-Eastern 9 17 North-Eastern 0.2 0.2 Eastern 21 42 Eastern 0.5 0.5 Central 0.7 1.0 Central 36 86 Western 0.7 0.7 Western 67 134 Southern 1.6 2.0 Southern 157 280 All India 0.9 1.0 All India 67 128 Notes : 1. Agricultural credit relates to direct finance to agriculture and allied Notes : 1. Ratios obtained by dividing the average direct finance to Agricultural activities by all scheduled commercial banks (disbursements - Short term and allied activities of all scheduled commercial banks (Disbursements  and Long term). Short term and Long term) during the period 1991-95 and 1996-2001 by 2. NSDP is at current prices. the total region-wise population in 1991 and 2001, respectively. Source: Reserve Bank of India and Economic Survey: Various Issues. 2. NSDP is at current prices. Source : Reserve Bank of India and Economic Survey: Various Issues. recent years after repeated droughts has been concentrated in the Southern region. Ironically, it is priority sector. However, they are not as high as those possible that this may have occurred as a consequence for small scale industries (SSI) and for other priority of the relative success of the agricultural credit effort sectors. In fact, for private sector banks, agricultural in this region. All these issues need much greater NPAs are as low as 5 per cent of total outstanding research so that our continuing search for viable advances to agriculture, and are lower than for the non agricultural credit extension is informed by appropriate priority sector (Table 9). In fact, it is likely that if knowledge. public sector enterprises are excluded from the data for the non-priority sector, the performance of NPAs NON-PERFORMING ASSETS in agriculture may not be much higher than for lending to the non-priority sector private sector credit exposure I started with the core issue of risk in agriculture as a whole. These data do suggest that agricultural and how that is a key determinant of all the problems lending may be more risky than non-priority sectors, encountered in agricultural lending. I would, therefore, but the difference is probably not large enough to briefly like to examine the record of non-performing warrant excessive caution in bank lending for assets (NPAs) in agriculture for commercial banks. Is agricultural purposes. the hesitation of banks to lend for agriculture really caused by the experience of a much higher level of Table 9: Sector-wise Average Non-Performing Assets of Banks - NPAs? It is found that the proportion of NPAs are (2001- 2003) indeed higher for agriculture than they are for the non- (Amounts in Rs Crore) Agriculture Small Others Total Non- Scale Priority Priority Table 7: Region-wise Share of Agriculture and Allied Sector Credit Sector Sector (Short Term and Long Term) Disbursements  (Per cent) Public Sector Banks Region 1990-91 1995-96 2001-02     Average NPAs 7,635 10,362 6,748 24,745 28,764 Northern 12.9 11.6 19.9     Average NPAs as a North-Eastern 0.4 0.4 0.5 per cent of average outstanding advances 12.0 20.6 12.2 14.2 9.4 Eastern 8.3 6.4 7.4 Central 16.9 16.4 14.1 Private Sector Banks Western 13.6 17.1 14.4 Average NPAs 433 1,249 593 2,275 9,271 Southern 47.9 48 43.8 Average NPAs as a All-India 100 100 100 per cent of average Outstanding advances 5.1 15.9 5.3 8.1 10.2 Note  : Agricultural Credit relates to direct finance to agricultural and allied activities of all scheduled commercial banks (Disbursments - Short-term and Note : NPAs and outstanding advances as on March 31. Long- term). Source : Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India: Various Issues; Reserve Source: Reserve Bank of India. Bank of India. 1000November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 10: Growth of Indian Economy (Annual Growth Rate) SUMMARY  (Per cent) What have we learnt from this brief summary of the Year GNP Per Capita record of agricultural credit? First, after about 70 years 1950-80 3.5 1.2 of constant efforts, institutional credit is indeed reaching 1980-90 5.7 3.4 a substantial proportion of farmers. Second, with the 1990-2000 5.8 3.6 share of agricultural GDP falling in total GDP, it is to be Source: National Accounts Statistics: Central Statistical Organisation. expected that the share of agricultural credit will go down as a proportion of total credit. But we do need to ensure When annual per capita income growth is in the that it does not fall as a share of agricultural GDP, and region of 1.2 per cent, it is barely palpable, even that it in fact intensifies. Third, what is needed is a cumulatively over 10 years. When, however per capita better analysis by banks on where the risks are in the income growth ascends to around 3.5 per cent per extension of agricultural credit, and to then find market- year, it starts becoming palpable on a cumulative basis oriented solutions for mitigating such risks. Where the and leads to perceptible shifts in the demand pattern. mitigation of such risk involves positive externalities and Although there is some dispute on the measurement the promotion of public good, methods of appropriate of poverty, the official estimates of poverty, and of government intervention would need to be identified and most academic analysts suggest that there has been considered. Fourth, there is an urgent need for the substantial reduction in absolute poverty levels between adoption of the best modern techniques for risk the 1970s and late 1990s (Chart 5). With measured management in agriculture, including a clearer distribution poverty having fallen to around 26 per cent, from between risky and less risky borrowers. Fifth, banks the late 1970s levels of around 50 percent, the pattern need to adopt a more specialised approach as between of demand for food has been changing different agricultural sectors and regions in order to correspondingly. achieve a better understanding of agricultural credit needs The key observation to be made is that there has and risks on a disaggregated basis: which sectors and regions are more credit worthy and which less so? Which been a steep fall in the share of cereals in total household agricultural activities and regions are getting more credit food expenditure over the last 30 years: from just under 60 per cent in the late 1960s to less than 40 per cent in and why? Business as usual and a blanket approach will the late 1990s in rural areas; and from over 35 per cent no longer do. Sixth, there is an increasing need for allied in the late 1960s to 25 per cent in the late 1990s in activities and term lending, and hence a change in our urban areas (Table 11). traditional view of what constitutes agriculture and how it should be promoted. It is to these issues that I now turn. THE CHANGING FACE OF AGRICULTURE CHANGES IN THE DEMAND FOR FOOD The defining characteristic of the 1980s and 1990s has been the overall acceleration in economic growth of the country (Table 10). Whereas per capita annual income growth was only about 1.2 per cent for about 30 years until 1980 or so, growth has been accelerating in the 1980s and 1990s. With the perceptible fall in population growth in the 1990s a similar level of overall GDP growth implies still higher per capita income growth. The consequence is that Indian annual per capita income is now about US $ 500 which is pushing India into the group of middle income countries. 1001November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 11: Share of Cereals and Non-Cereal Items in Total Monthly CHANGES IN THE SUPPLY PATTERN OF FOOD Per-Capita Expenditure on Food: Rural and Urban Areas India is already a very large producer of fruits and (Per cent) 1969-70 1987-88 1993-94 1999-2000 vegetables. It is ranked among the top five producers in Rural Cereals 56.0 41.0 38.3 37.3 a range of items such as bananas, mangoes, papayas Non-Cereals 44.0 59.0 61.7 62.7 and pineapples, among fruits; and brinjal, cabbage, Urban Cereals 36.6 26.5 25.7 25.7 cauliflower, peas, onions and potatoes, among vegetables. Non-Cereals 63.4 73.5 74.3 74.3 India is perhaps the second largest producer of both Source: Various NSS Rounds on Household Consumption Expenditure. fruits and vegetables (Table 13). As incomes increase and diet diversification takes Moreover, there has been similar change in the place, the demand for fruits and vegetables will grow household expenditure on food as a proportion of total correspondingly and hence, we can expect huge changes expenditure in both rural and urban areas. In rural areas, to take place in the supply response to such emerging the expenditure on non-food items has shot up from 26 demand. The production growth in these items is likely per cent of the total in 1969-70 to 41 per cent in 1999- to accelerate significantly if appropriate conditions are 2000. In urban areas, this proportion has gone up from created for such expansion. Correspondingly, such about 34 per cent to 52 per cent over the same period expansion will give rise to huge possibilities for food (Table 12). processing. Although India is indeed a very large producer Thus household expenditure on cereals has been of fruits and vegetables, our productivity levels continue shrinking as a proportion of total expenditure in the to be very low: Indian yields are significantly below the last 30-35 years, and this trend may be expected to world average in vegetables (Table 14). continue in the years to come. It is quite clear that One successful example of policy attention in the non- with progressive and continuous increases in income foodgrains area is that of milk. Ever since the creation and poverty reduction, the Indian diet is gradually of the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), the becoming more diversified. The composition of production of milk has increased tremendously, as has products in the supply of food will also have to reflect its distribution over most parts of the country. The this with the passage of time. With acceleration in production of milk increased from around 56 million economic growth, this change will probably take place tonnes in 1991-92 to about 80 million tonnes by 2000- faster. 01. This development took place only as a result of From a policy perspective, the key lesson from this focussed attention to technology development, extension, change in demand pattern is that Indian agricultural policy provision of input supply, procurement, distribution and will need to shift its almost exclusive attention from the marketing, along with corresponding appropriate production of foodgrains to the promotion of all the other institutional development. The success achieved in both food products. The quest for higher agricultural growth, the acceleration of growth in foodgrains production since and large accelerated economic growth in rural areas the early 1970s, and milk production later, owed much therefore requires a shift of policy attention to a much more diversified approach involving growth of production Table 13: India's Position in World Production of Fruits and Vegetables of products such as meat, fish, poultry, vegetables, fruits, Crop Rank Crop Rank and the like. 1 2 3 4 Apple 10 Brinjal 2 Table 12: Share of Food and Non-Food Items in Total Monthly Banana 1 Cabbage 2 Per-Capita Expenditure: Rural and Urban Areas (Per cent) Mango 1 Cauliflower 1 1969-70 1987-88 1993-94 1999-2000 Papaya 2 Peas 1 Rural Food 73.7 63.8 63.2 59.4 Pine apple 4 Onion 2 Non-food 26.3 36.2 36.8 40.6 Grapes 10 Potato 3 Urban Food 65.7 55.9 54.7 48.1 Total Fruits 2 Total Vegetables 2 Non-food 34.3 44.1 45.3 51.9 Coconut 3 Cashew 1 Source: Indian Horticulture Database - 2001. Source: Various NSS Rounds on Household Consumption Expenditure. 1002November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Table 14: Yields in Vegetables: India and the World heterogeneity, unlike in the case of wheat, rice and milk. (Quintals per hectare) There is a multiplicity of varieties that can be produced 1990 1995 2000 2002 2003 in each of these product groups; production is often World 149 155 166 169 168 regionally concentrated; the production and marketing China 177 188 189 196 192 conditions differ significantly; and the input requirements India 102 102 131 125 129 are equally heterogeneous. Hence, policies and programmes Note : Vegetables include melons. that are to be designed to support higher productivity and Source: FAO Stat 2004. production in these areas need to be much more regionally to specific policy analysis and subsequent policy action disaggregated and knowledge intensive. accompanied with institutional development - including In the new growth areas of agriculture, the that of the provision of credit. The key innovation made importance of post harvest activities such as storage, by the NDDB was to find a way of expanding production transportation, processing and marketing of non-cereal by small producers located over different regions, while products increases which leads to greater links between concentrating technology investment centrally and then agricultural diversification and rural industrialisation. The extending it to the producers. success of this strategy would, however, depend Just as research and development activities, and crucially on developing adequate infrastructural and other marketing were very important in the production and support systems. adaptation of high yielding seed varieties for wheat and The monopoly of Government regulated wholesale rice, expanding milk production, productivity increases markets has prevented development of a competitive in other areas such as horticulture will also need similar marketing system in the country, providing no help to intensity of investment in appropriate R&D, and special farmers in direct marketing, organised retailing, developing marketing efforts increasingly involving public/private smooth raw material supply systems for agro-processing partnership. industries and the adoption of innovative marketing system and technologies. An efficient agricultural ELEMENTS OF A NEW APPROACH marketing system is essential for development of the The changing demand pattern for food involves a agricultural sector as it provides outlets and incentives reordering of priorities in organising appropriate matching for increased production and the marketing system supply responses. Besides promoting diversification, there contributes greatly to the commercialisation of is also a need for value addition in agricultural production subsistence farmers. Worldwide, Governments have for increasing rural employment and incomes. recognised the importance of liberalised agricultural Interestingly, very significant changes are taking place markets. If the agricultural markets are to be developed in the agricultural sector in this regard. There are in private and co-operative sectors and are to be provided incipient signs of a much closer connection between a competitive environment vis--vis regulated markets, primary producers, trade intermediaries, food processing the existing framework of State Agricultural Produce entities, and the eventual marketing of value added Marketing Committee (APMC) Acts will have to undergo products. With the share of unprocessed foods falling, a change. In this context, the Model Agricultural Produce the real growth area in the agricultural sector is in value Marketing (Development & Regulation) Act, 2003 added food products such as meat, poultry, fish, circulated in September 2003 acquires significance. Ten vegetables, fruits and the like. There is an accelerating States have initiated legal or administrative action for direct move of consumers to basic processed foods such as marketing and contract farming arrangements in line with atta, packaged milk, fresh poultry, soft drinks, processed the Model Act. Other states need to follow suit. meat and poultry, and the like. As mere policy reforms in these areas would be Supporting policy changes and investment are required inadequate, corresponding investment in rural to facilitate agricultural diversification and value-addition. infrastructure is required for closer connection between The task of the policy makers in designing an appropriate the farmer and the market. The government has already package of measures becomes more challenging launched an ambitious rural roads programme, namely considering the fact that the new growth areas of the Prime Ministers Gram Sadak Yojana. As village agriculture are characterised by a high degree of connectivity is actually achieved through the 1003November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 construction of rural roads, it will become possible to Experience shows that the green revolution was largely make other investments that are required for farm to aided by domestic and international research and extension market transfer of agricultural products. The experience efforts. While traditionally this has been concentrated of states like Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Haryana, Kerala and exclusively in the Government, in these new areas of Goa, where rural connectivity through roads was agriculture, measures need to be taken to encourage the achieved much earlier, suggests that such a programme private sector to invest in R&D and extension activities. is more successful when conducted in a decentralised Several South-east and East-Asian countries, which framework. adopted agricultural diversification and rural Heavy investments need to be made in establishing industrialisation as a strategy for rural development, have cold chains across the country such as cold storage, witnessed a move away from cereals to non-cereal transport facilities and the like. The kind of storage and production. This was spurred by the structural changes, transportation facilities required will differ from product which accompanied the long-term contraction of to product and from region to region. It would be best agriculture in the economy, the decline in the real prices accomplished in a decentralised private sector framework of cereals following the success of green revolution, with appropriate policies and supportive financing as also the changes in the consumption pattern due to facilities. rising incomes and urbanisation. Agricultural diversification has been seen as desirable response to The banking system in India is, at present, geared these demand and supply changes and was explicitly more to financing the traditional crops like cereals. incorporated into many countries agricultural policies However, it needs to reorient itself to meet the changing and rural development strategies (Goletti, 1999). Thus, requirements of commercialising agriculture. Credit fundamental changes in the diets of the population in requirements would go up due to purchased-input Asian developing countries has been a major factor in intensive and heterogeneous production cycles of the new the evolution of cereal supply and demand and areas of agriculture. This would also call for designing agricultural diversification (Rosegrant and Hazell, 2001). innovative schemes and products which recognise the Agro-based rural industries were recognised as differing nature of agri-business and supply chains for providing not only high value products and income to different products. Newer forms of credit assessment the rural population but also employment to large rural and risk management systems may also have to be put non-farm population which could not be absorbed by in place, besides upgrading skills and changes in attitudes the rapidly expanding industrial and services sector. This and mind-sets. The rural credit system has been bypassed strategy was followed in several countries like Taiwan by the revolution in information technology. The banking and Malaysia in sixties and Thailand, Philippines and system may also have to address the problem of financial Indonesia in the seventies and eighties. dualism, characterised by faster modernisation of urban financial markets compared with their rural counterparts The rapid transformation that has been observed in and the digital divide which separates those using these areas in South East Asian countries in the last 20 modern computers and communication technologies from years provides pointers to what can be expected in the those who do not. Financial dualism could result in large years to come. One key area of change that has farmers, agri-business and rural industries obtaining occurred is in the modernisation of retail grocery financial services from modern urban financial institutions, structures. Most cultures in a transitional phase attach while small and marginal farmers and landless laborers great importance to personalised shopping for daily may have to depend on micro finance and personal needs. The small corner stores are well distributed savings. Information technology has to be used to across towns and cities. The situation in East Asia was facilitate transformation in various processes of rural similar until the 1980s. However, tremendous change credit. In this regard, it is suggested that each bank has taken place in retail grocery structures in these should form a special task force to look into the entire countries over the last 15 years. In Taiwan, for example, gamut of credit in the context of the agricultural whereas only about 2 per cent of groceries were sold transformation. The best results could be obtained if these in modern retail formats such as super markets in the task forces are staffed with enthusiastic young bankers mid 1980s, this proportion has now shot up to more with penchant for innovation. than 65 per cent. Similar change has taken place from 1004November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 zero to 50 per cent over the same period in Thailand. medium and long-term lending and limited deposit Even in Indonesia, about 25 per cent of groceries are mobilisation and heavy dependence on borrowed funds now bought in modern super markets. Modern retailing by major agricultural credit purveyors. These have firms are much more efficient than traditional firms. major implications for agricultural development as also Their costs can be as much as 20 per cent lower than the well being of the farming community. Efforts are in traditional firms. Contrary to popular perception, they therefore required to address and rectify these issues. actually generate greater employment. The economies Following the changes in the consumption and the of scale provide for greater variety in product stocks; dietary patterns from cereals to non-cereal products, a they provide a demand pull factor from consumers to silent transformation is taking place in the rural areas producers; and they help in reducing the difference calling for diversification in agricultural production and between the retail and farm gate prices. Overall, they value addition processes in order to protect employment help in accelerating growth in the whole food chain and incomes of the rural population. In the changed thereby leading to higher agricultural growth and, more scenario, strong and viable agricultural financial importantly, higher employment growth in the whole institutions are needed to cater to the requirements of food chain from the farm, food processing, logistics, finance for building the necessary institutional and and retailing. marketing infrastructure. To sum up, the income and consumption changes, What is needed in agriculture now is a new mission described above, have ushered in a new demand structure mode akin to what was done in the 1970s with the for rural products that has gone largely unnoticed. Green Revolution. The difference is that then we Traditional approaches to agriculture, which focussed on concentrated countrywide on two relatively foodgrain production will only bring agricultural stagnation homogeneous products so that the countrywide strategy and employment distress in rural areas. The need of the could also be similarly homogeneous. The approach was hour is to promote agricultural diversification, encourage a package approach, which attempted to bring together production of other food products, invest actively in rural technology inputs (focussed investment in new infrastructure, and enable greater food processing and agricultural universities, regionally distributed, with value addition to agricultural production, which would complementary organisation of agricultural extension create new avenues for rural employment and income. services) along with provision of infrastructure inputs like power at subsidised costs; arrangements for the CONCLUSION supply of bought out inputs like seeds, fertilisers, tractors; and most importantly, corresponding Agricultural credit has played a vital role in arrangements for credit provision through the then supporting agricultural production in India. The Green recently nationalised banking system. This model has Revolution characterised by a greater use of inputs like clearly delivered results in the sense that India has fertilizers, seeds and other inputs, increased credit become self sufficient in food and we have effectively requirements which were provided by the agricultural brought food security. However, the model has not financial institutions. Though the outreach and the changed much since then and various ills have resulted: amount of agricultural credit have increased over the the persistence of high fertiliser subsidies, power years, several weaknesses have crept in which have subsidies and minimum support prices that may now affected the viability and sustainability of these act as a disincentive for crop diversification. We, institutions. Furthermore, antiquated legal framework and therefore, need a major review of agriculture policy to the outdated tenancy laws have hampered flow of credit meet the changing needs of both producers and and development of strong and efficient agricultural consumers. credit institutions. The difference now is that we need initiatives in a A review of performance of agricultural credit in disaggregated manner in many different segments of India reveals that though the overall flow of agriculture and agro industry: horticulture, aquaculture, institutional credit has increased over the years, there pisciculture, dairying, sericulture, poultry, vegetables, meat, are several gaps in the system like inadequate provision food processing, other agro-processing and the like. of credit to small and marginal farmers, paucity of 1005November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 So what we need to do is to initiate a nationwide major Indian Banks Association (2002), Report of the Working mission programme for different activities, regionally Group on Agricultural Credit. disaggregated, in a similar package mode. The packages Mohan, Rakesh (2002), A Decade After 1991: New will have to be different for each activity and location. th Challenges Facing the Indian Economy: 28 Frank To begin with, expert teams will have to be formed for Moraes Lecture delivered at Chennai on July 26, each agro climate zone focussing on the relevant activities Organised by United Writers Association and the Frank there. These teams can then design the package that needs Moraes Foundation. Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, to be put together in each place. The basic ingredients of November. each package can be similar: provision of technology NABARD, Annual Report, Various issues, Mumbai. inputs, infrastructure, extension services, arrangements for  (1999), Report of the Task Force on Supportive the supply of inputs and the corresponding credit model. Policy and Regulatory Framework for Microfinance, A key difference in approach would have to be the much October. greater involvement of region specific market participants, and of private sector suppliers in all these activities, and  (2001), Report of the Expert Committee on Rural credit suppliers ranging from public sector banks, Credit (Chairman Dr. V.S. Vyas). cooperative banks, the new private sector banks and Pant Joshi, Deepali (2003), Indian Agriculture micro-credit suppliers, specially self help groups. Perspectives, Prajnan, Vol 32(1), pp7-36. References Reddy, Y.V. (1998), RBI and Banking Sector Reform, All India Rural Credit Review Committee (Chairman: Speech delivered at Indian Institute of Management, B.Venkatappiah). Ahmedabad. Capoor, J (1999), Structural Reforms in Agricultural Reserve Bank of India (1970), History. and Rural Development Banks, Reserve Bank of India , Annual Report, various issues, Mumbai. Bulletin, October, Vol.53 No.10, pp.1185-1190. , Functions and Working, 1983, 2001. Desai, Bhupat M. and N.V. Namboodri (1993), Rural , Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy, Financial Institutions: Promotions and Performance, various issues, Mumbai. Oxford, New Delhi. , Monthly Bulletin, various issues, Mumbai. Food and Agriculture Organisation (2004), FAOSTAT (website), Rome. , Report on Currency and Finance, various Government of India: Economic Survey, various issues, issues, Mumbai. Ministry of Finance, New Delhi. , Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in  , NSSO, various rounds, New Delhi. India, various issues, Mumbai.  (1991), Report of the Committee on the  (1985), Report of the Committee to Review Financial System (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham), the Working of the Monetary System in India (Chairman: Ministry of Finance, New Delhi. Prof. Sukhamoy Chakravarty).  (1998), Report of the Committee on the Banking  (1998), Report of the High Level Committee Sector Reforms (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham), on Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks Ministry of Finance, New Delhi. (Chairman: Shri R.V. Gupta).  (2001), Indian Horticulture Database, New Delhi.  (1999), Report of the Task Force on Revival/  (2002), Report of the Working Group to Suggest Restructuring for Co-operating Banks (Chairperson: Shri. Amendments in the Regional Rural Banks Act,1976 Jagadish Capoor), Mumbai. (Chairman: Shri M.V.S. Chalapathi Rao), Ministry of  (2000), All-India Rural Debt and Investment Finance, New Delhi. Surveys, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, February. Goletti Francesco (1999), Agricultural Diversification  (2004), Report of the Advisory Committee on and Rural Industrialisation as a Strategy for Rural Flow of Credit to Agriculture and Related Activities from Income Growth and Poverty Reduction in Indochina and Banking System (Chairman: Prof. V. S.Vyas), June. Myanmar; IFPRI, June. 1006November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 , Report of the All India Rural Credit Survey Someshwara Rao, K. (1998), Economics of Rural Committee, 1951-52 . Banking, Anmol Publications, New Delhi. Report of the Committee on Co-operation in India, 1915 Subramanian, K. and T.K. Velaudham (1997), Banking Reform in India: Managing Change, Tata McGraw Hill, (Maclagan Committee). New Delhi. Rosegrant, W. Mark and B.R. Peter Hazell (2001), Thingalaya, N.K. (1999), The Banking Saga: History of Transforming the Rural Asian Economy: The Unfinished Revolution; IFPRI. South Kanara Banks, Corporation Bank, Mangalore. 1007