C M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Corporate Governance in Banks* V. LEELADHAR Let me at the outset commend the achievements of operatives are organised groups of people and jointly your bank in almost all the performance parameters. It is managed and democratically controlled enterprises. They indeed heartening to see a well functioning and sound exist to serve their members and depositors and produce bank in the otherwise none too rosy co-operative sector. benefits for them. Co-operative corporate governance is In fact, there could have been no better tribute to the therefore about ensuring co-operative relevance and memory of your great founder Sheth Shantaram Mangesh performance by connecting members, management and Kulkarni than to turn in a solid performance year after the employees to the policy, strategy and decision-making year, and also at the same time becoming a processes. technologically savvy institution. I congratulate the management team and staff of your bank for carrying GENESIS OF C ORPORATE G OVERNANCE forward the vision of your great founder. It will certainly not be out of place here to recount how issues relating to corporate governance and corporate CORPORATE G OVERNANCE AND CO-OPERATIVE B ANKS control have come to the fore the world over in the recent Coming to the theme of my lecture today, I deem it a past. The seeds of modern corporate governance were privilege to have been invited to address this gathering probably sown by the Watergate scandal in the USA. on a topic of tremendous relevance, focus and significance Subsequent investigations by US regulatory and legislative in todays context. Needless to say, for the co-operative bodies highlighted control failures that had allowed several banks in India these are challenging times. Never before major corporations to make illegal political contributions has the need for restoring customer confidence in the co- and bribe government officials. While these developments operative sector been felt so much. Never before has the in the US stimulated debate in the UK, a spate of scandals issue of good governance in the co-operative banks and collapses in that country in the late 1980s and early assumed such criticality. The literature on corporate 1990s led shareholders and banks to worry about their governance in its wider connotation covers a range of investments. Several companies in UK which saw issues such as protection of shareholders rights, explosive growth in earnings in the 80s ended the decade enhancing shareholders value, Board issues including its in a memorably disastrous manner. Importantly, such composition and role, disclosure requirements, integrity spectacular corporate failures arose primarily out of poorly of accounting practices, the control systems, in particular managed business practices. internal control systems. Corporate governance especially This debate was driven partly by the subsequent in the co-operative sector has come into sharp focus enquiries into corporate governance (most notably the because more and more co-operative banks in India, both Cadbury Report) and partly by extensive changes in in urban and rural areas, have experienced grave problems corporate structure. In May 1991, the London Stock in recent times which has in a way threatened the profile Exchange set up a Committee under the chairmanship of and identity of the entire co-operative system. These Sir Arian Cadbury to help raise the standards of corporate problems include mismanagement, financial impropriety, governance and the level of confidence in financial poor investment decisions and the growing distance reporting and auditing by setting out clearly what it sees between members and their co-operative society. as the respective responsibilities of those involved and The purpose and objectives of co-operatives provide what it believes is expected of them. The Committee the framework for co-operative corporate governance. Co- investigated accountability of the Board of Directors to Speech delivered by Shri V. Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India on November 27, 2004 at the Sheth Shantaram * Mangesh Kulkarni Memorial Lecture organised by The North Kanara G.S.B. Co-op Bank Ltd. 1101 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 shareholders and to the society. It submitted its report non-banking and non-finance organisations. In the case and the associated code of best practices in December of traditional manufacturing corporations, the issue has 1992 wherein it spelt out the methods of governance been that of safeguarding and maximising the needed to achieve a balance between the essential powers shareholders value. In the case of banking, the risk of the Board of Directors and their proper accountability. involved for depositors and the possibility of contagion Being a pioneering report on corporate governance, it assumes greater importance than that of consumers of would perhaps be in order to make a brief reference to manufactured products. Further, the involvement of its recommendations which are in the nature of guidelines government is discernibly higher in banks due to relating to, among other things, the Board of Directors importance of stability of financial system and the larger and Reporting & Control. interests of the public. Since the market control is not sufficient to ensure proper governance in banks, the The Cadbury Report stipulated that the Board of government does see reason in regulating and controlling Directors should meet regularly, retain full and effective the nature of activities, the structure of bonds, the control over the company and monitor the executive ownership pattern, capital adequacy norms, liquidity management. There should be a clearly accepted division ratios, etc. of responsibilities at the head of the company which will ensure balance of power and authority so that no individual has unfettered powers of decision. The Board REASONS FOR HIGH D EGREE OF OVERSIGHT should have a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved to it for decisions to ensure that the direction There are three reasons for degree of government and control of the company is firmly in its hands. There oversight in this sector. should also be an agreed procedure for Directors in the l Firstly, it is believed that the depositors, particularly furtherance of their duties to take independent professional retail depositors, can not effectively protect advice. themselves as they do not have adequate The Cadbury Report generated a lot of interest in information, nor are they in a position to coordinate India. The issue of corporate governance was studied in with each other. depth and dealt with by the Confederation of Indian l Secondly, bank assets are unusually opaque, and Industries (CII), Associated Chamber of Commerce and lack transparency as well as liquidity. This Industry (ASSOCHAM) and Securities and Exchange condition arises due to the fact that most bank Board of India (SEBI). These studies reinforced the loans, unlike other products and services, are Cadbury Reports focus on the crucial role of the Board usually customised and privately negotiated. and the need for it to observe a Code of Best Practices. l Thirdly, it is believed that that there could be a Co-operative banks as corporate entities possess certain contagion effect resulting from the instability of unique characteristics. Paradoxical as it may sound, one bank, which would affect a class of banks or evolution of co-operatives in India as peoples even the entire financial system and the economy. organisations rather than business enterprises adopting professional managerial systems has hindered growth of As one bank becomes unstable, there may be a heightened perception of risk among depositors for professionalism in co-operatives and proved to be a the entire class of such banks, resulting in a run neglected area in their evolution. on the deposits and putting the entire financial system in jeopardy. THE SPECIAL PLACE OF BANKING The banking sector is not necessarily totally corporate. ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT AND THE REGULATOR Some part of it is, of course, but a segment of banks is Regulators are external pressure points for good mostly government owned as statutory corporations or corporate governance. Mere compliance with regulatory run as cooperatives  just like your bank. Banking as a requirements is not however an ideal situation in itself. sector has been unique and the interests of other stake In fact, mere compliance with regulatory pressures is a holders appear more important to it than in the case of 1102 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 of Co-operative Societies Act / Rules of the state minimum requirement of good corporate governance and concerned and the bye-laws of the respective institutions. what are required are internal pressures, peer pressures and market pressures to reach higher than minimum standards prescribed by regulatory agencies. RBIs BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND THEIR COMMITTEES: approach to regulation in recent times has some features that would enhance the need for and usefulness of good At the initiative of the RBI, a consultative group, corporate governance in the co-operative sector. The aimed at strengthening corporate governance in banks, transparency aspect has been emphasised by expanding headed by Dr. Ashok Ganguli was set up to review the the coverage of information and timeliness of such supervisory role of Board of banks. The recommendations information and analytical content. Importantly, include the role and responsibility of independent non- deregulation and operational freedom must go hand in executive directors, qualification and other eligibility hand with operational transparency. In fact, the RBI has criteria for appointment of non-executive directors, made it clear that with the abolition of minimum lending training the directors and keeping them current with the rates for co-operative banks, it will be incumbent on latest developments. Private sector banks, etc. it is these banks to make the interest rates charged by them unanimously accepted that the most crucial aspect of transparent and known to all customers. Banks have corporate governance is that the organisation have a therefore been asked to publish the minimum and professional board which can drive the organisation maximum interest rates charged by them and display through its ability to perform its responsibility of meeting this information in every branch. Disclosure and regularly, retaining full and effective control over the transparency are thus key pillars of a corporate company and monitor the executive management. Some governance framework because they provide all the of the important recommendations on the constitution of stakeholders with the information necessary to judge the Board are: whether their interests are being taken care of. We in l Qualification and other eligibility criteria for RBI see transparency and disclosure as an important appointment of non-executive directors, adjunct to the supervisory process as they facilitate l Defining role and responsibilities of directors market discipline of banks. including the recommended Deed of Covenant Another area which requires focused attention is to be executed by the bank and the directors in greater transparency in the balance sheets of co-operative conduct of the board functions. banks. The commercial banks in India are now required l Training the directors and keeping them abreast of to disclose accounting ratios relating to operating profit, the latest developments. return on assets, business per employee, NPAs, etc. as also maturity profile of loans, advances, investments, borrowings and deposits. The issue before us now is how MEASURES T AKEN BY B ANKS T OWARDS to adapt similar disclosures suitably to be captured in the IMPLEMENTATION OF BEST P RACTICES audit reports of co-operative banks. RBI had advised Prudential norms in terms of income recognition, Registrars of Co-operative Societies of the State asset classification, and capital adequacy have been well Governments in 1996 that the balance sheet and profit & assimilated by the Indian banking system. In keeping with loss account should be prepared based on prudential st the international best practice, starting 31 March 2004, norms introduced as a sequel to Financial Sector Reforms banks have adopted 90 days norm for classification of and that the statutory/departmental auditors of co-operative NPAs. Also, norms governing provisioning requirements banks should look into the compliance with these norms. in respect of doubtful assets have been made more Auditors are therefore expected to be well-versed with stringent in a phased manner. Beginning 2005, banks will all aspects of the new guidelines issued by RBI and ensure be required to set aside capital charge for market risk on that the profit & loss account and balance sheet of co- their trading portfolio of government investments, which operative banks are prepared in a transparent manner and was earlier virtually exempt from market risk requirement. reflect the true state of affairs. Auditors should also ensure that other necessary statutory provisions and Capital Adequacy: All the Indian banks barring one appropriations out of profits are made as required in terms today are well above the stipulated benchmark of 9 per 1103 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 with improvements in the capability of market players to cent and remain in a state of preparedness to achieve analyse the information objectively. the best standards of CRAR as soon as the new Basel 2 st norms are made operational. In fact, as of 31 March The off-site surveillance mechanism is also active in 2004, banking system as a whole had a CRAR close to monitoring the movement of assets, its impact on capital 13 per cent. adequacy and overall efficiency and adequacy of managerial practices in banks. RBI also brings out the periodic data On the Income Recognition Front,  there is complete on Peer Group Comparison on critical ratios to maintain uniformity now in the banking industry and the system peer pressure for better performance and governance. therefore ensures responsibility and accountability on the part of the management in proper accounting of income Prompt corrective action has been adopted by RBI as as well as loan impairment. a part of core principles for effective banking supervision. As against a single trigger point based on capita adequacy ALM and Risk Management Practices  At the normally adopted by many countries, Reserve Bank in initiative of the regulators, banks were quickly required keeping with Indian conditions have set two more trigger to address the need for Asset Liability Management points namely Non-Performing Assets (NPA) and Return followed by risk management practices. Both these are on Assets (ROA) as proxies for asset quality and critical areas for an effective oversight by the Board profitability. These trigger points will enable the and the senior management which are implemented by intervention of regulator through a set of mandatory action the Indian banking system on a tight time frame and to stem further deterioration in the health of banks the implementation review by RBI. These steps have showing signs of weakness. enabled banks to understand, measure and anticipate the impact of the interest rate risk and liquidity risk, which in deregulated environment is gaining importance. CONCLUSION In the years to come, the Indian financial system will MEASURES T AKEN BY R EGULATOR T OWARDS grow not only in size but also in complexity as the forces CORPORATE G OVERNANCE of competition gain further momentum and financial markets acquire greater depth. I can assure you that the Reserve Bank of India has taken various steps policy environment will remain supportive of healthy furthering corporate governance in the Indian Banking growth and development with accent on more operational System. These can broadly be classified into the following flexibility as well as greater prudential regulation and three categories: supervision. The real success of our financial sector a) Transparency reforms will however depend primarily on the organisational effectiveness of the banks, including co- b) Off-site surveillance operative banks, for which initiatives will have to come c) Prompt corrective action from the banks themselves. It is for the co-operative banks Transparency and disclosure standards are also themselves to build on the synergy inherent in the co- operative structure and stand up for their unique qualities. important constituents of a sound corporate governance With elements of good corporate governance, sound mechanism. Transparency and accounting standards in India have been enhanced to align with international best investment policy, appropriate internal control systems, better credit risk management, focus on newly-emerging practices. However, there are many gaps in the disclosures in India vis--vis the international standards, particularly business areas like micro finance, commitment to better in the area of risk management strategies and risk customer service, adequate automation and proactive policies on house-keeping issues, co-operative banks will parameters, risk concentrations, performance measures, definitely be able to grapple with these challenges and component of capital structure, etc. Hence, the disclosure standards need to be further broad-based in consonance convert them into opportunities. 1104 C M Y K