  SPEECH OF     MINISTER OF STATE FOR COMMUNICATIONS & I T (K)    RELEASE OF POSTAGE STAMP ON    RESERVE BANK OF INDIA    ON     16.1.2010    AT    NEW DELHI  (As prepared for Delivery)  Her Excellency the President of India,   Smt.Pratibha Devisingh Patil,    Honble Union Finance Minister,   Shri Pranab Mukherjee,   Honble Minister of State for Banking and Insurance,   Shri Namo Narain Meena  Governor,  Reserve Bank of India,   Dr D. Subba Rao  Distinguished guests, Today we have gathered to celebrate the Platinum Jubilee Year  of the Reserve Bank of India with the release of a commemorative  postage stamp by Her Excellency, the President of India. It is my  pleasure to be a part of this august gathering on this momentous day.  The Reserve Bank of India, which began its operations on April 1, 1935,  th has entered its 75 year marking a major milestone in its history.  The  Bank was constituted to regulate the issue of Bank Notes, maintain  reserves with a view to securing monetary stabilities and to operate the  credit and currency system of the country.   An interesting feature of the Reserve Bank of India was that at its very  inception, the Bank was seen as playing a special role in the context of  development, especially Agriculture.  When India commenced its Plan  endeavours, the development role of the Bank came into focus,  especially in the sixties, when the Reserve Bank in many ways  pioneered the concept and practice of using finance to catalyse  development.  The Bank was also instrumental in institutional  development and helped set up institutions like the Deposit Insurance  and Credit Guarantee Corporation of India, the Unit Trust of India, the  Industrial Development Bank of India, the National Bank of Agriculture  and Rural Development, the District and Finance House of India etc. to  build the financial infrastructure of the country. To commemorate the Platinum Jubilee Year, the Reserve Bank is also  reaching out to the common man in villages, schools, etc., with a focus  on spreading awareness about the economy in general and the role  and importance of the Reserve Bank in particular, familiarising the  villagers, school children, members of self help groups, farmers clubs,  kisan clubs etc, about the basic functions of the Reserve Bank. Through  these outreach programmes, the Reserve Bank intends to continue its  efforts to fill the gaps to promote inclusive growth and stability. Besides,  the Reserve Bank is also aiming at informing the public, so that they  know what to expect, what choices they have and what rights and  obligations they have in relation to banking services.  Apart from ensuring stability of interest and exchange rates to providing  liquidity and an adequate supply of currency and credit for the real  sector; from ensuring bank penetration and safety of depositors funds,  to promoting and developing financial institutions and markets and  making a difference in the daily life of the common man, the Reserve  Banks role has grown manifold over the years. Apart from these  functional activities, the Reserve Bank has also been generating sound  economic research, data collection and knowledge sharing. Today, the Reserve Bank is the umbrella network for numerous activities,  all related to the nations financial sector, encompassing and  extending beyond the functions of a typical central bank.    The postage stamp which began as a piece of paper as a token of  receipt of postage has assumed additional dimensions. It is a tool for  celebrating and promoting the nations heritage, a paper  ambassador, a grand image of the postal administration and a  statement of the nations sovereignty like currency. The postage stamp  highlights a countrys achievements in various spheres.  By bringing out  commemorative postage stamps, the Department of Posts is  committed to nurture the historical and cultural   heritage of a nation.   Today, it is with pride that we are going to issue a commemorative  postage stamp celebrating 75 years of the Reserve Bank of India.   I request Her Excellency the  President of India, Smt.Pratibha  Devisingh Patil, to kindly release the stamp.   