FOUNDATION OF Elements Practice, Marvin Carnegie Reserve Central Mumbai, October 1 Marvin Carnegie Governor the grateful, to India I monetary worked the and that Fed I banking. least gold the emerge exchange a be needs 1  of 1For Bank archives of improvements scarcely except successes into Historical if banking, perceived deliberately centuries liquidity John Reserve money interest United discretionary pitfalls, disturbances, the hundred how In central 2policy revolutionary output a how monetary practice My focused communication, policy. and experience. good to Strategic The A price with finally collapsed policy. was idea discretionary concerns advantage 3said dictum circles. Unfortunately, policy increasing stop in phase expectations rose, than of was down easier go interest rates In the inflation the go summed watershed [Our] doubt softness 4like momentum...That satisfactory period off...sluggishness getting we would interest over This when unemployment in to Famously, from recession lasted rate acceptable and expansions 2001. years The succeeding policy 5and of needed down makes by To monetary have significant time, expectations. years, scare priority The early before rate point in tightening fall Factors to trigger hesitation appeared 6inflation term which inflation Fed the A 1981 in administration which the the by percent. behind and the the if The bringing inflation percent October points Fed by history 7and creating by This scare, for After long 1987. to inflationary. and under apparently negatively arrangements The founding price First, sufficiently significant Second, the policy. Third, policy 8mandate credibility inflation Fourth, inflation recession. Fifth, maintain to inflation to aggressively, of An era indispensable bank by price economy stop be Tactical My led to focus 9chairman guidance The target, keeping inflation credibility of general decision Moreover, targeting to Committee expenditure Later, U.S. acknowledge prevailing Fed Thus to for The however, strategy central flexibility 10Greenspan Fed only inflation to that A Fed War at the which developments A Greenspan inflation, interest 1993 and actions Greenspan book. States fell of and I role 11by story proud but a rate The Fed inflation interest against 1.75 from officially Research contraction All Fed interest could infrequent Transparency Transparency policy short rates employment, 12bank stabilize actions helping with Often communication objective, anchor rates More transparency bank expected term rates. short call The that day; few interest Since prepare take future and 13One communication interest confidence relevant short output, There are judgments inflation to transparency evermore interest As hoc actions. in committees. of interest and However, because interpreted The provides 14deflationary policy inflation inflation As the surprise unwelcome. putting zone the would The markets and the data. and points And The rational how when 2003 relative could and 15Either implementation create expectations rates. in by adverse If inferred drifted with policy inflation the tolerance about that that Needless ambiguity instance, rate in trigger An following unprecedented 16Greenspan Furthermore, after to fact, for these in monetary on On an inflation that circumstances 2001 2000. aggregate accumulated demanded slight inflation cushion The widening potential Fed reaction in 17Open aggressive. and the inflation can inflation of have earlier for The percent years higher above expansion and Moreover, percent the downturn Central Central is banking. bank that interference 18banks pressure Yet the policy States, policy Euro and In in Committees exchange and the The potentially rate credibility rate export can interest inflation way pressurise monetary economic 19insufficiently the Thus, the creates domestic circumstances. Achilles policy. is have independence concerns exchange Conclusion Central reluctant against the stop Central rate announced indispensable inflation, against term 20to of markets reliable intentions. can articulated Central is Yet price rate stability. 21