 Mint Road Milestones  Talking Points at the Inauguration of NEWSIBITION  Kolkata    1.  I am delighted to inaugurate this Newsibition of the Reserve Bank in this City of Joy.  2. Last year, the Reserve Bank celebrated our Platinum Jubilee.  As part of the  celebrations, we documented the 75 years of the Reserve Bank's history in the form of a  book - Mint Road Milestones. Milestones is rich treasure trove of archival material  including, photographs, news clippings, documents along with a commentary which  weaves them all together in an interesting narrative. In fact, the material that we collected  was so interesting and rare that we thought it would be a great public service to put it up all  in the form of an exhibition and make it accessible to a much wider audience.     3. But why are we setting up the exhibition in Kolkata? Because, Kolkata is where it  all began. The Reserve Banks first central office was located here in this very building. It  is thus appropriate that any effort to document the banks past and project its future be  located here.   4. This exhibition is a part of the Banks outreach efforts to demystify the central  bank. It seeks to introduce the viewer to the broad canvas, considerations and changing  facets of thought that lay behind the Banks policy efforts over the years.   5. The display is divided into nine sections representing different phases in the Banks  evolution. These take the viewer down 75 years of central banking history covering critical  events and policies.   6. The Reserve Bank took birth here in Kolkata on April 1, 1935 as a private  shareholders institution. It shifted to Mumbai shortly thereafter and was nationalized in  1949. Soon after independence, the bank repositioned itself to meet the aspirations of an infant democracy and dovetailed its functions to the demands of a poor country with  ambitious development goals.   7. The 60s were a period of institution building where the Reserve Bank helped  formalize systems for agricultural and industrial credit; catalyzed institutions such as the  State Finance Corporations and helped set up the Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Unit  Trust of India as the first mutual fund, the IDBI as an apex development bank , etc.    8. The 70s saw the nationalization of banks which heralded a new era when banking  was taken from the classes to the masses. This was also the period when banks performed a  critical role in poverty alleviation programmes of the government.   9. In the 80s, we started sowing the seeds of libralisation following the  recommendations of the Sukhomoy Chakrabarty Committee.  We focused on developing  markets in a sequenced and calibrated manner.   10. Early in the 90s, we headed into a balance of payments crisis. The stabilization and  structural adjustment programmes that followed marked an inflexion point in Indias  economic and financial development. Banking sector reforms helped strengthen the  banking system and made it more competitive.   11. The new millennieum brought with it a new momentum where India made a  decisive break from the Hindu rate and shifted onto a higher growth trajectory.  This was  also the period when Basel II norms were adopted, the payments system was substantially  revamped, and the focus shifted to issues of inclusion.  India weathered the global financial  crisis where the Reserve Banks policy response and role brought it into a new public  focus.   12. As we turn into the second decade of the new millennium, our endeavour is to  position the RBI as a knowledge institution; conduct outreach efforts as well as a financial  literacy and inclusion drive; and finally make efforts to document the banks history and  traditions.  13. The 75 year journey of RBI gives us a glimpse of the spirit of the times and the  Policy concerns of the age. We also have delightful anecdotes on the note that never was  . This was a note signed by the first governor Osborne Smith. It was not issued cos  Edward VIIs heart had its reasons. The Kings abdication delayed the note issues of the  Reserve Bank and the first RBI notes were signed by the second governor James Taylor.  14. The exhibition also chronicles anecdotes about the Reserve Banks brush with art  (artists and philistines) and public prudery in the commissioning of the imposing statues of  the Yaksha and Yakshini on the frontage of the Banks New Delhi office. These offended  the sensibilities of many and evoking a host of parliamentary questions.   15. This exhibition tries to document events not only as they happened but also how  the they were viewed by the public at large through media reports. Earlier, the RBI  Monetary Museum documented the history of money in India and served as the focal point  of the Banks public education and outreach endeavours.  16. This is a concept exhibition. We hope to expand and refine it to showcase how the  Reserve Bank contributed to economic policy formulation in the country over time.   17. As the Bank looks forward to the future, we trust that this exhibition would be the  RBIs mite to the cause of financial literacy in India. We trust it will evoke interest and  take banking and finance not only to bankers and students of economics but also to the  common person.    