RESERVE BANK OF INDIA FIRST P. R. BRAHMANANDA MEMORIAL LECTURE by Lord Meghnad Desai Lord Meghnad Jagdishchandra Desai, Professor of Economics at the London School of Economics and Political Science (LSE), is currently the Director of the Centre for the Study of Global Governance, LSE. Born on July 10, 1940 in Baroda, India, he was educated at the University of Bombay. He secured his Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania, USA. He was created Lord Desai of St. Clement Danes in April 1991. DRAINS, HOARDS AND FOREIGNERS: Lord Desai has taught at the London School of Economics since 1965; he was made a DOES THE NINETEENTH CENTURY INDIAN Professor of Economics in 1983 and he established the Centre for the Study of Global ECONOMY HAVE ANY LESSONS FOR THE Governance in 1992. He has been a visiting fellow/professor in various Universities of international repute, and a member of various national and international bodies. He has TWENTY FIRST CENTURY INDIA? also served as a consultant to United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (1966- 68), United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (1967-68), International Coffee Organisation (1966-69), British Airports Authority (1968), Ministry of Industrial Development, Algeria (1973-74) and other organisations. Besides this, he is heading various Committees constituted in the LSE. He has been both the Chair and the President of Islington South and Finsbury Constituency Labour Party in London. Lord Desai has written extensively on a wide range of subjects in Economics, viz. International Political Economy, Marxian Economics, Econometrics, Monetary Economics, Macroeconomics, Economic History, South-Asian studies and Globalisation. He has also worked extensively on issues relating to Indian politics and problems. He authored 7 books, numerous scholarly articles and edited 8 books. From 1984 to 1991, he was co-editor of the Journal of Applied Econometrics. He has been a member of the Editorial Boards of Journal of Economic Surveys, International Review of Applied Economics, Pakistan Journal of Applied Econometrics, Journal of Quantitative Economics, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Ethnic and Racial Studies, Review of Economic Studies and Review of International Political Economy.Governor and Distinguished Guests Introduction: Thank you for doing me the great honour of inviting me to give the Inaugural Brahmananda Memorial Lecture. Brahmananda, or PRB as we often referred to him as, was my teacher and an exemplary person for many of us. As his students we relied on him to teach us, counsel us, often feed us late in the evenings. He  nagged and cajoled us to work but above all made us think independently. He was always an unorthodox economist- classical when all around were neoclassical, favoured a wage goods led growth strategy while all around were enamoured of the Mahalanobis capital intensive one, fiercely patriotic in choosing to stay at home and develop his arguments in a distinctly Indian way and yet widely read in the best literature of economics from around the world. He was also a great editor for the Indian Economic Journal and nursed many talents in that role. But he was above all a superb researcher. It is his monumental monetary history commissioned by the RBI which I shall refer to several times in my lecture. Indeed my Lecture is not only in his memory but concerns th his great volume on the 19 century monetary history. th Money, Income and Prices in 19 Century India [MIP 19] is a mine of information not only on the Indian economy but also on high points of monetary history of many other nations. It is a statistical cornucopia, a storehouse of material on the various Reports on Indian currency as well as the thinking of many British and Indian 1economists. It contains statistical analysis of the data using economy enjoying an export led growth.  There was indeed a drain econometric tools as well as a theoretical and historical discussion of the export surplus to pay Home Charges. The question I want to of the development of India. Brahmananda has written the story of examine is about the likely impact of the drain being eliminated on th Indian economic growth in the 19 century. Indian growth. Indian Economic Growth 1860-1900: The Indian economy was a large one in relative terms. Its population was  256 million in 1861  and the total NDP was Rs. 731 crores, with  It is a story which has been often recounted though without reliable a per capita income of Rs. 28.60. But in Sterling terms the NDP was data. There have been strong views held about the role of British 730 million pounds. By 1899, the population was 296 million, the Imperialism in holding back Indias growth , the burden of the drain, NDP Rs. 1196 and per capita income Rs. 41.20 The Rupee the iniquities of laissez faire policy imposed on a country which depreciated through this period from around  Rs. 10 to Rs. 15 per would have preferred an activist national government. MIP 19  allows Pound. So the 1899 NDP was 797 million Pounds. But in PPP terms, us now to reexamine some of those issues. Needless to say there are the Indian economy was larger than the UK economy in 1871. Angus surprises, some as I shall reveal, not even obvious to the author Maddison has done a lot of comparative and long run growth himself. Again as you would expect from me, my reinterpretation of measurement. His measure is the international PPP Dollar at 1990 th the 19 century story is revisionist but it has lessons for the prices. I shall label it M$. In these terms, in 1871 Indian GDP was st 21 century. M$ 134 billion, while the UK in 1870 had a GDP  of  M$ 100 billion. China alone was larger than India in these terms at M$ 189.7 billion. th How did Indias economy do in the 19 century? The crude In 1913, UK had outstripped India with M$ 224.6 billion compared nationalist version is a story of gloom and doom. The British, we are to Indias M$ 204 billion. China was by then M$ 240 billion. India told,  deindustrialised India, sucked its wealth abroad, distorted its was catching up with China, then at least. economy by integrating it in a world economy and by applying laissez faire principles retarded its growth. MIP 19 discusses the problem The Indian economy grew at about  between 1 % to 1.5 % per of the drain and argues about alternatives to the policy of laissez annum between 1861 and 1900 depending on which of the four faire. But its statistical picture of Indias growth is not one of gloom 1 definitions of income given in MIP 19  you choose. The growth of and doom. Indeed one can say that during the second half of the population was 0.42  % per annum, so per capita income grew th 19 century where the data are best available, India was an open 1  All the data cited in this Lecture unless otherwise explicitly stated are from MIP 19. 2 3between one half to one percent per annum. Angus Maddisons There was also a structural transformation in the economy. Thus, calculations cover a longer period from the Mughal period onwards. the share of agriculture in total income fell from 56.5% to 45.3 %. He shows no growth of per capita income, but  rather a slight decline India had a share in world trade of about 7 %, and it absorbed a in the 250 years from 1600 to 1857  from M$ 550 in 1600 to M$ 520 quarter of the world silver production and around 10 to 15 % its 2 in 1857.  In the years covered by MIP 19,  Maddison shows income gold production. India had a net export surplus of 2 % of NDP in going up from M$ 533 in  1870 to M $ 599 by 1900 implying a 1861 rising to 3.2 % by 1899. But of course of this surplus about growth rate of 0.4 % but as  between 1870 and 1913 as 0.54 per half was taken in Home Charges, from  1.1 % in 1861 rising to as annum. [Maddison, 2001]. Thus Brahmanandas growth numbers much as 2.34 % in 1894 but falling to 2.05 in 1899 (after abandonment are broadly in line with Maddisons. of the silver coinage and adoption of the Gold Exchange Standard). The central question for the nationalists was the adverse impact of Capital stock grew at 2.4% per annum in this forty year period. 3 the drain on the economy. Thus while per capita income growth was between  to 1 %, capital stock per capita grew at about 2 %. A production function regression The Drain : Its Size and Its Burden: for NDP gives the coefficients of Labour land and capital, The drain was a charge for Imperial purchases of British goods and respectively  as 0.37, 0.56 and 0.12. This growth of per capita output services, service charges for past capital investments and pensions was partly due to agricultural growth [0.70% p.a.], mainly due to a of retired British India personnel. The issue of whether the charges modest  expansion of area under cultivation [ by about one third] were justified or not reverberates through the literature but for my and a spectacular advance of industrial production [8.4 % p.a.]. purpose today  I accept PRBs verdict which is C.N.Vakils as well Indeed  industrial production starting at a very low level of 4 in 1861 that about half of the charges were unrequited transfer [MIP 19, reached 99 by 1900 where the base is 1948-49=100. To put p.507]. Dadabhai Naoroji of course developed a powerful critique these rates in perspective, the Indian economy grew at only between of the drain and Brahmanada says, 1.25 % and 1.5 % in per capita terms in the first thirty years after Independence and the growth rate of manufacturing has not been We submit that the Drain theory was a theory, satisfying the sustained at the historic rate of 8.4 % for any forty year patch requirements of a general theory containing an interconnected model since 1900. with applicability for the period  [ p.507]. 2 3  Again Maddison makes the Drain a smaller ratio of NDP at 1.0 % in 1868-1872,  Maddison dollars are international 1990 PPP dollars [Maddison, p.165 for 1.3 %  for 1911-15 and 0.9 % for 1926-30 [Maddison, p.87]. I shall stick with explanation. In rupee terms , the per capita income in 1900 was  Rs. 37 and Rs. 204 PRBs estimates. at 1948-49 prices. Thus one rupee in 1948-49 was worth three PPP dollars ! 4 5The drain was in effect a combination of salaries and pensions paid silver was falling against gold), the domestic burden of servicing the in Sterling as well as materials ( stores) bought in London and interest debt was getting heavier during 1870s and 1880s. It was only when charges for East India company investments and Railway and irrigation in the mid 1890s the Rupee was put on a Gold Exchange Standard investments. MIP 19 shows that the Sterling debt was Rs.105 crores that the burden stabilised. The rupee depreciation helped Indian (100 million Pounds) in 1861, peaking in 1894 to Rs. 234 crores exports, of course, but as UK prices in Gold terms were falling over (130 million Pounds) and in 1899 was Rs 179 crores (119 million the period and Indian prices were rising in silver terms, the real pounds)  Home Charges were Rs. 8 crores in 1861, Rs. 29 crores in exchange rate was not as favourable as it could be. The Drain was 1894 and Rs. 24.5 crores in 1899. As a proportion of NDP, the debt thus as much a problem for the Government of India vis--vis was 13.6 % in 1861 and 15 % in 1899; the drain amounted to between Whitehall as for the nationalist opinion which resented the outflow 1 % and 2.5 % of NDP over the same period, which in contemporary of resources. It is interesting to note here that in the USA at this terms of debt servicing burden is hardly remarkable. Indeed if it was time, there was a strong agitation for a silver reflation of the dollar not for the fact that the creditor foreigners were rulers of India, the and for cheap credit by the farmers and merchants but the bankers debt service charge would hardly have had the emotional impact  it and East Coast industrialists wanted sound money and gold. The did. Thus for example there was no critique of the drain caused by USA also plumped for a Gold Standard and stopped silver coinage. the rulers of the native states as well as the feudal zamindars who The Indian debate on the exchange rate of the Rupee runs parallel indulged in profligate luxury consumption abroad or of imported with this and the outcome was the same in a free as in a slave country- luxury goods at home. This internal drain did not attract the same upward revaluation of the currency. attention since it was native and not foreign rulers who were causing In his book PRB examines the effect of the drain on  the economy. it. Indeed this internal drain has not even been estimated to the best He does this by regressing money supply, net exports, exchange of my knowledge. rate , the Gold Silver price ratio, etc. on the drain and other variables But the strong nationalist feeling was that the quantity of inputs [Chapter 27]. The way of financing Home Charges via sale of council bought and the price paid for them were both not quite what an bills in London obviously affected money supply since these bills independent India would have paid. But apart from that, the Drain were bought by British importers of Indian goods and paid to Indian created problems of repayment because it was incurred in terms of exporters who in turn cashed them in India for silver. But for variables Pound Sterling then based on gold and paid in Rupees based on such as the Gold Silver price ratio which is exogenous to India, it is silver. Since the Rupee was depreciating against the Pound (since not clear why a regression on the drain tells us anything. In a 6 7regression for  the determinants of income,  the real burden of the for interest on the public debt, which is chiefly caused by the British drain even turns out to have a positive and significant coefficient rule [Naoroji, p.131]. [Table 24.1, p.459]. I shall, however, set these regressions aside as I Dadabhais critique was very powerful not least because in the course do not need them either way. of mounting that critique he pioneered the construction of national The time has come to examine this theory of the Drain carefully. income conceptually as well as statistically. Yet in my view, this This is not to question  that there was an unrequited transfer from statement exaggerates the size of the surplus in the economy and India to Britain but I do wish to question that it was crucial to an diverts attention away from the real cause of poverty which is the explanation of Indias underdevelopment. Indeed the Drain theory small size of the surplus itself due to the social and economic structure was not only an impediment to clear thinking about Indias economic which results in low productivity. The problem is that the surplus, growth. It became a general theory of nationalist economic critique drained or not, is inadequate and the task of development policy for of colonial rule and impeded the rapid growth of countries everywhere the leaders of a newly independent country is to raise the surplus 4 in the Third World. and not hope that stopping the drain would cure all. Indian economic thinking was impeded by too much hope that the stoppage of the The Drain theory in effect says that there is investible surplus already drain would cure Indias poverty. This is what explains the slow present in the home country but that it is drained away abroad by the growth in the first thirty years after Independence as I shall argue Colonial power. Come Independence, the drain would vanish  and below. growth would result by using the drain now retained. To quote Dadabhai Naorojis classic statement, First some stylised numbers. Let us suppose that the export surplus of about 3 % of NDP was split 2:1 between drain and home retention.  The chief cause of Indias poverty, misery, and all material evils is Now it is well known that India was also absorbing a vast amount of the exhaustion of its previous wealth, the continuously increasing gold during this period. So we can surmise that around 1 % of NDP exhausting and weakening drain from its annual production by the was being hoarded as gold while 2 % was being drained. For very excessive expenditure on the European portion of all its services, simplicity, I shall assume that the entire sum of the drain  was  an and the burden of a large amount a year to be paid to foreign countries unrequited transfer. So what would have been the change in growth 4 of NDP had the entire Drain be retained and invested ?  The most blatant case of this thinking was in the case of Bangladesh whose leaders argued when it was East Pakistan that it was being kept in poverty because of a drain to West Pakistan. Since independence, one has failed to locate this surplus. 8 9ornaments hoards are estimated as being as much as 50 % of NDP The Capital output ratio was 1.26 in 1861 and rose to 2.28 in 1900, [Table 8.1a, p.213-215]. Between 1861 and 1894 the value of the so let us say around 2 on average. A one per cent of income would hoards grew from Rs. 389 crores to Rs. 576 crores or about 50%. be a half per cent addition to the Capital stock roughly speaking and Just the increment of Rs. 187 crores would have been an extra 8 to given the coefficient of 0.12 for the Capital Stock variable in the 10 % of the Capital stock in any of the years 1861-1894. Thus at income equations in MIP 19, it would lead to  0.12 x 0.5 = 0.06 % half the drain, the hoards if reinvested would have boosted the growth addition to the annual growth rate of  NDP. Thus if the 2 % of NDP rate by 0.06  % per annum. But of course no such investment took drained had been invested entirely into productive investment, it would place. have added  between 0.12  to, let us say,   at most 0.15 to the growth rate of NDP thus raising it from between 1 to 1.5 % to around,  say It could be argued that in the absence of a pro - growth government, 1.15 to 1.65 %, or, in per capita terms, 0.70 to 1.20 %. there was no incentive for people to dishoard, and hence, this is not a fair test. If there had been a nationalist government, it would have This is not a large and dramatic effect and it is a maximal estimate invested in growth. Is that true and had such investment been made, since I take the entire 2 % as unrequited implicitly assuming that all would it have been effective ? the goods and services bought abroad would have been bought at home.  The question is  Would that have been enough to take India The test of that proposition was carried out in the years after out of poverty? Note first that the per capita growth rate between Independence. India had Sterling balances accumulated from the 1947 and 1980 was very much in the range indicated above, and War. These balances amounted to Rs. 1724 crores by end of the 5 poverty by the Head count ratio hardly moved during that period. War in March 1946 and of that sum Rs. 1512 crores [1.134 billion Pounds Sterling] were available to the two independent countries But the more important question is  Had the drain not occurred India and Pakistan in 1947. Of the share India had, after giving would the money have been invested ? Pakistan its share [which caused much debate], what with buying pension annuities, and imports of food and stores, capital outflow It is assumed in the nationalist discourse that investment of the drain only Rs. 621 crores was left by end of 1949, the new Government in productive assets would be automatic. But there are two objections having spent the money in words of C.D. Deshmukh as if there is to that presumption. Firstly, the remaining 1 % from net exports was 6 no tomorrow. After that, there was Sterling devaluation which shrunk hoarded in gold and silver rather than invested. The gold and silver 6   I am grateful to Dr. Jadhav for providing me with material on Sterling balances 5   Maddison puts the growth rate of per capita income at 1.40 % for 1950-1973. which is incorporated here. The responsibility for errors and interpretation is mine. 10 11the purchasing power of the balances in terms of dollars. There for this is the expansion in area cultivated which at around one third followed a pact to spend the balances at a steady rate. By about was more rapid than population growth which was about 16 % over 1957, they had been spent and the Second Five Year Plan faced its the period. Productivity was of course not rising on land but as resources crisis in 1958 and had to be pruned. So what were the 8 irrigated area expanded , agricultural output expanded at Sterling balances spent on? One major use was to buy out British 0.7 % per annum and food grains at 1.04 %. But the effect of exports owned assets and transfer them to Indian hands both private and should also be included here. Since per capita agricultural output 7 public. This was thus not investment but paper transfer of was expanding, some of it was exported. In this period although ownership, satisfying to the nationalist consciousness but not a prices were falling, the World economy was expanding as a market productive use of accumulated surplus. The other was a liberalisation for Indian exports. Britain was also growing in this period although of  imports of consumer goods and some capital goods. It cannot USA and Germany were catching up with it.  Indias share in world be said that the Sterling balances transformed the Indian economy. trade was 7 % according to MIP19. By 1913, India had $ 7 per capita foreign capital ( $ 2.1 billion )  while China had only But more than that, once Independence came, why did the Drain not $3.7 ($ 1.6 billion ). India was plugged into a growing system. stop and replenish the Indian economy?  My view is that by this time, the drain was not very large since there had been import Roots of Indias Pauperisation: substitution both in personnel and goods as between Britain and India. Maddisons estimates put the drain at 0.9 % of NDP for So why did India get its image as a poor country? Of course even 1926-30. This is nearly 30 % down from the level in the 1911-1915 despite the growth of forty years, the absolute level of per capita period. The trend of the economy was downward but even of the income was still low since productivity was low and stagnant. The reduced income the drain as a proportion was lower. Thus by the extra output had come from new land irrigated in Panjab and time Independence came, the drain was a negligible proportion of elsewhere and a bit more from the fledgling industrial growth. But of th NDP; though one presumes, in absence of reliable data, the nationalist course the first fifty years of the 20 century were much less leadership was not to know this. favourable for the Indian economy than the forty years of the th 19 century. The growth rate of per capita of income was negative The period 1860-1900 was thus a period of modest growth but such for 1913-1950; Maddison puts it at 0.22%. Even here the sub periods as had not been seen for the two centuries previously. One reason 8   The colonial government increased the irrigated area about eightfold. Eventually 7  Michael Kidron (1965) Foreign Investment in India [Oxford; Oxford University more than a quarter of the land of British India was irrigated , compared with 5 per Press] cent in Moghul India  [ Maddison, p.115]. 12 13are interesting to examine. Maddisons time series for Indias GDP 3 % (though between 1913 and 1950 Asias share of World Exports shows growth albeit with fluctuations until 1929/30 when income grew from 10.8 % to 14.1 % [Maddison, p.127]). reached M$ 728 from its level of M$ 599 in 1900 th Thus the first half of the 20 century especially the interwar period [a growth rate of 0.65 % per annum].  It is after that in the next 20 th was a period, unlike the 19 century, of stagnation and even years that income declines to M $ 618 by 1947 [ -0.96 % per annum]. retrogression in the Indian economy. India was falling behind Asia in Of course it was also in this period that Indias rate of population its export performance and its per capita income stagnated over the growth stepped up. Thus while between 1860 and 1900 rose from period. Indias picture as a labour surplus country with a largely 256 million to 296 million [MIP19, p.213] by 1946 the rural and poor population comes from this period. Indeed one can population of undivided India was 410 million [0.70 % per annum]. say that India began its withdrawal from world economy during this 9 Hindi hai hum challis karod ! period. This trend continued, was indeed encouraged upon This was also the period in which agricultural growth came to a halt, independence. Indian economic policy became hostile to foreign in area as well as productivity. The data given in MIP 19 say that trade especially once the Sterling balances ran out. This is because industrial output had reached a value of 99 with base 1948-49 as the nationalist logic saw all foreign trade and not just the classic 100. So industrial growth also collapsed, presumably after 1929. Home Charges as a drain of resources. India was to retain all its This was despite a slightly more active industrial policy following output at home, regulate foreign trade exports as well as imports. It the Industrial Commission Report of 1916 as well as tariff autonomy was to develop as a self sufficient economy not integrated into the for India. But the world economy was also shrinking. Trade was world economy. declining due to tariffs and capital movements were drying up. The Ambition and Reality in Independent India : 10 world had de-globalised. Britain was also lagging behind the world in this period unlike in the earlier period. India was plugged into a But before Independence and before the Second World War when stagnant if not shrinking world economy. the Sterling balances accumulated, nationalists were confident that once the foreign rulers had been thrown out, India will be able to be It was during this period that India began losing its share of world prosperous quite rapidly. Thus Nehru summarises the goals as set trade so that by Independence the share was closer to about by the National Planning Committee of the Congress Party as follows : 9  I do not however subscribe to the Malthusian explanation for the slow growth. I cite the population growth figures for simple accounting of the per capita income growth The aim was declared to be to ensure an adequate standard of figures. 10 living for the masses, in other words, to get rid of the appalling  I have dealt with this in Desai (2002). 14 15poverty of the people. The irreducible minimum, in terms of money, suggest for raising productivity on land was expansion of the unit of had been estimated by economists at figures varying from Rs. 15 to cultivation by pooling of land . Rs.25 per capita per monthWe calculated that a really The lack of surplus became obvious in the mid 1950s. Efforts to progressive standard of living would necessitate the increase of the mobilise surplus by taxation along the lines suggested by Prof. Kaldor national wealth by 500 to 600 per cent. This was, however, too big a ran into political resistance. Even Nehrus dream of cooperative jump for us, and we aimed at a 200 to 300 per cent increase within farming ran aground thanks to Charan Singh. Yet the strategy of ten years[Nehru(1945), p.333]. planned development was to invest all in capital goods industry not This quotation tells us how ambitious the leadership thought it could for export but for building up a self sufficient economy immune be. A growth rate of 200 to 300 % over ten years [ 7 to 11 % per from foreign trade. It ended in low growth and the persistence of annum] is to be contrasted with the much more modest goals set out poverty while the Mahalanobis strategy  lasted. Of course in the Plans subsequently, to say nothing about the even more modest Brahmananda was innocent in all this . He did propose a wage goods achievements. A minimum living standard of Rs. 15 in pre - War strategy but his model was not mathematically elegant as the 11 prices would have meant at least twice as much by the mid 1950s. Mahalanobis model was. Thus the poverty level when fixed in the 1960s at Rs. 15 was way Internal Drain and Economic Underachievement : below what would have matched expectations of the Independence movement. The reason for this downward revision is not too far to The lack of surplus put a brake on growth. In the 1950s, once the look. Sterling balances had run out and the good harvest of 1954-55 not repeated, there was inflation. Foreign aid plus deficit financing filled The shock for the planners of post-independence India was to be the gap. Luckily for India, the constraint on agricultural productivity that there was an acute shortage of investible surplus. The expectation was lifted  during the 1960s by the Green Revolution. This was a was that since the surplus was there and would be enhanced by the happy combination of foreign technology and private sector, i.e., drain ending, the priority was how to allocate the resources to farmers response to some government incentives. The windfall of industrial development. The real issue was the lack of surplus due to the Green Revolution was hors du plan Thus a possibility existed the low productivity in agriculture. Here again agrarian policy concentrated on land reform and hence the issue of distribution of 11  I have discussed this in my article in the Manmohan Singh festschrift . See Desai the surplus rather than its enhancement. The only policy it could (1998) also reprinted in Desai (2004) 16 17of lifting the Indian economy to a high growth path once the food surplus financed industrial investment. But since the industries grain constraint had been lifted. But there was an internal drain to enjoyed no comparative advantage and were largely loss making, the contend with. Brahmananda is eloquent about this in the concluding investment did not lead to rapid growth or elimination of poverty. paragraph of his Chapter 27 on the impact of the drain. Let me Indias per capita income did not regain its pre - Independence peak quote him : of 1929 till 1960 according to Maddisons figures. Poverty numbers The new dimension on poverty has no direct relation to Naorojis did not begin to move down till twenty years later during the 1980s. analysis but there can exist an internal drain, which potentially keeps But by then one important plank of Indias economic dogma had large portions of population below the poverty line. Such a drain been abandoned. The fear of foreign borrowing had been removed can be inbuilt in economic policy formulation and in planning by the time Mrs. Indira Gandhi came back to power in 1980. India strategies [MIP 19, p.519]. abandoned the goal of self sufficiency,  i.e., the belief  that there was enough investible surplus at home. Foreign debt went up from $ 20 As an early and prescient opponent of the Mahalanobis strategy, billion to $ 83 billion over the 1980s [Maddison, p.166]. There was PRB was entitled to point to this internal drain but he does not a drain of course; the debt had to be serviced. But the GDP growth further specify what it is but goes on to talk in general terms about rate improved from around 3.5 % in the 1950-1980 period to 5.5 % contracts and exploitation. Let me spell out what the internal drain is. in the 1980s. But the growth was not export oriented as was the case th in the 19 century. There was not a sufficient export surplus to This is made up of diverting the surplus into capital intensive industries th service the Home Charges of  20 century. So the economy crashed which were surplus absorbing rather than surplus enhancing [ loss in 1991. making in other words ] and into public sector employment at real th wages rising faster than the real growth rate of the economy as they There is also parallel to the 19 century a hoard but again it is an have done till very recently.  Although the public sector labour force internal hoard whereby people hoard cash in large amounts. Its accounted for only 15 % of the labour force, it absorbed a lot of the estimates vary but it is not less than the 50 % of GDP proportion th surplus. With other forms of internal drain- subsidies costing nearly that the 19 century hoard of gold attained. Part of this so called 15 % of GDP, the drain assumes alarming proportions. Industry black money enters the circuit of expenditure in real estate, films and enjoyed a positive tariff of around 45 % and agriculture a negative crime related activities but a large proportion is just hoarded. It is as tariff of about 20 %. Thus as in the Soviet Five Year Plan, agricultural much of a drain as the other one. Since independence governments 18 19th have not only not reinvested the drain effectively but created a new With the 19 century drain, no one was certain if the benefit exceeded and larger one. Add to it the internal hoard [ though this may involve the cost and since the rulers were foreign the suspicion was that any some double counting ].  India is wasting a much larger part of GDP investment they made was not beneficial. While I did not question st than when Dadabhai spotted the drain. Perhaps the consolation is that proposition, it is worth pointing out that in the 21 century, that the wastage is not by foreigners but by Indians themselves. India enjoys some advantage in the globalisation game because of the English language as well as the legal system that the British st Lessons for the 21 Century: imposed on India. Not all the railways and canals were entirely useless. One should perhaps now sit down and do a careful analysis Since the Indian economy crashed in 1991 and changed its course of the returns to investments made then and compare it to the cost things have improved tremendously. The growth rate of total and to get a better estimate of the unrequited proportion of the drain. per capita income is now respectable. Nehrus dream of doubling st income in ten years required a growth rate of 7 % per annum and But the lesson for the 21 century is clear. Any drain internal or this is now for the first time in fifty seven years after independence external should be minimised if not eliminated. A nation where even th attainable. As in the 19 century, the economy is becoming export after nearly six decades of independence a quarter of the population oriented though as yet Indias share of world exports is nowhere is poor cannot afford to waste resources. The internal drain has to 12 near what it was then. The pattern of capital import in the Gandhi- be cut. This means budget deficits and for that purpose subsidies th Gandhi decade of 1980s was very much like that in the 19 century- which are all regressive. But its also means eliminating the hoards at high and fixed interest rates. What is needed is foreign direct and harnessing them for development. Let me finally turn to that investment as equity rather than debt. This is the new pattern of problem. st capital imports in the 21 century globalisation as against the fixed th interest borrowings of the 19 century. China has shown how much Harnessing the Hoards : can be borrowed this way. Thus the drain will be there only if the Since I am enjoying the hospitality of a Central Bank, let me try out imported capital benefits the economy, i.e., if it generates profits, if a policy proposal. The excessive hoards are an example of acute it is surplus generating. liquidity preference. In the past various schemes have been tried to make hoarders disgorge without much success.  Now one way to 12  As I write this, the new trade policy aims to double the share from 0.9 to 1.8 % by tackle such liquidity preference is to do what Silvio Gessell 2009. It is to be hoped that the policy succeeds. 20 2113 prescribed. He of course advocated stamping money frequently, small recompense for the kind honour you have done me in inviting e.g. monthly, to preserve its value thus taxing hoarding. This is rather me to give this inaugural lecture. inconvenient. I would propose periodic, say  quinquennial, renewal References: of the currency.  The present currency should   be replaced, one for one, for a new currency every five years. Bank deposits are of course Ahluwalia, Isher and I.M.D.Little [1998] Indias Economic Reforms no problem and can be automatically converted into the new currency. and Development [ Delhi; Oxford University Press] But cash hoards should be convertible at variable rates. Thus up to th Brahmananda, P.R. [2001] Money, Income, Prices in 19 Century a certain limit reasonably required for transaction purposes, say  up India:A Historical, Quantitative and Theoretical Study [ Mumbai, to one million rupees per person, the conversion should be one to Himalaya Publishing] one and automatic. Beyond that conversion should be permitted only if the holder can prove that tax has been paid  on the income. Desai, Meghnad [1998] Development Perspectives : Was There An Otherwise they should be offered zero interest bonds in exchange Alternative to Mahalanobis ? in Ahluwalia and Little (1998) , also for their hoards. These bonds can of course be traded after a decent reprinted in Desai (2004) interval of the reissue. [2002] The Possibility of DeGlobalisation, in Dolfsma and This scheme is designed to plough the hoards into government Dennereuther (2002) coffers by way of bonds sold. If the hoards are anything like 50 % [2004] Development and Nationhood : Essays in Political Economy of GDP  then the sale should realise a hefty sum enough to retire a of South Asia [Delhi; Oxford University Press] substantial part of the National Debt. It is of course a tax on hoarding. When the bonds are cashed in a rush by the hoarders the market will Dolfsma,W. and C.Dennereuther (eds.)[2002] Globalisation, price them down. Thus the tax on hoarding will be market Inequality and Social Capital [Aldershot, Edward Elgar] determined. Then this scheme is to be repeated every five years or so to discourage rehoarding. Governor I offer you my scheme as a Gessell, Silvio [1929] The Natural Economic Order, translated by Philip Pye [Berlin; Neo-Verlag] 13  Silvio Gessells ideas contained in his book The Natural Economic Order were given publicity by Keynes who praised him in The General Theory as being better Kidron, Michael [1965] Foreign Investment in India [ Oxford; Oxford than Marx in understanding capitalism. Keyness hope that Gessell will be read more University Press] than Marx in the future has not been fulfilled. 22 23Maddison, Angus [2001] The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective [Paris; OECD] Naoroji, Dadabhai [1901/1962] Poverty and UnBritsh Rule in India [ Reprinted, Delhi; Government of India Publications] Nehru, Jawaharlal [1945] The Discovery of India [London; Bodley Head] 24