The Reserve Bank of India: Pulling every lever | The Economist Page 1 of 5 The Reserve Bank of India  Pulling every lever  Indias central bank is one of its best institutions. It is also  complicit in a government-borrowing binge  Feb 4th 2012 | MUMBAI | from the print edition ONE of  the  perks of  being  governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is the use of a colonial  bungalow on Carmichael Road, a posh street that weaves along a ridge  in south Mumbai. On one side live some of Indias richest industrialists,  modern-day pharaohs with flashy architectural tastes. On the other, a  stones throw down a cliff, is a small sluma monument to desperation  and government failure. Both sets of neighbours are part of the 1.2  billion population that Indias central bank must look out for. In normal  times this is a task that would furrow the brow; now that the countrys  boom is faltering, it risks causing a blinding headache.  Judging by the numbers, the RBI is among the worlds best central  banks. Its record on balancing growth and inflation is decent enough  http://www.economist.com/node/21546004/print 13-02-2012The Reserve Bank of India: Pulling every lever | The Economist Page 2 of 5 (see chart 1). Since 1995 wholesale  prices have risen by an average of 6% a  year, not too far from the RBIs comfort  zone of about 5%. Growth has averaged  7% a year. The RBI is also in charge of  the safety of the financial system, to  which end it yanks more levers than  Willy Wonka in a chocolate factory. Its  record here is excellent. Despite a  current-account deficit that leaves India  vulnerable to global jitters, the country  sidestepped the 1997 Asian crisis (nobody gave us a chance, recalls a  former governor) and the Wests banking crisis in 2008. The RBI also  coped with big and potentially destabilising capital inflows in the  euphoric years before Wall Street began to totter, and has avoided a  domestic financial crisis despite fast growth in banks assets for many  years.  Some fancy the RBI is a model for the kind of full-service central bank  that is back in fashion worldwideboth the Federal Reserve and the  Bank of England, among others, are now in charge of financial stability  as well as interest rates. In truth, it would be hard to run a rich  economy the way the RBI does India, with its financial system only  partly liberalised. But the central bank has new clout abroad and at  home its stock is high.  Under the present governor, Duvvuri Subbarao, a softly spoken figure,  it has made a tough series of rate rises in the past two years to try to  curb a stubborn spell of inflation (a battle that may not be over). And  although the bank finds it hard to tempt star graduates to work in its  tower overlooking Mumbai harbourif you look at its people and those  of the Fed, theres no comparison, laments one bigwigrelative to  most Indian state bodies the RBI has more brains, muscle and  integrity. It is about the only institution in the country you never hear  accused of graft.  Thats a big turnaround for a body that became a politicians plaything  after India nationalised its banks in 1969. For two decades the state  controlled lending and also fixed as many as 200 separate interest  rates. It used the RBI as a piggy bank, forcing it to print money to  finance its short-term needs. After 1991, when a balance-of-payments  crisis led India to deregulate, the central bank rediscovered its spine.  http://www.economist.com/node/21546004/print 13-02-2012The Reserve Bank of India: Pulling every lever | The Economist Page 3 of 5 Agreements fully enacted in 1997 and 2006 stopped the state using it  as an ATM, and as interest rates were liberalised and the bond market  developed, the RBI began to look more like a normal central bank,  setting short-term policy rates to try to balance inflation and growth.  This journey never reached the destination that was until recently in  vogue in the Westthat of a statutorily independent central bank  narrowly focused on setting interest rates and targeting inflation. The  RBIs independence is not enshrined in law, although none of the four  central-bank governors since 1992, interviewed by The Economist for  this article, raised this as a big concern. The RBI consults the  government but it has enough breathing-space to set rates as it  pleases, they say.  And like a triumphant wearer of flares that have at last come back in  fashion, the RBIs wide remitminting coins, managing the exchange  rate, acting as banker for the government, and supervising banks and  the bond marketis now seen as a template. These responsibilities  helped it deal with the 2008 crisis: in short order it defended the  currency, loaned money to cash-strapped banks, gave forbearance on  troubled loans, soothed the bond market and eased banks capital  requirements. Today a process of constant tweaking continues. In  December, after a panicky fall in the rupee, the RBI introduced several  obscure measures to bolster it, such as making it more attractive for  Indians resident abroad to deposit money in the homeland.  Such fiddling has a cost. In 2007 an official report on making Mumbai a  global financial centrea work of great imaginationidentified nit- picking and suspicion of foreign financiers (who are welcome to buy  shares in India but not to play in debt markets) as a big problem. In  2009 an official review of finance chaired by Raghuram Rajan, a former  chief economist of the IMF, worried that conservative regulation was  inhibiting Indias potential. One local bank boss says the RBI runs a  repressed financial system which is intolerant towards innovation. If the  US was at 90 out of 100 in terms of complexity and sophistication, we  are at 10I sometimes get the impression it [the RBI] is resting on its  laurels, not realising that more financial innovation could help Indias  development.  Still, after years of financial convulsions abroad it is hard to say that  the RBI has got the balance between safety and thrills wildly wrong.  Indeed, the thing that endangers India today is not its financial markets  but its government.  http://www.economist.com/node/21546004/print 13-02-2012The Reserve Bank of India: Pulling every lever | The Economist Page 4 of 5 Heady talk of 9-10% as Indias new natural rate of growth is long gone.  Many blame the government, which has not passed a significant reform  for years while running a fiscal deficit of almost a tenth of GDP,  including the states and off-balance-sheet items (see chart 2). The  deficitwhich began as an electoral giveaway in 2007, morphed into a  stimulus package and is now just a product of indiscipline and populist  politicsis widely seen as bad for India. Government borrowing crowds  out the private sector, which has to live with higher interest rates than  might otherwise be the case. Because the state is less likely than  private business to spend the cash on investment, it does less to boost  the economys potential.  At the RBI the boom of 2003-07, when growth was near double-digits  and inflation comfortable, is now seen as a distinct era during which the  deficit was falling, bullish firms were investing freely, a critical mass of  reforms were in the bag and the state was productively solving day-to- day problems. Those conditions do not exist today. The central banks  rule of thumb for the non-inflationary rate of growth has fallen to 8%,  but that seems to bake in an assumption that the political class will  recover its wits. If, hypothetically, that does not happen, insiders at the  RBI accept that trend growth could be significantly lower. Bears outside  the central bank talk of 6%.  The uncomfortable question for the RBI is whether it is partly  responsible for the slowdown, albeit indirectly. If you have a central  bank that always gets you home safely at the end of the night the  temptation for politicians may be to go crazy. The RBIs position is  especially delicate on the fiscal deficit. The central bank oversees a  financial system that is a conduit for funnelling savings into government  bonds, 70% of which are owned either by the central bank or by the  banking system, which remains dominated by state-owned lenders.  Although the ratio has come down, the RBI still forces banks to invest  24% of their core deposits in government bonds, far above what is  needed to give banks a safety buffer of liquid assets. This creates  captive demand for public borrowing (although during an economic soft  patch such as todays, cautious banks may voluntarily hold more than  the minimum). The RBI also buys government bonds in the market. It  argues this makes markets work smoothly, but most outsiders think the  aim is to put a lid on government-bond yields. A spike in yields in  November has been followed by a big, $14 billion RBI bond-purchase  programme.  http://www.economist.com/node/21546004/print 13-02-2012The Reserve Bank of India: Pulling every lever | The Economist Page 5 of 5 The RBI is thus in the weird position of publicly rebuking the  government about its deficits while being the guarantor that they are  financed. An extreme remedy would be for it to stop buying nearly so  many bonds and to ease the rules on banks bond holdings. Without  captive buyers interest rates would rise, perhaps by a percentage point  or two. Some doubt whether the politicians would pay any attention their appetites are insensitive to the governments borrowing costs, it is  argued. But the RBI would still probably like to try; in December 2010  it cut the liquidity requirement from 25% to 24%. The trouble is,  anything more dramatic might be seen as meddling in politics and could  prompt a bond-market rout that endangers stability.  Prop trading  In this respect, as with its strong supervisory record, the RBI may have  lessons for the world. Other central banks, including the euro zones,  are propping up sovereign-bond markets. Mr Rajan talks of the conceit  that central banks are independent. When they find that the  governments are not going to budge [on cutting their deficits] few feel  able to just walk away. In a speech on February 1st, Mr Subbarao, the  RBIs governor, worried that in the presence of large sovereign  borrowingcentral banks typically have little choice.  One possibility is that slower growth, high borrowing and lack of reform  might eventually prompt a fiscal or balance-of-payments scare that  even the RBI, with its impressive array of tools, struggles to keep a lid  on. That might frighten the political class enough to act. The more  benign scenario is that politicians will anticipate this risk and act  spontaneously to get Indias public finances back on track. But politics  is one thing Indias central bank cannot control. As he settles down at  his villa to watch the sun set over the metropolis of Mumbai, all the  governor of the RBI can do is cross his fingers.  from the print edition | Finance and economics Copyright  The Economist Newspaper Limited 2012. All rights reserved. Legal disclaimer    Accessibility Privacy policy Terms of use Help  http://www.economist.com/node/21546004/print 13-02-2012