I must compliment the organisers for convening this Conference and thank them for inviting me to be here.  Perhaps, you could not have chosen a better moment to have an inaugural announced earlier this week is a However, recognising the contemporary interest in the implications of the borrowing As per the latest estimates for 1999-2000, in the Budget, the future borrowing requirements of the Central Government till this month end are in the range of Rs.4000 to Rs.5000  There have also been speculations that all this remaining borrowing needs of the Central element of private placement. RBI sees no basis for such assumptions, when the actual On the borrowing programme for next year, i.e. 2000-2001 ,  the net borrowing is marginally less than the current year, though the gross amount to be raised is somewhat higher. Given the recent experience of significant slippages in the budgeted programme, the first issue that arises relates to how realistic the estimate is.  Both, in the previous and current year, there have been political and economic uncertainties, be it in global or domestic scene  such as elections, Asian crisis, sanctions, Kargil, etc.  There is now reason to believe that such uncertainties are behind us.  We observe that some analysts have already described the next years borrowing programme as based on realistic estimates.  Operationally, therefore, the Further, since the RBI has equipped itself with several innovative instruments and institutional arrangements, the functioning of Government securities market should be far more efficient and smoother than it has been so far, especially if there are no unforeseen is a landmark for fixed income market dealers.  These are worth exploring since their policy and regulation of the financial system.  In this context, he said that he intended to up an Internal Group to identify the legislative changes that are desirable at this stage of economic reform.  You will recall that a few months back, in a  Assembly at , I had stated that the RBI intends to move towards the statutory minimum with reference to CRR in the medium term as also bring amendments to lower the statutory up. Kathmandu forex bring to Parliament proposals for amending the relevant legislation.  The RBI had already set become necessary to accord greater operational flexibility to the RBI for conduct of monetary The Finance Minister has expressed that in the fast changing world of modern finance it has significance is perhaps, yet to be fully appreciated. As mentioned, at the beginning of this address, there are several reasons as to why this budget uncertainties. tasks could be less daunting in the future than it has been so far. requirements of Government of India as well as instruments and methods are yet to be firmed Government in the current fiscal year will be raised through auction only, thus excluding any Centre or States should not be met as smoothly this month as it has been until now. the  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) sees absolutely no reason as to why the borrowing needs of crore. programme of Government as announced in the budget, I will spend a few minutes on it. of the latest Budget for fixed income markets. market reform in India.  The main focus of todays address would, therefore, be on the impact of healthy fixed income markets in India.  The Budget ushers in the most comprehensive debt landmark and, indeed a watershed, in heralding an enabling environment for the development meet of dealers in Fixed Income markets.  The latest Budget  Friends, Budget 2000 and Fixed Income Markets*minimum itself in respect of both CRR and SLR.   Naturally, this will be one of the defining it in terms of exclusion of items; vesting  with RBI  the power to declare securities eligible for SLR purpose; making of enabling provision for a future separation of monetary and debt management functions and empowering the  RBI to notify institutions for inclusion The Budget has also indicated the replacement of the old Public Debt Act, 1944  with a Government Securities Act.  The proposal seeks to recognise electronic mode of transfer of title of Government Securities.  It would also facilitate pledging of securities without actual transfer.  In other words, the proposal seeks to be consistent with modern trading practices and technological development including RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement).  Substantial Though not strictly a part of Budget, you are aware of day before yesterdays announcement regarding the repeal of the 1969 Notification, which had banned forward trading. I  had referred to this issue a number of times in the past.   The Government had recently amended of responsibility between the RBI and SEBI.  Follow-up notifications by RBI and SEBI have already been issued yesterday. These developments have paved the way for introduction of when-issued market for PDs in the near future.  We should be in a position to issue detailed The Budget made a reference to Credit Information  Bureau. This is based on the recommendations of a Working Group set up by RBI.  There are already reports of interest from some banks and institutions to set up such a Bureau and the RBI also had informal soundings on the subject.  The Bureau will improve the transparency regarding the The Finance Minister also stated that a portion of disinvestments proceeds would be earmarked for retiring Government debt.  The modalities of this proposal are yet to be worked out in detail, and possible link with a proposal for Sinking Fund is yet to be The withdrawals of  interest tax in this Budget is also a significant measure as it leads to reduction in the transaction cost of banks, and the price, to the extent the tax is passed on to borrowers through interest rates. The Government has foregone a revenue of over Rs.1000 crore as a result of this measure.  Gains to the financial system as a consequence would be significantly higher than Rs.1000 crore because of savings on account of transaction and Clarification regarding  Stamp Duty  on dematerialised debt instruments has been long overdue and is reported to have been fully resolved in the latest Finance Bill introduced with Now, a word on Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA).  A statement of paramount importance in the Budget is `For medium term management of the fiscal deficit we also need the support of a strong institutional mechanism embodied in a Fiscal Responsibility Act.  The Working Group on FRA met in the RBI yesterday to discuss the draft legislation.  The matter is likely to be considered in a couple of weeks by Dr.Sarma Committee, the Committee to which 2 expeditious processing of this matter. reference  in the Budget speech. We should expect high priority and Finance Minister made a  clarification  is bound to give a fillip to secondary market debt trading. the Budget.  Such a  compliance costs. examined.  In any event, this is a noteworthy development. creditworthiness of market participants and thus facilitate healthy financial markets. guidelines on some of these matters very soon. the Securities Contract Regulation Act and it has now issued a statement delineating the areas Secretaries, we expect the Bill to be passed in the Parliament soon. work has already been completed on this front.  In the light of discussions with State Finance in the banking system for computation of liabilities of a banking company/cooperative bank. include  empowering the RBI to define constitution of demand and time liabilities rather than legislative changes that will be sought.  Other major recommendations of the Working GroupIn brief, the RBI has reason to be highly appreciative of the Budget initiatives on financial markets and we propose to complete submission of all necessary draft legislative proposals, as a follow-up of the  Budget within six to eight weeks to enable early enactments in the Parliament. Hence, it will be deeply appreciated if market participants may please make In this background, let me briefly mention what we in the RBI expect to benefit from this Second, of immediate significance, we seek your views on budget related issues that I mentioned, in particular, the contemplated legislative changes and appropriate regulatory Third, several policy changes such as Liquidity Adjustment Facility; changes in institutional as  clearing and settlement systems; changes in debt market operations of RBI such as two way  quotes; and procedural aspects of repo market; etc. are under Fourth, and the most significant, relates to retailing of Government Securities on which we The next monetary policy statement is due in April.  Obviously, while we are not in a position to state what it would be like, you are in a position to advice and we are willing to listen.  I hope this Conference will give an opportunity to exchange views - informal, well * Inaugural address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, at the First Annual Conference  Action Plan 2000  organised by FIMMDA and PDAI at Goa on March 4, 2000. He is thankful to Dr.A.Prasad for his 3 valuable assistance. Thank you informed and in a professional manner. We value your views on all these matters. are still groping. contemplation and we need your inputs on all these. arrangements such  from  RBI. These may be deliberated here and views communicated to us soon. notifications  for future annual conferences. fora for interaction through this, and prepare modalities establish  an effective First, we could  Conference. suggestions as soon as possible.