Address by C. Rangarajan Governor, Reserve  Bank of India at the Bankers' Training Centre of  the Nepal Rastra Bank Kathmandu on 18th May  1997    Address by C. Rangarajan Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bankers' Training Centre of  the Nepal Rastra Bank Kathmandu on 18th May 1997   Financial Sector Reforms: The Indian Experience  I. Introduction   1. In any economy, the financial sector plays a major role in the mobilisation and allocation  of savings. Financial institutions, instruments and markets which constitute the financial  sector act as a conduit for the transfer of financial resources from net savers to net  borrowers, i.e. from those who spend less than they earn to those who earn less than  they spend.   2. The financial sector performs this basic economic function of intermediation essentially  through four transformation mechanisms :   i. liability-asset transformation (i.e.,accepting deposits as a liability and converting  them into assets such as loans);   ii. size-transformation (i.e., providing large loans on the basis of numerous small  deposits);   iii. maturity transformation (i.e., offering savers alternate forms of deposits according  to their liquidity preferences while providing borrowers with loans of desired  maturities); and   iv. risk transformation (i.e., distributing risks through diversification which  substantially reduces risks for savers which would prevail while lending directly in  the absence of financial intermediation).   3. The process of financial intermediation supports increasing capital accumulation through  the institutionalisation of savings and investment and as such, fosters economic growth.  The gains to the real sector of the economy therefore depend on how efficiently the  financial sector performs this basic function of financial intermediation.   4. A distinction is often made in the literature between operational efficiency and allocational  efficiency; while the former relates to transaction costs, the latter deals with the  distribution of mobilised funds among competing demands. Sustained improvement of  economic activity and growth is greatly enhanced by the existence of a financial system  developed in terms of both operational and allocational efficiency in mobilising savings  and in channelling them among competing demands. In addition, functional efficiency of a  financial system must be judged in terms of (a) the soundness of the appraisals as  measured by the level of overdues, (b) the resource cost of specific operations, and (c)  the quality and speed of delivery.   This is an update of author's Fourth SICOM Silver Jubilee Memorial Lecture delivered at  Mumbai on 29th July 1996. of services. Both operational and allocational efficiency, to a  large extent, are influenced by market structure and the regulatory framework, and on  both grounds the central bank has an important role to play in a developing economy like  India.  II. Financial Sector Reforms - The Global  experience  5. The process of changing the character and structure of financial markets has in many  ways been a global phenomenon, though the motivations for reforming domestic financial  markets have varied from country to country. Issues of financial sector liberalization and  reform, including elements such as effective bank supervision, changing banking  regulations, interest rates policies, etc., have received attention not only among  developing countries but also a large number of developed countries. The debt crisis of  the early '80s and a series of financial crisis witnessed, particularly, during the 1980s,  accentuated the move towards adopting measures to impart greater depth, liquidity and  stability to the international financial markets. According to the BIS more than 30  Governments across the world have had to help their financial institutions in distress over  the last 10 years or so and also bring about consequent changes in their regulatory  environment and market structure.   6. The reform of the financial sector in the industrially advanced countries was triggered to a  major extent by the global isation of banks and the financial markets. The globalisation  trend began at the end of '60s and '70s and was influenced by factors such as restrictive  regulations on banking, like Regulation Q in the United States. In fact, the creation of the  Euro dollar market was perhaps a precursor to the creation of freer and market driven  financial systems. Further, the collapse of the Brettonwoods system had ushered in an  era of floating exchange rates in most countries. The subsequent abolition by several  countries of capital controls resulted in the development of strong cross-border flows and  trading. Simultaneous technological advances in the financial sector strengthened the  information resources of banks enabling them to offer real time buying and lending of  financial assets, creating profit and loss opportunities throughout the day. These trends  were reinforced by the growth of strong competition among institutions especially from  the non-bank financial institutions. With the distinction between banks and non-banks  coming down, several restrictions specific to the banking sector got dismantled.   7. These developments however raised the level of risk being handled by the global  financial system. While risk rose, the margins decreased. Response to increasing  competition and decreasing margins came in the form of financial product innovations  engineered particularly so as to remain off-balance sheet.   8. Greater opportunities, competitive pressures, financial deregulation and liberalization  however led to a tendency on the part of the banks and financial institutions to over  extend their lending and investment decisions, such as, by accepting debtors of lower  credit worthiness in an attempt to maintain profitability. In the mid 80s, these forced the  monetary authorities to strengthen the regulations and raise capital requirements which  came to be popularly known as the `Basle norms'. Rules were laid down for reporting  non-balance sheet items and prescribing higher risk capital to cover contingencies.   9. Apart from the general objective of improving the working of the financial system,  financial sector reforms in many developing countries in Latin America and Asia, were  introduced as part of an overall programme of economic stabilisation. In some of the  Latin American countries, financial sector reforms were initiated as early as from the  middle of 1970s but in most of the countries this phenomenon gained prevalence in the  mid '80s. While in some countries financial sector reforms helped in the strengthening of  the financial system, some other countries had to initially face some setbacks.   10. A recent study draws the following lessons from the experience of several developing  countries which introduced financial liberalisation programmes. First, a minimal system of  prudential regulation is necessary before embarking on financial sector reforms. Second,  the speed and nature of interest rate liberalisation has to take into account the pace with  which problem banks and their debtors can be restructured. Recapitalising the weak  banks and restructuring their portfolios must receive attention in this context. Third, the  success of the financial liberalisation programmes critically depends upon maintaining macro economic control during the reform period. Fourth, introduction of convertibility  should move from trade to current to capital account.   III. Background of Financial Sector Reform in  India  11. The financial sector reforms currently underway in India must be seen as a component,  of the overall scheme of structural reforms. The overall package is aimed at enhancing  the productivity and efficiency of the economy as a whole and also in creasing  international competitiveness. The reforms are comprehensive in scope covering besides  financial sector reforms, several other components of economic policy including,  liberalisation and deregulation of domestic investment, opening up of key infrastructure  areas hitherto reserved for the public sector for private sector participation, opening up  the economy to foreign competition by reducing protective barriers such as import  controls and high tariff, encouraging direct foreign investment as a source of technology  upgradation and also as a source of non-debt finance for investment, reform of the public  sector to impart greater efficiency of operations and reform of the tax system to create a  structure with moderate rates of tax, broader base of taxation and greater ease of  administration. All these reforms are closely inter-related, and progress in one area helps  to achieve objectives in others. Since the reforms are being introduced in a phased  manner the extent of progress differs from area to area. Importance of the financial sector  reforms in this structured package needs to be delineated clearly. Structural reforms in  areas such as industrial and trade policy can succeed only if resources are redeployed  towards more efficient producers which are encouraged to expand under the new  policies. This reallocation is possible only if the financial system plays a crucial supportive  role. The reforms in the banking sector and in the capital markets are aimed precisely at  achieving this primary objective.   12. The Indian financial system comprises an impressive network of banks and financial  institutions and a wide range of financial instruments. There is no doubt that there has  been a considerable widening and deepening of the Indian financial system, particularly  in the last two decades. The extension of banking and other financial facilities to a larger  cross-section of the people stands out as a significant achievement.   13. Despite the overall progress made by the financial system in terms of geographic and  functional coverage, the balance sheet of the performance of the banking sector was a  mixed one - strong in widening the credit coverage but weak as far as viability and  sustainability was concerned. It was against this background that the financial sector  reform was initiated aimed at addressing the causal factors both internal and external to  the system.   IV. Financial Sector Reforms in India:  Philosophy and Strategy  14. The ongoing financial sector reform programme aims at promoting a diversified, efficient  and competitive financial sector with the ultimate objective of improving the allocative  efficiency of available resources, increasing the return on invest ments and promoting an  accelerated growth of the real sector of the economy.   15. More specifically, the financial sector reform programme seeks to achieve the following:   i. suitable modifications in the policy framework within which various components  of the financial system operate, such as rationalisation of interest rates, reduction  in the levels of resource pre-emptions and improving the effectiveness of directed  credit programmes;  ii. improvement in the financial health and competitive capabilities by means of  prescription of prudential norms, recapitalisation of banks, restructuring of  weaker banks, allowing freer entry of new banks and generally improving the  incentive system under which banks function;   iii. building financial infrastructure relating to supervision, audit, technology and legal  framework; and,   iv. upgradation of the level of managerial competence and the quality of human  resource of banks by reviewing the policies relating to recruitment, training, and  placement.   16. There are certain `commandments' or pre-requisites for systemic reform of the financial  sector. First and foremost, macroeconomic stabilisation is a must during the reform  process. Fiscal and external policies must support monetary policy in maintaining the  overall macroeconomic balance. Secondly, during the reform period, prudential regulation  must be introduced and adhered to in order to help safeguard against a financial crisis  and prevent the undermining of monetary control and macroeconomic adjustment.  Thirdly, the Government must simultaneously implement wide-ranging reforms in other  sectors, specially those which require support from the financial system to get the best  results.   V. Salient Features of Financial sector reform  in India  17. In conformity with the broad philosophy and strategy for reform, salient features of the  financial sector reform in India could be analysed under three broad categories :   a. Policy framework,   b. Improvement in financial health, and   c. Institutional Strengthening.   (a) Policy Framework   18. The external factors bearing on the profitability of the banking system related to the  administered structure of interest rates, high levels of pre-emptions in the form of reserve  requirements, and credit allocation to certain sectors. Easing of these external constraints  constitutes a major part of the reform agenda.   (i) Interest Rate Policy   19. The reform of the interest regime constitutes an integral part of the financial sector  reform. For long, an administered structure of interest rates was in vogue. The purpose  behind this structure was largely to direct implicit subsidy to certain sectors and enable  them to obtain funds at concessional rates of interest. An element of cross subsidisation  automatically got built into the system where concessional rates of interest provided to  some sectors were compensated by higher rates charged to other non-concessional  borrowers. The regulation of lending rates, ipso facto,led to the regulation of the deposit  rates mainly to keep the cost of funds to banks in reasonable relation to the rates at  which they are required to lend. This system of setting the interest rates through  administrative fiat became extremely complex and was characterised by detailed  prescriptions on the lending as well as the deposit side.   20. In recognition of the problems arising from administrative control over the interest rates,  such as, market fragmentation, inefficient allocation of resources, and the like, several  attempts were made since the mid-1980s to rationalise the level and structure of interest  rates in the country. Initially, steps were taken to develop the domestic money market  and freeing of the money market rates. The rates of interest offered on Government Securities were progressively raised so that the Government borrowing could be carried  out at market-related rates. The rates at which the corporate entities could borrow from  the capital market were also freed.   21. In respect of banks, a major effort was undertaken to simplify the administered structure  of interest rates. In September 1990, a process of simplification was undertaken by  reducing the number of slabs for which lending rates had hitherto been prescribed. Until  some time ago, the Reserve Bank was prescribing a minimum lending rate, two  concessional rates of lending for small borrowers and a maximum deposit rate. The  rationalisation in the structure of interest rates culminated in the move by the Reserve  Bank, abolishing the minimum lending rate in October 1994 and leaving banks to  determine their prime lending rates, while retaining the two concessional rates of lending  for small borrowers. On the deposit side, since July 1996 the Reserve Bank prescribes  only a maximum rate for deposits upto one year.   22. A gradual approach has thus far been adopted in reforming the interest rates structure in  India. Care has been taken to ensure that banks and financial intermediaries do not have  incentives which tempt them to lend at high rates of interest assuming higher risks. A  major safeguard in this regard has been the prescription of prudential norms relating to  provisioning and capital adequacy. These combined with higher standards of operational  accountability and appraisal of credit risks would ensure that banks lend prudently and  with care.   23. In the context of the deregulation of interest rates, there was an urgent need for  developing a reference rate to signal the policy stance of the Reserve Bank. Accordingly,  to make the Bank rate an effective signalling rate, in the monetary and credit policy for  the first half of 1997-98 announced recently there has been a rationalisation of the  interest rate structure with link ing of several interest rates of significance to the Bank  rate.   (ii) Pre-emption of Deposits   24. Indian banking system has operated for a long time with a high level reserve  requirements both in the form of Cash Reserve Ratio and Statutory Liquidity Ratio. This  is really a consequence of the high fiscal deficit and a high degree of monetisa tion of that  deficit. In mid 1991. pre-emption in the form of CRR and SLR requirements on  incremental deposits amounted to 63.5 per cent. Our efforts in the recent period have  been to lower both the CRR and SLR. Apart from removing the incremental CRR, since  1991, the average CRR has been brought down. The objective has been to take the CRR  to 10 per cent and below. We are already on this path and the effective CRR has come  down from 15.7 per cent at the end of March 1995 to less than 10 per cent by March  1997. With a view to facilitating the development of a more realistic rupee yield curve and  term money market, liabilities to banking system have been exempted from maintenance  of CRR since April 1997. The SLR has also been brought down from the pre-reform peak  of an effective rate of 37.5 per cent to an overall effective level of 26.7 per cent in March  1997. With the SLR on incremental deposits set at 25 per cent and the exemption of  inter-bank liabilities from SLR, the average SLR will also come down to 25 per cent.   (iii) Directed Credit   25. In respect of directed lending, there is a prescription that 40 per cent of the net bank  credit should go to certain sectors - the priority sector - such as agriculture, small scale  industry and small businesses and the programmes for poverty alleviation. Given the  imperfections of the credit market, credit allocation for certain sectors becomes  necessary in the Indian context. The prescription of 40 per cent of net bank credit going  to the priority sector as well as the prescription of two concessional rates of interest  applicable for small loans have been retained. Since the bulk of borrowers with such  credit needs fall within the priority sector, they will continue to obtain bank finance at concessional rates. Priority sector borrowers with credit needs of higher amounts will  however, be governed by the general interest rate prescriptions. This will ensure that a  certain proportion of bank credit goes to the designated sector and to the needy  borrowers, without unduly affecting the viability and profitability of banks.   (b) Improvement in Financial Health   26. Another major element of the financial sector reform has been the introduction of  prudential norms and regulations aimed at ensuring the safety and soundness of the  financial system, impart greater transparency and accountability in operke these  (financial) markets function better but will also improve the performance of the economy".  The need for intervention in finan cial markets is not denied by anyone. All advocates of  financial sector reform have pleaded that deregulation should be accompa nied if not  preceded by putting in place a rigorous set of prudential standards to be met by financial  institutions. As John Crow former Governor of the Bank of Canada said, "deregulation  does not mean desupervision". Internationally accepted common standards for income  recognition, provisioning and capital ade quacy have come into force in almost all  countries. It is when Stiglitz argues for a more intrusive form of intervention which  includes directed credit and maintaining low interest rates through a system of financial  repression, that differences begin to emerge. Even here the differences are one of  degree rather than of kind. Stiglitz himself talks of the failure to distinguish between small  and large repressions. While cross subsidisation of interest rates as well as some forms  of directed credit can be built into a system of credit dispensation, the issue becomes  serious when such subsidisation reaches levels at which the very viability of the financial  institutions is at stake. To some extent, Stiglitz recognises this when he says that `there  is a role for Government in financial markets but the success of Government  interventions has been mixed. It is important that intervention be well designed'. In fact,  what he calls for, are imaginative forms of Government intervention. The crux of the  problem lies in determining whether or not a specific policy intervention is imaginative  enough i.e. whether it would be more effective than reliance on market force. The art of  policy making thus really lies in the eclectic selection of policy interventions.   27. In the context of the banking sector reforms in India, two issues have been raised which  need to be addressed squarely. One relates to the rate of interest and the other to the  prudential norms. With respect to interest rates the two main questions that are being  raised are -    . should the interest rate be allowed to be determined by market forces? and   a. should Government meet its borrowing requirements by raising funds at market  determined rates of interest?   28. It is being argued that when market forces are allowed to determine the rate of interest,  the rate will tend to remain high and such high rates can hinder the process of growth.  But these critics fail to understand that if rates of interest are kept at artificially low levels,  it can only result in diverting funds from the organised to the unorganised sectors, losing  total control over the end-use of funds. While aggregate savings may not be significantly  influenced by changes in interest rate, there is enough evidence, nevertheless to show,  even in the Indian context, that savings in the form of financial assets are considerably  influenced by interest rate. Therefore, if the financial institutions are to perform effectively  their major role of mobilising resources, the rate should be allowed to be determined by  the forces of supply and demand. The interest rate is, however, a strategic variable and  its level can be and is influenced by the actions of the monetary authority. In that sense,  interest rate nowhere in the world is purely determined by market forces. It is the function  of the monetary authority's policy intervention through the various instruments available  to it to move the rate of interest towards a level considered appropriate. Within this  overall policy framework, market forces have a greater role in determining the structure of  interest rates rather than its level. The monetary authority, however, cannot keep interest  rates for long at levels that are inconsistent with the basic supply and demand balance.  29. On the issue of Government borrowing at market related rates of interest, the only way in  which Government can meet its requirements at below market rates will be either through  a mandatory requirement forcing banks and other financial institutions to invest a certain  proportion of their liabilities in Government paper or by simply borrowing from the central  bank generat ing an increase in money supply. The first alternative leads to a situation in  which the viability of the financial institutions themselves gets eroded. While obviously  certain liquidity requirements can be imposed, beyond a point it can only turn the financial  institutions into loss making entities. If Government borrows excessively from the central  bank, it can only fuel inflation by expanding money supply beyond reasonable limits. It is  some times argued that the high rates of interest that the Government has to pay on its  borrowings worsens the fiscal deficit. But it is overlooked that high interest rates  themselves are not the cause but the effect of unduly large fiscal deficits. The answer to  reducing the interest payments lies basically in the Government containing the fiscal  deficit and not artificially trying to keep the rates of interest low. While a high interest rate  may not be a sufficient deterrent in containing borrowing, nevertheless, it serves a useful  function in making explicit the true cost of Government borrowing.   30. Some critics have even taken objection to the introduction of prudential norms. They  regard such an introduction either as irrelevant or premature. It is indeed surprising that  objections could be raised against introduction of prudential norms. These norms are  basically intended to improve the soundness of the working of institutions. In order to  avoid a serious set back to the functioning of banks and other institutions, prudential  norms have also been introduced in India in a phased manner. Progressively the  definition of Non Performing Assets has been tightened. The circumstances prevailing in  the Indian financial sector have been taken into account in determining the phasing in of  prudential norms. The prudential norms have served a useful role wherever they have  been introduced. They have compelled institutions to pay greater attention to the quality  of lending. It is true that as a consequence of the introduction of capital adequacy norms,  Government have had to allocate a fairly large amount of funds in order to enable the  public sector banks to achieve the required capital adequacy standards. There has been  no cash outflow because capital has been inducted in the form of bonds. Nevertheless,  there is an outflow as far as the Government is concerned in the form of interest  payments and the phased amortisation of the bonds. The recapitalisation became neces  sary in order to strengthen the balance sheets of banks. Some critics have even sought  to establish a relationship between write-off of bad loans and recapitalisation but it is  necessary to recognise that these two are independent processes. Write-off of bad loans  is part of the programme of cleaning the balance-sheet of banks while recapitalisation  has been necessitated by the weakened financial position. Had the prudential norms  been introduced earlier, much of the problems of non-performing assets confronted by  banks today could have been avoided.   31. One argument against liberalisation has been that it could lead banks to lend at higher  and higher rates of interest and thereby accepting higher levels of risk. Literature  describes this phenomenon as a process of `adverse selection'. In fact, the answer to  adverse selection is the prescription of prudential norms, which will compel banks not to  accept risks beyond a point. In any case, banks have never been pure profit maximisers.  Profit maximisation has always been subject to the constraint of acceptable level of risk.  The prudential norms make this constraint explicit.   32. The chief merit of our reform process has been the cautious sequencing of reforms and  the consistent and mutually reinforcing character of the various measures taken.  Introduction of prudential norms, widening of the capital base and strengthening of the  organisational infrastructure have all gone hand in hand.   33. The first stage of the banking sector reform is coming to an end and we are now moving  on to the next stage of the reform. In the years to come, the Indian financial system will  grow not only in size but also in complexity as the forces of competition gain further  momentum and as the financial markets acquire greater width and depth. While the  policy environment will remain supportive of healthy growth and development with accent  on greater operational flexibility as well as greater prudential regulation and supervision, the thrust of the second phase of reform would have to be on improvement in the  organisational effective ness of banks and other financial entities.   34. Through the various reform measures we have laid the foundation for an efficient and a  well-functioning financial system in order to support and sustain a high level of real  growth. Significant changes have already taken place. True, as the saying goes, we have  miles to go. But our experience so far shows that the steps that have been taken are in  the right direction.   