January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Retail Banking : Challenges Ahead in Distribution * Channels in Urban/Rural India VEPA KAMESAM The promise of lower transaction costs, strategy. Although banks may invest heavily increased sales productivity, and more in new delivery channels, the success and convenient service has lured banks into sustainability of these channels critically lie setting up new delivery channels. Earlier, vast in the ability to convert that investment into brick and mortar branch network has been lower distribution costs. The steps to be considered as an inherent advantage of followed in making a new distribution channel established banks and new entrants were at successful: huge disadvantage vis--vis the established (a) Understand customers current players in terms of customer reach. However, channel/transaction behaviour and post 1990s new players are effectively taking their underlying attitude; on the branch network advantage of the (b) Use sophisticated experimental established players by optimally leveraging customer research to assess the technology and cost-effective delivery economic impact of tactics designed channels. to change that behaviour; The goal for banks senior management (c) Develop an integrated channel is to turn todays all things to all people migration plan which blends branch network into highly differentiated economic and non-economic system for delivery of multiple products. The incentives to ensure that right foundation for creating such delivery initiatives are targeted at the right channels is superior insights into customer customers; behaviour. These can come in many forms, (d) Protect sales effectiveness by but at their most basic they entail utilising the ability of non-branch understanding customer needs for the channels to select amongst delivery of different products, how these prospects and differentiate the needs vary by customer types (including marketing message; small businesses), current customer (e) Design non-branch channels to behaviour (especially as it relates to channel emphasize personalised interaction usage), and customer profitability. It is this to counteract decreased loyalty multifaceted understanding of customers that among remote customers; yields actionable implications for distribution * Remarks by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Twenty-Fifth Bank Economists Conference  2003 at ITC Grand Maratha Sheraton Hotel, Mumbai on December 12, 2003. 103January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 (f) Develop tracking mechanisms to and sharing of ATM services and this trend allow you to assess and revise your will gather momentum in near future. As this migration strategy on an ongoing delivery channel gains mass acceptability and basis. is user friendly, the bank can use it to cross- sell its as well as others products. For Turning our attention to delivery example, banks have already started channels used by banks in India, in dispensing railway tickets, movie tickets comparison with their international through their ATMs. In future a banks ATM counterparts, it is observed that the banks would function like a kiosk delivering more are yet to exploit the delivery channels to the of non-cash transactions, thereby maximum extent technology permits. simultaneously reducing the fixed and Increase in off-site delivery channels has led operating cost of ATM. to new product development, speed of transaction processing and reduction in Internet Banking-an emerging delivery transaction costs. In India the major issue channel-offers significant cost advantage to about new technology related delivery banks. A net-based transaction costs the channels is their impact on the processing bank only around Rs. 4 and costs per of information, which lies at the core of transaction are even lower than those of an banking business. Inspite of their ATM, mainly due to savings on prohibitive advantages, reliance on technology based real estate costs. Internet Banking has failed delivery channels often exacerbates to take off due to a combination of traditional risks: operational risk (since it psychological, legal, technological and socio- requires changes in procedures), reputational economic factors. Lack of critical mass of risk (if the bank fails to deliver secure, early adopters, lack of a strong trust accurate and timely service) and legal risk environment, slowness in adoption of the (uncertainty about which legislation applies internet, low penetration of PCs and access to e-banking transactions), besides to internet are some of the impediments in emergence of other risks (business and the adoption of internet banking in India. With credit risks). ATMs still remain the most drastic fall in cell phone tariff and emergence successful delivery channel followed by of seamless connectivity between fixed and telephone banking and internet banking. With mobile lines, mobile banking is set to emerge about 9000 off-site and on-site ATMs as one of the cost-effective delivery channels installed, banks are effectively reaching out in near future. Toll-free-numbers would also to a large customer base at a substantially gain popularity as an important delivery lower cost. Typically, it costs close to Rs.50 channel. Although banks abroad are using per transaction if conducted in a branch and call centre as a delivery channel for some the same if done through ATM costs about time, banks in India have just begun to Rs.15. In order to reduce the cost of exploit it as an effective non-branch delivery transaction banks have started out-sourcing channel. 104January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Systems should be developed in such a The bankers will have to take a way that a customer can use his ATM card comprehensive view about their delivery and his own ATM PIN (Personal Identification channels. Till now delivery channels were Number) for customer authentication in a Web viewed in terms of cost and technology. transaction, which is normally not done in a Delivery channels were devised focussing Web-based transaction or in any other mainly on time and place advantage to the delivery channel. customers. However, with the continuing advances in wireless technology, flexibility in The process cycle of the above single delivery channel device would be the forte of Signon should be that once the customer banks. Successful adoption of wireless initiates the transaction by entering the PIN technology would help banks to offer not only from any of the delivery channels, the PIN any time, anywhere, but also any device entered by the customer is verified with the banking. Further, banks will have to build PIN details of the customer and once the integrated delivery channels with both vertical verification yields a positive response the and horizontal integration. In order to do so customer will be allowed to perform the the banks should install an enabling and transaction. The PIN, which the user enters compatible multi-channel platform which to perform the transaction, should be a unique should support and seamlessly integrate both PIN that can be used by the customer to the existing and future delivery channels. perform the transaction across any delivery channel. In short, the banks should have a  In todays distributed computing comprehensive system which will allow them environments, retail users sign onto many to deliver dynamic end-to-end customer different applications and systems including service that can reshape customer base, email, networks, databases and Web servers maximise cross-selling opportunities and each typically requiring its own security generate a positive ROI (Return on procedure. The more systems users must Investment) in the changing business navigate, the more IDs and passwords they economy. must remember. 105