C M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Debt Markets in India  Issues and Prospects* RAKESH MOHAN I am very happy to be amongst you today to deliver Today after a decade of the reforms process, it is an rd the keynote address at the 3 Annual Citibank - Fitch opportune time to take a look at the current issues that Debt Markets Conference. I understand that the response are of interest to the market. to the previous Citibank-Fitch debt markets conferences The limitations of public finances as well as the has been very encouraging, which has motivated the systemic risk awareness of the banking systems in organisers to convert this into an annual event. This kind developing countries have led to growing interest in of interaction among investors and issuers provides an developing bond markets. It is believed that well run and opportunity for mutual discussions in the interest of liquid corporate bond markets can play a critical role in fostering further market development. supporting economic development in developing countries, Development, sustenance and expansion of the debt both at the macroeconomic and microeconomic levels. markets is a very complex activity. Our experience so Corporate debt in developing countries has traditionally far suggests that a well functioning debt market needs to been raised from banks through plain vanilla bank lending. be carefully nurtured over time and requires a great deal The need for a developed bond market with a sizeable of discussion between issuers, investors, intermediaries, corporate debt segment is particularly important as it and regulators, alike. Todays deliberations, I am sure will offers an effective alternative to banks for raising capital provide newer visions towards such a collaborative by corporates, leading to improvement in efficiency of developmental process. the capital market. Corporate debt markets also function as a stable source of finance when the equity market is volatile. Generally, there have been two models for I. PROLOGUE developing debt markets internationally. Whereas, in developed countries like the U.S., regulators stepped in A well developed capital market consists of both the to bring about an orderly way of doing business after the equity market and the bond market. While the exact markets had by themselves developed reasonably, in composition of the market varies from country to country, several developing countries such as India, the regulators it is generally found that the debt market segment of the have had to assume the role of market developers. capital market develops more slowly than the equity What have the developments in these segments of the market. Purely from an issuer angle, the debt market could financial market? What needs to be done? What issues be segregated into G-Sec and corporate bond market. Due remain the paramount concern of the regulators? Let me to their genre, I shall discuss them separately. today trace some of the developments and share with you The existence of an efficient government securities some of my thoughts on these issues. debt market is usually seen as an essential precursor for the corporate debt market. Following a developmental model rather than a regulatory and supervisory model, II. OVERVIEW OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THE G-SEC the Reserve Bank of India took up the task of developing MARKET the government securities market, so as to facilitate overall improvement in the strength of financial and economic Let me take you to little bit back in time. As we all system of the country. Along with the initiation of overall know, the Government securities market before the 1990s economic reforms in the early 1990s, the development of was characterised by administered (and often artificially the government securities market was initiated in 1992. low) rates of interest, captive investors (essentially banks) Speech by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, the then Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 3rd India Debt Markets Conference * organised by Citigroup and Fitch Ratings India on August 14, 2004 at Mumbai.  Dr. Mohan is grateful to H.R. Khan, Partha Ray and S. Subbaiah of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance. 1091 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 due to high Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)  requirements, known. I will only recount some of the key reform absence of a liquid and transparent secondary market for measures: G-Secs and lack of smooth and robust yield curve for l 1992: Introduction of auction system for price pricing of the instruments. Low coupon rates were offered discovery on government securities to keep government borrowing l 1993: Introduction of 91 day T- bills for managing costs down, which made real rates of return negative for liquidity and benchmarking several years till the mid-1980s. During the 1980s, the volume of debt expanded considerably, particularly short- l 1994: Zero Coupon Bonds were issued term debt, due to automatic accommodation to Central l 1995: Primary Dealer (PD) system was set up; DvP government by the Reserve Bank, through the mechanism settlement system introduced; Floating Rate Bonds of ad hoc Treasury Bills. With a captive investor base issued and interest rate below the market rate, the secondary l 1997: Technical Advisory Committee set up, market for government bonds remained dormant. Artificial permitting repos in G-Secs, allowed FIIs to invest yields on government securities affected the yield structure in G-Secs; system of Ways and Means advances of financial assets in the system, and led to higher lending introduced for Government of India; introduced rates. Driven by these compulsions, Reserve Banks Capital Indexed Bonds monetary management was dominated by a regime of administered interest rates, and rising Cash Reserve Ratio l 1999: OTC interest rate derivatives like IRS/FRAs (CRR) and SLR prescriptions. High CRR and SLR left introduced. little room for monetary maneuvering. l 2000: Introduction of Liquidity Adjustment Facility What were the compelling factors for initiating (LAF) to manage short term liquidity mismatches reforms? The following factors were extremely important l 2002: Operationalisation of Negotiated Dealing in particular: System (NDS) and CCIL. Trade data on NDS made l Increasing borrowing requirements of the available on RBI web site for transparency government due to a rising fiscal deficit; l 2003: Introduction of trading of G-Secs on stock l The need to keep the cost of borrowing reasonable; exchanges, permitting non-banks to participate in l The need for developing a benchmark for other repo market, introduction of exchange traded fixed income instruments for the purposes of interest rate futures pricing and valuation; l Operation of monetary policy through indirect III. RECENT D EVELOPMENTS instruments like Open Market Operations and repos, which required an active secondary market Subsequently, significant measures have also been for G-Secs and taken during the current year, 2004. An important l Improving the overall efficiency of the financial development has been the introduction of the Real Time markets. Some of the most salient reforms initiated Gross Settlement System which will facilitate better in the G-Sec market after 1991-92 are presented liquidity management. The DvP III mode of settlement below. has been enabled which permits net settlement of both In this perspective the primary objective of the reform funds and securities legs. The DvP III mode of settlement has also permitted the rollover of repos. Another process in the G-Sec market was to raise government debt significant development was the introduction of the at market related interest rates. In order to do so, development of appropriate market infrastructure, Market Stabilisation Scheme which has expanded the instruments available to the Reserve Bank for managing elongation of maturity profile, increasing the width and depth of the markets, became extremely critical. the surplus liquidity in the system. Improving risk management practices and transparency These reforms can be briefly viewed as a systematic were the other important considerations. exercise for the development of the debt market as well What did we do? The sequence of Reserve Banks as integration of the entire financial markets by making it deep, wide and transparent. In looking back at the market development activities in the 1990s is now well 1092 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 (YTM) of a basket comprising three bonds with maturity sequence and pace of these reforms that have been put ranging from 9 to 11 years. The exchanges are in the in place over a decade, one begins to appreciate the process of launching such a new product. complexity and difficulty that is intrinsic to the development of an efficient debt market. And we still b) Legality of OTC Derivatives  Amendments to SCRA have a long way to go. OTC interest rate derivatives were introduced in These reforms were linked to operational autonomy of 1999. Banks could undertake plain vanilla FRA and IRS the RBI. Measures such as the abolition of automatic contracts for their own balance sheet management and monetisation through ad-hoc Treasury Bills (in 1997) and also for market making purposes, provided they ensure its replacement by Ways and Means Advances facility, with adequate infrastructure, risk management systems and limits, to meet temporary cash flow mismatches for the internal control systems. The volume in the market has Central Government, were considered critical for the grown noticeably with the outstanding notional amount stabilisation of monetary policy. You are also aware that 1 at around Rs. 6,40,000 crore . However, there has been these measures have been taken in close collaboration with some apprehension regarding legality of OTC derivatives the market players. This underscores the need for with section 18A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) collaboration and consultation between regulatory Act, 1956 (SCRA), making only derivatives contracts authorities and market players in the process of that are executed on exchanges legal and valid. development of any market. It is heartening to note that Accordingly, certain modifications by way of this has been achieved very successfully in the Indian debt supplementary provisions to the proposed amendments market because of the existence of industry associations are under discussion with the Government of India so like FIMMDA and PDAI, and an active PD system wherein as to ensure that the proposed amendments do not the Primary Dealers have acted as a linking mechanism jeopardize the legal status of OTC derivatives. between the market and the Regulator. The heterogeneity Specifically, it has been suggested that section 18A be of market participants, some of whom have brought in to amended so as to make contracts of the class and nature the Indian market the best international technology, risk as notified by RBI legally valid, even if they are not management practices, know how of the instruments, traded on any recognised stock exchange. Exchange especially derivatives has also helped greatly. traded derivatives have their own role to play in the Let me discuss some of the recent developments in debt market - but by their very nature they have to be greater detail : standardised products. OTC derivatives, on the other hand can be customised to the requirements of the a) Interest Rate Futures (IRFs) trading entities. Thus both OTC and exchange traded derivatives are essential for market development. Consequent upon the decision to introduce IRFs on NSE, guidelines in respect of RBI regulated entities were c) Rollover of Repos formulated to enable their participation. NSE introduced With the decision to move gradually towards a pure three futures instruments on June 3, 2003, viz., futures inter-bank call/term money market, there is a need to contracts on notional 91 day Treasury Bill, futures remove the operational/regulatory constraints in the repo contracts on notional 10 year coupon bearing bond and market. One of the perceived hurdles in the development futures contracts on notional 10 year zero coupon bonds. of the repo market is the inability to rollover contracts. While banks were allowed to use futures only to hedge To enable continuous access to funds from the repo their G-sec investments in Held for Trading (HFT) and market, it was decided to permit rollover of repos which Available for Sale (AFS) categories, PDs were allowed will be enabled along with DvP III. to deal in interest rate derivatives (IRDs) for both hedging d) DvP III Mode of Settlement and trading. However, due to the lack of liquidity of the exchange traded futures market, Securities and Exchange In order to reduce the price risk assumed by market Board of India (SEBI) in consultation with FIMMDA participants, sale of securities previously purchased is simplified futures contracts on a 10-year notional bond, proposed to be permitted with certain safeguards built in which is priced on the basis of the Yield To Maturity to prevent short sales. To enable this as well as to enable 1 As on September 17, 2004, this amount increased substantially to Rs.8,53,000 crore. 1093 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 rollover of repos, net settlement in securities is required. Dealers will have to assume a greater role and Therefore, it has been decided to shift the settlement mode responsibilities for market making and retailing of G-secs. to DvP III. On the benefits side, the long pending demand of the PDs for exclusivity in the auctions of G-Secs in a limited e) Market Stabilisation Scheme way has been under the active consideration of RBI. In As a response to the large-scale capital inflows in addition, the Standing Technical Advisory Committee on recent years and the consequent problems faced in Money, Government Securities and Forex Markets has managing liquidity, the Reserve Bank introduced the formed a Sub Group to look into the issue of broad basing Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) after consulting the the PDs portfolios by permitting them to invest in the Government of India for mopping up liquidity of a more sovereign securities abroad, setting up of overseas joint enduring nature in March 2004. Under this scheme, the ventures, wholly owned subsidiaries, and the like. Government would issue existing instruments, such as, As a result of all these measures, the Indian G-Sec Treasury Bills and/or dated securities by way of auctions market has been transformed substantially over the last under the MSS, in addition to the normal borrowing ten years. A major outcome of this development is that requirements, for absorbing liquidity from the system. The the market is becoming increasingly broad based: with intention of MSS is essentially to differentiate the liquidity the market now looking well diversified with the absorption of a more enduring nature by way of participation of banks, financial institutions, provident sterilisation from the day-to-day normal liquidity funds, insurance and pension funds, primary dealers, 100 management operations. In order to provide transparency per cent gilt mutual funds, corporate bodies, provident and stability to the financial markets, an indicative funds, trusts, individuals, foreign institutional investors schedule for issuance of Treasury Bills/dated securities (FIIs) and non-resident Indians (NRIs). The on a quarterly basis is being announced. consolidation of securities achieved over the years, has f) Capital Charge for Market Risk resulted in the development of active benchmark With a view to ensuring smooth transition to the norms securities. Hence we now observe that the auctions for under Basel II, banks were advised to maintain capital Government securities have developed a high degree of charge for market risk over a two-year period as under: sophistication. There is an ever narrowing gap between l Banks would be required to maintain capital charge the cut-off price and the weighted average cut-off price; for market risk in respect of their trading book the bids at the primary auction are nearly perfectly exposures (including derivatives) by March 31, correlated with the secondary market yield curve 2005. indicating excellent price discovery. A reasonably l Banks would be required to maintain capital charge smooth and elongated yield curve of up to 30 years maturity has emerged, which is probably comparable for market risk in respect of the securities included with those in developed economies. Volumes of trading under available for sale (AFS) category by March 31, 2006. in the secondary market are increasing and bid-ask spreads are narrow. The annual turnover in the secondary g) Primary Dealers and their Role market for G-Secs now is more than twice the GDP of As we know, PDs are expected to promote retailing the country and that, after Japan, Indias G-Sec market in the G-Sec, active market making in G-Secs and price is probably the largest in Asia. discovery. While the institution of PDs has led to I would like particularly to emphasise the high quality improved liquidity in the secondary market, retailing of of infrastructure that has been put in place in India. G-Secs and promoting a retail market has not been Through a process of novation, a Central Counter Party undertaken by the PDs on the scale and intensity that like the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL), was expected. With the proposed order driven trading in has provided excellent infrastructure and risk management G-Secs on the NDS, PDs are expected to play a significant means. The efficacy of the settlement system of role in developing the retail markets on exchanges. PDs government securities and forex transactions through should also improve their market making in interest rate CCIL was clearly brought out recently when the derivatives, particularly with a larger category of settlement in respect of transactions of the Global Trust institutions like insurance companies coming into the Bank following the moratorium, was put through market. Thus, in order to fulfil their obligations, Primary 1094 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 smoothly. There is still no room for complacency and to maturity and consequent reduction in market supply the need for sustained efforts to further improve market of these securities are some of them. practices and to benchmark them against the international Several measures have been taken in the recent past standards is of paramount importance. to transform the corporate debt market in India In fact in the process of reaching where we are today predominantly under the aegis of SEBI. Some of these in developing the G-Sec market, several issues had to measures include de-materialisation and electronic transfer be addressed and problems were faced in the areas of of securities, rolling settlement, introduction of broadening the primary market with appropriate auction sophisticated risk management, trading and settlement methodology, promoting depth and liquidity in the systems. Towards the end of 2003, SEBI has also taken secondary market, fostering market intermediaries and steps to reform the private placement market. In market making, setting up of reliable trading and conjunction with these measures, Reserve Bank of India, settlements systems, ensuring adequate institutional, legal issued guidelines to banks on investment of their non- and risk management systems and facilitating data SLR securities. All these measures are expected to dissemination and transparency. It is gratifying to note improve the functioning of corporate debt market in India. that despite these challenges, we could develop a deep Since this conference is a confluence of people across and liquid market for government securities in India. different sides of the debt markets in India, let me share a recent development. To help in the further development of the corporate debt market, a Group has recently been III. R EVIEW OF THE C ORPORATE DEBT M ARKET set-up with the participation of RBI, SEBI and other market participants. Among others, the group intends to Having delineated the developments of the G-Sec look into the following issues: market, let me now come to the other segment, viz., l Examination of the issues relating to primary corporate debt market, although it is the Securities and issuances as well as growth of secondary market Exchange Board of India (SEBI) that has the primary of corporate debt securities in the light of responsibility. But I do have some locus standi to speak international experience. on this issue as Chairman of SEBIs Market Advisory l Examination of the regulatory aspects for the Committee! Whereas the Government Securities market development of the market for Asset Backed has developed a great deal, the corporate debt market Securities (ABS) and Mortgage Backed Securities has a long way to go. Though the corporate debt market (MBS). in India has been in existence since independence in 1947, l Analysing the issues relating to trading, settlement it was only after 1985-86, following some debt market and accounting of corporate debt securities reforms that state owned public enterprises (PSUs) began including the issue of DvP settlement for corporate issuing PSU bonds. However, in the absence of a well debt market. functioning secondary market, such debt instruments l Suggesting measures to enhance transparency in remained highly illiquid and unpopular among the pricing and valuation of corporate debt securities. investing population at large. I understand that the deliberations of the Group are However, corporates continued to prefer private underway. Taking advantage of this conference, let me placements to public issues. Such a dominance of private invite your suggestions and comments for furthering the placement has been attributed to several factors, viz., ease development of the corporate debt market, so that we of procedures and operation of private placement, can take a comprehensive review and propose measures involved procedure and considerably higher costs of which are pragmatic and relevant. public issues, and higher subscriptions for private placements. Essentially for these reasons, the financial institutions have tended to dominate public issues in the IV. SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME IN THE G-SEC MARKET primary corporate debt market. The secondary market for corporate debt has also certain shortcomings. Lack of In order to have a feel of the shape of things to come market making resulting in poor liquidity, tendency on in the G-Sec market, let me have a quick review of the the part of institutional investors to hold these securities various proposed measures in the G-Sec market. 1095 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 a) Diversification of Instruments: insurance that at the time of redemption the principal value would not fall below par. The proposal for the Different investors have a variety of investment reintroduction of such CIB is under discussion with the horizons, risk appetite and needs. It is therefore important Government. Our proposals on the characteristics of to diversify the instruments available. capital indexed bonds have also been put on our website Floating Rate Bonds: There is a perceptible to elicit expert and market views. We will welcome any improvement in the issuance of Floating Rate Bonds views you might have on the appropriate design of these (FRBs), which is an effective instrument for hedging instruments. It may be indicated that CIB was introduced interest rate risk by investors in the context of elongation in December 1997 which matured in December 2002. No of the maturity profile of Government debt. A total of subsequent issue has been made till date. Rs. 16,000 crore was raised through Floating Rate Bonds b) Screen-based Trading of Government Securities during 2003-04, which accounted for 16 per cent of the total issuances of dated securities, excluding those issued A countrywide, anonymous, screen based, order driven by way of private placements with the RBI. The calendar system for trading in government securities introduced in for H1/2004-05 also provides for issuance of FRBs for the stock exchanges (NSE, BSE and OTCEI) in January about 10 to 20 per cent of the total issuances. We have 2003 has continued to suffer from very poor trading already issued Rs.18,000 crore in this fiscal year. These volumes during 2003-04. In order to examine the various instruments are particularly popular during times of issues related to the successful operationalisation of the perceived market uncertainty. screen-based trading, a Working Group on Screen Based Trading in Government Securities was constituted. The STRIPS: Introduction of STRIPS is one of our top Group has made several recommendation relating to priorities. An informal interdepartmental Group in RBI improving the NDS in terms of software and hardware on operationalisation of Separate Trading for Registered and linkages with INFINET, administration of NDS Interest and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) has functioning, setting up of an NDS user Group etc. The recommended certain system requirement specifications Group has also recommended that it would be desirable which are being evaluated internally. Meanwhile, steps to make available an anonymous, screen-based order have been taken to realign the coupon payments dates on driven trading system for the NDS members in a Straight four identified dates so as to create a critical mass for Through Processing (STP) mode. The Group has also issue of coupon STRIPS. Necessary enabling legal suggested in the Report several measures to develop the provisions are expected to come into effect as and when retail gilt market on the exchanges. These include, the Government Securities Bill is introduced and passed obligation on market intermediaries to provide two-way by Parliament soon. With introduction of STRIPS, the quotes, spreading awareness through concerted campaigns long felt needs of the market in the areas of ALM by exchanges etc. The Group also highlighted the need mismatches and better cash flow management would be for market making on exchanges by the Primary Dealers. addressed, besides, improving the opportunities for the retail segment for investing in long term discount As you are aware, the Reserve Bank of India has instruments. decided to implement the recommendation relating to introduction of screen-based order matching trading Capital Indexed Bonds: The RBI proposes to re- system on the NDS. The trading platform, called RBI- introduce Capital Indexed Bonds (CIBs) with modified NDS-GILTS-Order Matching Segment, (or, NDS-OM, features. The proposed CIB, in line with structures in short) is a part of RBIs NDS application. It will be prevalent internationally, would offer inflation linked available to the NDS members in addition to the existing returns both on the coupons and the principal repayments. trading mechanism. It will be temporarily hosted at CCIL The proposed CIB would be offered with market pending installation of required infrastructure at RBI. The determined real coupon rate, which would remain fixed new trading system will be audited by external experts during the currency of the bonds. The semi-annual coupon during the trial run phase to ensure robustness of security payments on the bonds would be made by applying the features and connectivity, and efficiency of the system. fixed real coupon rate to the inflation-adjusted principal. The proposed system which was demonstrated by CCIL The principal repayment at maturity would be the to the market participants recently on August 11, 2004 is inflation-adjusted principal amount or its original par expected to go live as soon as system integrity is ensured value, whichever is greater, thus providing an in-built 1096 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 and appropriate training has been imparted to traders in companies. SEBI issued a circular on December 22, 2003 the NDS members. I am sure that this new option to the to all the stock exchanges incorporating the above market traders would go a long way in addressing some suggestions. It was observed that the clarifications issued of the issues relating to transparency, price discovery, by SEBI effectively addressed almost all the issues raised credit risk etc. by the market participants. The feedback received from the market confirmed it. c) Clearing of OTC Interest Rate Derivatives by CCIL a) Infrastructure Financing A central counter party based clearing arrangement for OTC derivatives would reduce counterparty risk and With the development of an elongated and smooth extend the benefits of netting. Accordingly, in order to yield curve and aided by abundant liquidity in the system, strengthen the OTC derivatives market and to mitigate I think the stage is set for growth in infrastructure the risks involved, a clearing arrangement through CCIL financing. It is needless to highlight the importance of for the OTC interest rate derivatives is under examination. infrastructure financing if the stated objective of attaining This measure is expected to strengthen the OTC interest the developed country status for India is to be achieved. rate derivatives market. Therefore, the developments in the debt markets should percolate down to this sector as well. On its part, RBI d) Trade in non-SLR Securities - Settlement and has been actively encouraging the government and the Information market participants to work more on the issue and ensure Prudential guidelines on banks investment in non-SLR th credit enhancement to the sector. In the recently held 13 securities require banks to report all spot transaction in State Finance Secretaries Conference, a decision was listed and unlisted non-SLR securities on the NDS and taken to set up a Working Group to study the issue of settle through CCIL, from a date to be notified. CCIL is credit enhancement to the infrastructure financing in working out an arrangement for settlement on non- states. I feel that the private sector infrastructure agencies guaranteed basis and dissemination of information relating could also be active in the long term financing, but for to trades in listed as well as unlisted non-SLR debt this to work, the credit enhancement has to pick up. While instruments by NDS members. This measure would in 1995-96, there were large number of issuers, today we improve transparency of trades in corporate debt market. have a substantial pool of potential investors, who need to be tapped for this credit enhancement to materialise for the infrastructure area. At the same time, I hope that V. POTENTIAL OF CORPORATE D EBT MARKET a bond insurance mechanism can potentially be developed for ensuring credit enhancement and investor safety. In order to improve transparency and improving the market for private placement of debt, SEBI issued There have been enough indications that infrastructure guidelines on September 30, 2003 stipulating the needs would go up, which would contribute to an efficient conditions to be complied in respect of private placement functioning of corporate debt market. The crucial issues of debt. These conditions governed issuance, listing and involved in developing the corporate debt market are the trading of privately placed debt securities. Subsequent to ways and means of elongation of maturity of corporate the issue of the circular, market participants made debt paper, improving the liquidity in secondary market, representations and suggestions and sought clarifications improving institutional mechanics etc. While the G-Sec on various provisions of the circular from SEBI. There markets were now fairly well-developed, the corporate was a general feeling in the market that the guidelines debt markets needed to go a long way so that India can were too stringent. It may be mentioned here that from have a well-integrated financial market. An integrated time to time, RBI had been interacting with SEBI on the financial market is necessary for efficient transmission issue of Private Placement of Corporate Debt. Based on of monetary policy, keeping in view the fact that it is the feedback received from market participants and banks, now operated on indirect instruments. Fortunately, the RBI has modified (on December 10, 2003) the prudential foundations for developing an efficient corporate debt guidelines for banks non-SLR investments. Besides, SEBI market have already been laid as the necessary was advised to take steps to address the issues of (i) a infrastructure and institutions that have been created for simplified listing procedure for listed companies and (ii) the G-Sec market are already available. The regulators to spell out an appropriate listing procedure for unlisted have also taken the first initiative in this regard with SEBI 1097 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 announcing its guidelines on trading and listing regulations on the private placement in debt market. To requirements for corporate debt and the RBI asking banks encourage the growth of this market, the Reserve Bank to invest only in listed and rated corporate paper on a excluded investments in Asset Backed Securities (ABS)/ private placement basis. Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS) from the 10 percent ceiling on the investment of banks in unlisted non-SLR The economy being on a high growth path would securities. However, several issues relating to regulation, create higher demand for funds, especially in listing and improvement of liquidity need to be infrastructure development. Corporates looking to raising addressed. Most MBS/ABS are issued by Special Purpose funds from the capital markets would also require them Vehicles (SPVs) in the form of trusts which are not to raise the balancing debt. With term lending from regulated. ABS/MBS issued by trusts cannot be listed, financial institutions on the decline, corporate funding although these are rated. Only the securities issued by needs, especially of the infrastructure segment, would the companies can be listed. On the other hand, there is necessarily have to be met by the bond market. With these legal ambiguity on the status of the listing of ABS/MBS. motivating factors for development of corporate debt Exchanges reportedly sought SEBIs clarification on the market and a large pool of well-informed urban population issue and it is learnt that SEBI preferred an unambiguous with 35 cities having 10 million population, there is a enabling provision in the SCRA that these mortgage huge potential in this market for new issuers and backed securities can be listed. Even in the case of investors. However, we need innovations in credit U.S.A., where the ABS/MBS market is very large, the enhancement with the active participation of brokerage regulatory process is still evolving. In fact, the SEC is houses, retail investors etc. proposing comprehensive new and amended rules and However, while the development of corporate debt forms covering registration, disclosure and reporting market was an opportunity, the experience of developing requirements for ABS and MBS under the Securities the G-Sec market has shown that it is a long drawn out Act of 1933 and the Securities Exchanges Act of 1934. and arduous effort which requires cooperative and The Group on corporate debt market is examining the collaborative efforts from not only the regulators but issues relating to development of securitised market in also from the market participants and self regulatory India in a comprehensive manner, including the issues organisations. The players  both issuers and investors relating to pricing, valuation and credit enhancements. - in the corporate debt market would be varied. It was therefore important for the regulators to focus attention on protecting investors interest by developing processes VI. THE R OAD A HEAD of clearing and settlement that would ensure a risk free environment. This calls for effective regulation and How do we see the future? Taking a cue from Woody innovative approaches as well. One of these innovations Allen, the American film maker who said forecasting is could be conversion of loan market in to bond market difficult, particularly for the future, let me refrain from of banks. Since the cash flows being similar, and loans giving any futuristic scenario. Instead let me flag four outstanding are significant, these loans could be issues viz., (a) securitisation of state government paper; securitised and bonds could be issued against them. This (b) FRB and its impact on the debt markets; (c) the would lead to high credit quality and reduction in overall derivatives market and (d) corporate governance and risk risks. management. b) Repo in Corporate Debt Papers a) Securitising State Government Paper To facilitate the growth of corporate debt market, the Promoting liquidity in state government papers is a Reserve Bank is actively considering introduction of repos crucial issue, especially in the context of large borrowing in corporate bonds, to be settled through CCIL. by the state governments under debt swap of high coupon Participation of corporates in repo market is also being state government loans with the government of India. The considered positively. recent issue of power bonds has also added to the stock c) Securitisation Market of state government paper. Against this background and The securitisation market has been growing at a rapid in the scenario of the continued large borrowings by state pace, particularly after the SEBI/RBI introduced governments, there is an urgent need to promote liquidity 1098 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 and trading in state government papers. One way of highly challenging task. Banks are hesitant to finance solving this issue could be to securitise the various state infrastructure projects partly because they lack the government paper. Such securitising of state government requisite skills in project appraisal and partly on paper and issuing units based on these underlying state consideration of asset-liability mismatches. The gap government papers, addresses the issues of fungibility, between increasing demand for financing infrastructure transferability etc., besides improving liquidity in state activity and lower budgetary support has led to a wave government papers, I therefore, urge the market of deregulation and privatisation of infrastructure in a participants to think on this issue and get back to us with number of countries. The huge gap between investment comments and suggestions. demand and the supply of finances provides complex challenges to the different constituents of the financial b) Fiscal Reponsibility and Budget Management system, which compel a search for alternative ways of (FRBM) Act and the Debt Markets financing these investments. With the development of an Over the last two decades, sustained budget deficits active and liquid market for securitised corporate debt, produced large issuance of government securities in India. mutual funds, pension and insurance funds could also Taking advantage of this, we were able to develop a deep emerge as potentially large investors. Thus, in the context and liquid government securities market. Improvements of infrastructure financing, the prevelance of a long-term in the fiscal position in the last two years have resulted debt market becomes critical. A vibrant debt market in a lower than budgeted fiscal deficit. The government assumes importance in the context of providing has embarked on a process of fiscal consolidation through mechanisms for greater liquidity as also for risk the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act minimisation. In India, while equity markets have through which the improvement in the fiscal position (zero developed faster in terms of liquidity, infrastructure and revenue deficit) is projected to be achieved in the next regulatory framework, the debt market has lagged behind. five years. The fiscal deficit is sought to be brought down As the fiscal consolidation process proceeds resources to 3.0 per cent. The achievement of these targets can be with financial institutions of different kinds will expected to lead to a significant decline in the share of increasingly become available for investment in corporate government securities in the total assets of the financial debt for financing productive activities. system. However, after accounting for inflation and Third, with the decline of development finance expected real GDP growth, there may not be much fall institutions, one of the sources of finance for corporates, in the absolute level of net issuance of government viz., project loans has been falling. Corporates will securities in the coming years. The Indian market has therefore have to increasingly source their debt financing been used to rising fiscal deficits and large borrowing directly from the market. This underscores the importance programmes of government over the years. So we will of a transparent, deep and liquid corporate debt market. continue to have active issuance of government paper in In order to promote infrastructure lending, the Governor the foreseeable future. Banks especially have been proposed, in his Annual Policy Statement on May 18, investing in government securities much more than the 2004 to allow banks to raise long-term bonds with a statutory requirements. The Reserve Bank of India, minimum maturity of 5 years to the extent of their through its monetary and credit policy statements and exposure of residual maturity of more than 5 years to the other fora, has been cautioning against such a substantial infrastructure sector. It was also proposed to expand the exposure to market risk if the yields reverse. In fact, the scope of the definition of infrastructure lending to include annual policy statement issued on May 18 reads The projects/sectors for construction in the areas of (i) agro- movement in interest rates during 2003-04 corroborates processing and supply of inputs to agriculture (ii) the view that banks should, in their interest, take steps to preservation and storage of processed agro-products, build up investment fluctuation reserves (IFR) in a smooth perishable goods such as fruits, vegetable and flowers and phased manner for better risk management. including testing facilities for quality and (iii) educational The challenge facing the Indian economy is the institutions and hospitals. acceleration of the growth process. The availability of All these point to the need and scope for the adequate infrastructure facilities is vital for the diversification of asset holding of the banking system in acceleration of the economic development of a country. favour of corporate bonds. Several other instruments such However, the financing of infrastructure projects is a 1099 C M Y KC M Y K December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 d) Risk Management and Corporate Governance as ABS/MBS would also offer the scope for substantial business potential. Presently, PDs measure market risk of their portfolios based on the internal VaR model and/or standardised model, c) Derivatives Market while the banks are required to use a flat charge. In order The need for a well developed interest rate to implement the BIS guidelines on measuring and derivatives market cannot be overemphasized in managing market risk, banks have also been advised to providing effective hedging tools for interest rate risks measure their market risk in a phased manner. It is of present in the balance sheet and in facilitating trading paramount importance that market participants ensure sound based on two-way view on interest rates, which is not and reliable risk management system to handle credit, possible in the underlying cash market in the absence market and operational risks. How well we guard the of short selling. Deregulation of interest rates, which system against the various risks would decide the future helped in making financial market operations efficient direction of the market. I would also like to emphasise and cost effective, has brought to the fore a wide array that the need for good corporate governance in all the of risks faced by market participants. To manage and institutions is some thing which we need to ensure in letter control these risks, several instruments such as Forward and spirit. I would like to quote George Bernard Shaw Rate Agreements (FRA) and Interest Rate Swaps (IRS) who said, The only man who behaved sensibly was my were introduced in July 1999, which could provide tailor; he took my measurement anew every time he saw effective hedges against interest rate risks. Further, in me, while all the rest went on with their old measurements June 2003, the Reserve Bank of India had issued and expected them to fit me. Corporate governance is guidelines to banks/primary dealers/FIs for transacting conducting business in a transparent manner that meets in exchange traded interest rate futures, which were the ever changing needs of the customers, society, introduced on the exchanges. There has also been a sharp regulators, investors and other stake holders. increase in the volume of transactions in the OTC products. Though there has been a significant increase in the number and amount of contracts, participation in VI.EPILOGUE the markets continues to remain limited mainly to select Development of debt market is not a one-off affair. foreign and private sector banks and PDs. I would like to emphasise that the PDs are expected to be market This has to happen in a continuous way. I have tried to give you a flavour of what has been done, what could makers in this segment. This coupled with recent have been done and, in that light, how does future look modifications in the IRD features by SEBI and the like. expected clarification on the legality of OTC derivative is expected to give thrust to the interest rate derivatives Let me conclude by submitting that while we have market in India. In this connection, I would like to stress been able to foster the development of a deep and liquid the need and importance of sound and adequate risk G-Sec market in India, there are issues that need management practices by market participants in the continued coordination and cooperation between the derivatives market. International experience teaches us market participants and the regulators, and opportunities the need for greater care in handling these instruments. that offer excellent opportunities for making this a truly I would expect that the market players not only put in global debt market. We are aware of the complexities place an appropriate risk management policy and and the difficult road ahead, but are keen to approach procedures for these products, but would also give equal the task with flexibility through the active involvement importance to the skills development of their human of market participants. Let me also wish the deliberations resources to handle these instruments and to appreciate all success and look forward to learning from the expertise the underlying risks. and experience of the distinguished participants. 1100 C M Y K