Over-the-counter derivative markets in India Issues and perspectives SHYAMALA GOPINATH Deputy Governor Reserve Bank of India The present article tries to put in perspective the boundary conditions, imposed by the macroeconomic  constraints, which have guided the evolution of over-the-counter (OTC) markets in India and underlines the  point that the process of transiting from a predominantly OTC based model to an exchange-traded model  needs to follow a calibrated path. Through this transition period, the overall regulatory approach towards  OTC derivative markets is as important as addressing the transactional aspects. In India, unlike the developed ? nancial markets where OTC derivative markets epitomised complex,  unregulated ? nancial innovations that grew exponentially over the last two decades, the OTC derivative  markets have evolved within a regulated space. The major elements of this regulatory framework include a  broad speci?  cation of products to be permitted, nature of participants in the markets, distinct responsibilities  for market makers and users for all OTC derivatives, effective reporting systems for capturing systemic  information and focus on developing market infrastructure for post-trade clearing and settlement. Given the above context, the OTC space in India for interest rate and forex derivatives will continue to  operate within a regulated manner with increased transparency. New instruments for exchanges will be  introduced in a gradual manner, as hitherto. Further areas for strengthening the functioning of OTC markets  will include greater standardisation of OTC derivatives and extending central clearing arrangements for  such contracts where feasible. Work has already been initiated for designing a centralised trade reporting  system for all OTC derivatives for better systemic oversight and market transparency. Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   61 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   61 13/07/2010   09:06:44 13/07/2010   09:06:44ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives he over-the-counter (OTC) derivative markets,  1| CONTEXTUAL CONSIDERATIONS  in particular credit derivatives, are now  T perceived as the weak link in the ?  nancial  system that increased the systemic risk of contagion Exchange traded derivative markets, to be ef?  cient and  and exacerbated the ? nancial crisis globally. Their complete, require a certain set of policy framework  complex and non-transparent nature coupled with for the underlying markets. Essentially what the  a light-touch regulatory approach towards them exchange traded markets demand are friction-free  resulted in excessive counterparty exposures and underlying markets with no restrictions on taking  risk concentrations building up through the system. long or short positions and a seamless integration  Naturally there has been a concerted effort globally between different segments enforced through free  to reform the OTC derivative markets, with much of participation by all agents. In simple words, ef? cient  the debate focusing on measures to address the issues exchange traded derivative markets and controls in  of counterparty credit risk and non-transparency. the underlying market do not go together.  The revised template for reforming these markets,  as is being pursued in major jurisdictions, therefore This is a fundamental challenge faced by the policy  broadly envisions greater standardisation of contracts makers in economies where macroeconomic and  to make them eligible for central clearing, tighter structural constraints as well as ?  nancial stability  counterparty risk management norms and higher considerations necessitate certain restrictions  capital charges for all clearing-ineligible contracts on the underlying markets. In the case of India,  and making these markets more transparent. for instance, there are policy-imposed limitations on  participation by various economic agents. There is  The OTC derivatives are generally considered still a requirement of an underlying exposure for  superior to exchange-traded derivatives in their undertaking forex derivative transactions. Most  amenability to customisation to cater to speci?  c importantly, the real sector tolerance for high  risk management needs of clients. OTC markets volatility in exchange rates as well as interest rates  are also best suited to test innovative products, is limited and this makes policy interventions in the  let them stabilise and get re? ned, before these cash markets an additional variable to contend with.  are considered suitable for wider offering through  standardisation. However, the explosion in the OTC While exchange traded derivative markets do not  derivative volumes over the past decade globally has ? t into this framework, whatever their operational  largely been a result of these markets moving out bene? ts, OTC markets make it feasible to pursue  of the regulatory perimeter as part of a conscious market development in a gradual framework within  policy stand. The regulation of ?  nancial markets in the given constraints. This is precisely what has  key developed markets was reinterpreted as being happened in India where OTC derivative markets  limited to regulation of the conduct of business aspect have evolved to signi?  cant volumes.  on exchange-traded markets, under the presumption  that the risks in OTC derivative markets would best It would be imperative to recognise the above  be addressed through entity regulation. As is now considerations while chalking out the reform path  evident, this approach was found to be inadequate for OTC derivative markets in India. The nuanced  since the entity regulation itself relied heavily on terms of the reform proposals will need to focus more  banks own risk management frameworks and more on strengthening the OTC market framework instead  importantly, risks building up in the OTC space at of being embroiled with binary consideration of OTC  the systemic level were lost sight of. vis-a-vis exchanges.  In contrast to the above, the predicament for  countries such as India is qualitatively different  2| EVOLUTION OF OTC DERIVATIVES  from the developed countries in terms of the  nature and evolution of the OTC derivative  markets as well as the regulatory approach towards The ? nancial derivative markets in India have  these markets. evolved through a reform process over the last  62 Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   62 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   62 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives two decades, witnessed in its growth in terms of existence of an underlying commercial transaction  size, product pro?  le, nature of participants and the for entering into a derivative, both on current or  development of market infrastructure. At present, capital account, has remained through the years.  the following categories of derivatives are permitted: The determination of underlying exposure is largely  based on current exposure and past performance for  OTC Exchange-traded trade related transactions. However, as an exception,  borrowers having long-term Indian rupee (INR)  Rupee interest  Forward rate Interest rate futures rate derivatives agreements, borrowing were permitted to use foreign currency-INR  interest rate swaps swaps to transform these into a foreign exchange  Foreign currency  Forwards, swaps, Currency futures liability.  derivatives options Equity derivatives On the interest rate side, banks and primary  Index futures,  index options,  dealers were allowed in 1999 to offer forward rate  stock futures,  agreement (FRA) and rupee interest rate swaps (IRS)  stock options to corporates for hedging interest rate risk as also to  deal in them for their own balance sheet hedging  The OTC derivative markets in India, unlike the and trading purposes. The size of the OTC interest  developed ? nancial markets where these markets rate and forex derivative markets in India is given  epitomised complex, unregulated ?  nancial in the Annex. innovations, have evolved within a regulated  space. The process of evolution needs to be seen In case of securitisation, a regulatory framework was  in perspective of the boundary conditions imposed put in place after a sizeable market had developed.  by the broader macroeconomic framework for the The attempt was to standardise the differing  development of the ?  nancial sector. practices being followed by banks and address  certain concerns on accounting, valuation and  The process of ? nancial market reforms in India is capital treatment. One of the key provisions, among  less than two decades old. It was in March 1993 that others, was to disallow upfront booking of pro?  t/ a system of market-determined exchange rates was premium arising on account of sale and requiring it  adopted by India as part of a broad set of structural to be amortised over the life of the securities issued  reform measures. Gradually, ? nancing the ?  scal by the SPV. These measures went a long way in  de? cit transitioned from automatic monetisation to dis-incentivising some of the innovative structures  market-based borrowings resulting in a regular supply that created problems elsewhere. Furthermore, in  of marketable securities. With regard to exchange view of the pass-through nature of the securities  rate, it was in August 1994 that the rupee was made linked to cash ?  ows from the underlying assets, the  fully convertible on current account. These reforms risk of maturity mismatches is reduced.  allowed increased integration between domestic and  international markets and created a need to manage Credit default swaps (CDSs) are currently not  interest rate and currency risks. permitted and are in the process of being introduced  to provide the participants an instrument to manage  It was in the above backdrop that a menu of OTC their credit risk. This is also expected to aid the  products was introduced to enable the economic development of the corporate bond market. The  agents to manage their risks in an effective manner. aftermath of the crisis provides an opportunity for  Being a bank dominated system, it was natural that countries such as India, which are starting on a  these products were offered through the OTC market clean slate, to address some of the negative features  with banks acting as intermediaries. On the forex associated with the product through an appropriate  side, apart from forwards, which were in existence framework design. It is proposed to start with plain  for long, cross currency options not involving rupee, vanilla single name CDSs on corporate bonds in the  foreign currency-rupee options and swaps were OTC market. The guidelines, to be placed in public  permitted for customers who have foreign currency domain would broadly emphasise on appropriate  exposures. The fundamental requirement of risk management framework, greater transparency  Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   63 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   63 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives in CDS transactions and eventually providing The RBI Amendment Act, 2006, was a key milestone  1 a clearing framework. in explicitly laying down the regulatory framework  for OTC interest rate, forex and credit derivatives.  From a systemic perspective, a key issue would The box gives a brief background and provisions of  be of induced volatility in the credit markets as this amendment.  a result of CDS markets. It is in this context that  the issue of insurable interest becomes relevant. Substantively also, regulation of these markets  Permitting naked CDS may increase buildup of being with the RBI makes eminent sense. The  speculative positions across the system. It may underlying variables in these markets viz. interest  also accentuate adverse incentives by encouraging rates and exchange rates have critical bearing on  leveraged credit exposures and impeding effective the macroeconomic management by the RBI and  resolution process. However, prohibiting naked it is imperative that the regulation of these derivatives  CDS would constrain market making in the product. are aligned with the larger policy objectives of  The challenge would be to design a limit structure monetary and ?  nancial stability. Further, in all these  within which market making could be facilitated markets banks are the dominant participants and  by regulated entities. Stipulating risk limits such the overarching role of the entity regulator for banks  2 as risky duration / risky PV01 of CDS portfolio i.e. the RBI provides the requisite synergy.  may need to be considered. The major elements of the regulatory framework  In the exchange traded derivative space, a more for OTC derivatives include a broad speci?  cation  liberal approach has been adopted and in the recent of products to be permitted, nature of participants  past. While currency futures and interest rate in the markets, distinct responsibilities for  futures have already been introduced on exchanges, market makers and users for all OTC derivatives,  currency options on USD/INR are in the process effective reporting systems for capturing systemic  of being introduced. While it is expected that these information, governance and oversight and focus  markets ful? l the genuine hedging requirements on developing market infrastructure for post-trade  of the participants, it is not possible to replicate clearing and settlement. The underlying rationale  the discipline of ensuring underlying commercial for key stipulations is explained below. transactions which is possible in the OTC market.  Accordingly, the interest rate and currency futures (i) There is a requirement that for an OTC derivative  markets operate in parallel with the OTC markets transaction to be legally valid, one of the parties  with different set of stipulations. to the transaction has to be a RBI regulated entity.  This is to ensure that the entire OTC derivative  market is within the regulatory perimeter.  3| REGULATORY FRAMEWORK Prudential prescriptions for each class of  participants may be decided by the respective   FOR OTC DERIVATIVES regulator within the broad policy framework but  it makes systemic monitoring possible.  Explicit regulation of OTC derivatives in India has been  a key element of the policy framework which has helped (ii) There is a clear distinction between the roles of  in preserving systemic stability. The responsibility market makers and users for all OTC derivatives.  for the regulation of all interest rate, forex and credit It is the market makers which function as risk  derivatives, including OTC derivatives, vests with the transferors in the system. It is extremely important  Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Legally, the RBI derives that these entities function in a totally transparent  these powers from various statutes including the and regulated manner. Only banks and primary  Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, the Banking Regulation dealers in case of certain interest rate derivatives are  Act, 1949, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 permitted to act as market makers since extending  and the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial this facility to all agents can result in risks building  Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. up on the balance sheets of such entities.  1 Gopinath (S) (2010) : Pursuit of complete markets  The missing perspectives, RBI Speeches, http://rbi.org.in/scripts/BS_SpeechesView.aspx?Id=480 2 Risky PV01 represents the value change (Present Value Impact) of the CDS when the spread moves by 1 basis point. 64 Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   64 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   64 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives Box 1 RBI Amendment Act, 2006 In 1999, by the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1999, section 18A was inserted in Securities Contracts (Regulation)  Act, 1956 (SCRA) which reads as under: 18A. Contracts in derivative  Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, contracts  in derivative shall be legal and valid if such contracts are (a) traded on a recognised stock exchange; (b) settled on the clearing house of the recognised stock exchange,  (c) in accordance with the rules and bye-laws of such stock exchange. In view of the said section 18A of SCRA, a doubt was raised about the legality of OTC derivatives such as forward  rate agreements and interest rate swaps permitted under RBI guidelines issued in July 1999. It was felt that these  OTC derivatives could be deemed as wagering contracts and as such, void under section 30 of the Indian Contract Act,  1872 and not legally valid under section 18A of SCRA.  Recognising that OTC derivatives play a crucial role in reallocating and mitigating the risks of corporates, banks and  ? nancial institutions and that the ambiguity regarding the legal validity of OTC derivatives inhibits the growth and stability  of the market for such derivatives, suitable amendments, effective January 9, 2007, were carried out to the Reserve Bank  of India Act, 1934 (RBI Act).  Section 45V of RBI Act, 1934 (inserted by Reserve Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2006) lays down that notwithstanding  anything contained in SCRA or any other law for the time being in force, transactions in such derivatives, as may be  speci? ed by RBI from time to time, shall be valid, if at least one of the parties to the transaction is RBI, a scheduled bank,  or such other agency falling under the regulatory purview of RBI under the RBI Act, the Banking Regulation Act, 1949,  the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999, or any other Act or instrument having the force of law, as may be speci?  ed  by RBI from time to time. It also provides that transactions in such derivatives, as had been speci? ed by RBI from time to  time, shall be deemed always to have been valid.  The Act further gives powers to the Reserve Bank under Section 45W to ...determine the policy relating to interest rates  or interest rate products and give directions in that behalf to all agencies or any of them, dealing in securities, money  market instruments, foreign exchange, derivatives, or other instruments of like nature as the Bank may specify from time  to time. However, the directions shall not relate to the procedure for execution or settlement of the trades in respect of  transactions on exchanges. (iii) The users, including ? nancial entities, are in the system. Some of these structures may  permitted to transact in derivatives essentially simply be unsuitable for a large section of users  to hedge an exposure to risk or a homogeneous given their complexity. Most importantly, if left  group of assets and liabilities or transform unregulated, these structures may exploit the  an existing risk exposure. This stipulation is clear regulatory arbitrage by offering hidden  essentially to restrict speculative trading in payoffs that are otherwise not allowed on a  derivatives by the real sector, whose primary standalone basis.  economic interest in undertaking derivative  transactions should be to hedge their exposures. (v) The responsibility for assessment of customer  suitability and appropriateness is squarely on  (iv) Derivative structured products (i.e. combination the market maker. There are a detailed set of  of cash and generic derivative instruments) are requirements that the market maker needs to  permitted as long as they are a combination of ful? ll in this regard while selling any product  two or more of the generic instruments permitted to a user. As the recent experience in many  by RBI and do not contain any derivative as countries shows, inappropriate understanding  underlying. Structured products entail packaging of complex derivatives by the buyers of these  of complex, exotic derivatives into structures can have serious repercussions. The argument  that may lead to increased build-up of risks of caveat emptor does not really work in practice,  Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   65 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   65 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives as many countries are realising on account of of inter-bank spot forex transactions and all outright  huge derivative losses. It is ultimately a systemic and repo transactions in government securities,  issue and it is important, in the interest of sellers whether negotiated or under order driven systems.  of the products as well, that suf?  cient suitability CCIL has commenced non-guaranteed settlement of  assessment is done before selling the product. OTC trades in IRS/FRA in November 2008, covering  over 75 per cent of the market turnover. CCIL also  (vi) All OTC forex and interest rate derivatives offers certain post-trade processing services like  attract a much higher credit conversion resetting interest rates and providing settlement  factor (CCF) than prescribed under the Basel values to the reporting members. Guaranteed  framework and all exposures are reckoned on settlement of these trades is expected soon. CCIL  a gross basis for capital adequacy purpose. also acts as central counterparty for spot and forex  The applicable CCFs were increased in 2008 forward trades.  since it was felt that the conversion factors  prescribed under the Basel framework did not With the enactment of the Payment and Settlement  suf? ciently capture the market volatility of Systems Act, 2008, the Reserve Bank has the  underlying variables in the Indian context. legislative authority to regulate and supervise  payment and settlement systems in the country. The  (vii) Exposures of banks to central counterparties clearing and settlement facilities offered by CCIL are  (CCPs) attract a zero risk weight as per Basel governed by the risk management processes which  norms. Additionally, collaterals kept by banks are assessed by the Reserve Bank through its offsite  with the CCPs attract risk weights appropriate monitoring and onsite inspections. The margins  to the nature of the CCP as re? ected in the with the CCIL are maintained in the form of cash  ratings under the Basel II Standardised Approach. and government bonds ensuring the quality and  The latter was incorporated by RBI as CCPs liquidity of the settlement guarantee fund.  cannot be considered risk free entities. (viii) All permitted derivative transactions, including  5| TRANSPARENCY AND REPORTING roll over , restructuring and novation are required  to be contracted only at prevailing market rates.  This ensures that non-market rates are not used The aggregate trade data relating to all OTC derivatives  to manipulate cash ?  ows current and future. is required to be reported by banks on a regular basis.  On the forex side, while banks are required to report  (ix) There are regulations for participation by aggregate daily sales/purchases of forex forwards and  non-residents in derivative transactions. swaps, data relating to options is collected on a weekly  This basically ? ows from the capital account basis. Additionally, as part of regulatory reporting,  management framework which places certain banks report to the RBI product-wise notional  restrictions for participation by non-resident principals of their outstanding derivative exposures  3 investors in the forex and interest rate markets. on a monthly basis, indicating the bifurcation between  trading book and banking book, and benchmark-wise  details of interest rate swaps. They also report related  credit risk exposure to their top ten counterparties  4| CLEARING AND SETTLEMENT each in the ?  nancial and non-?  nancial sectors.   INFRASTRUCTURE  In the recent past, important initiatives have been  taken to enhance reporting disaggregated trade data   FOR OTC DERIVATIVES  for OTC derivative transactions. A start was made  in 2007 when all banks started reporting the inter-bank  In India as early as in 2002, the Clearing Corporation of interest rate swap (IRS) trade data on-line to CCIL.  India Ltd (CCIL) commenced guaranteed settlement The collection of client level trade data from banks  3 Foreign investment in rupee debt securities, both sovereign as well as corporate, is permitted only within prescribed limits. This follows from the broader capital account  management framework which has favoured freer foreign investment in equity markets and a limited access in the debt markets. Non-residents are also not permitted  to freely transact in forward markets; a limited window has been allowed to non-resident investors to hedge their currency risk in respect of their investments in India. 66 Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   66 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   66 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives has also started on a weekly basis from October 2009. may need to be recognised that a bank-client  The traded price range and volume data on inter-bank relationship is a much broader one and could  trades is also being disseminated publicly for market include a credit relationship as well. Provision  transparency. of a facility-wise collateralisation may work  against the smaller clients which face dif?  culties  Going forward, a working Group is looking into the in managing liquidity on a daily basis. issue of a single point centralised comprehensive  reporting of all OTC derivatives. The objective is  two-fold: to make the reporting more meaningful only if the exposure is calculated frequently  for regulatory assessment as well as market and there is a mechanism to exchange collateral  transparency and to have a single-point reporting dynamically. Who would ensure this? It will  platform for all market transactions. invariably again be the banks own model which  will be used to arrive at both the exposures in  favour or against the bank.  6| ISSUES GOING FORWARD  the issue of procyclicality that gets hardwired  Given the above context, the OTC market in India in the system through mark-to-market based  for interest rate, forex and credit derivatives will collateralisation and this would be equally  continue to operate within a regulated framework applicable in the central clearing model.  with increased transparency. New instruments for  exchanges will be introduced in a gradual manner, (iii) Push towards central clearing: while CCP model is  as hitherto. Further areas for strengthening the accepted as an ideal solution form a counterparty  functioning of OTC markets will include greater risk perspective, it is being increasingly  standardisation of OTC derivatives and suitably recognised that a universal acceptance of CCP  extending central clearing arrangements for such model would result in the concentration of risks  contracts where feasible. at one point, which would potentially become  the single point of failure for market stability.  However, there are a few open issues which need Certain issues become extremely critical in  to be addressed: this regard: (i) Contract standardisation: standardisation is  one of the prerequisites of moving contracts The essence of a CCP arrangement is netting  towards central clearing. There is merit in going and margining, which are contingent on  by the argument put forth in a recent Financial homogeneity of the underlying asset, availability  Services Authority (FSA) paper that there are of reliable prices and sound risk models to  bene?  ts from pursuing greater standardisation capture potential future exposures. The ability  in itself, irrespective of whether these products of models to capture tail risks is, however, put  are then cleared or traded on an exchange. to question post crisis. Given the vanilla nature of products permitted  in the Indian context, standardisation for  existing products may not be dif?  cult. treated as too-big-to-fail systemic entities and  be brought under the oversight of the systemic  (ii) Bilateral collateralisation: though bilateral regulator within a globally harmonised set of  collteralisation is considered an ef?  cient, standards. In this regard one important and as  though sub-optimal, solution to central clearing, yet unresolved question is whether CCPs should  it involves signi?  cant trade-offs. have access to central bank credit facilities and,  if so, when. Given the incentives structures   increase cost for hedging by the real sector and infrastructure entities, it may be worthwhile to  place huge premium on availability of good consider CCPs as public utility and organise  quality collateral. In case of client trades, it them as at-cost entities.  Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   67 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   67 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives (iv) Higher capital requirements for non-cleared trades: in the past to enable better design of hedging  the Basel requirements already prescribe a capital solutions for clients. These cost reduction  charge for credit risk exposure of banks arising structures, introduced in 1996 inherently  out of OTC derivative transactions. In as much involved a trade-off between reduction in the  as these exposures are reckoned on a gross basis, cost of hedging and retention of part of the  there is already a disincentive for bilaterally cleared downside risk. The concerns relating to proper  OTC transactions as against centrally cleared valuation, mis-selling of such products and  transactions. To further address the systemic risks other irregularities that emerged in the recent  inherent in signi?  cant inter-bank OTC transactions, past forced a re-evaluation of the propriety of  all such inter-bank exposures may be subject to a allowing such products in India.  higher capital charge.   However, interestingly, many corporates and  (v) Role for bespoke products: this issue is more industry associations represented that prohibiting  relevant for jurisdictions involving product cost reduction structures will seriously impede  regulation, as in India. The trade-off is between the dynamic forex risk management operations of  the requirements of the real sector and the corporates and their competitiveness in the global  risk assessment of the product. To give an markets. It has been suggested that structures may  example from our experience, certain zero-cost be allowed with additional safeguards to address  forex option/swap structures were permitted the leverage and mis-selling issues. It would be interesting to see how the global debate in regard to the reform of the OTC derivative markets  ? nally settles in various jurisdictions. In some senses, the approach seems an extension of the pre-crisis  regulatory philosophy in these markets, with a non-obtrusive view of ?  nancial markets and ?  nancial products  per se, while concentrating on stronger entity regulation and conduct of business aspect of the ? nancial  markets.  It would be important for the process to have any lasting impact that it is supplemented with a framework  for regulating markets from a systemic risk perspective as well as ensuring sound prudential framework  for regulation of all ? nancial intermediaries engaged in derivatives, exchanges and CCPs. The reform of  OTC derivatives cannot be disassociated from the larger perspective of the too-big-to-fail issue, at the heart  of which is limiting the proprietary trading by banks.  For countries such as India, the collective experience of the developed markets at the epicentre of the  crisis and their response in terms of changes to institutional and regulatory models is a great opportunity  to tread a new path. Hopefully we will ? nd effective ways to channelise the power of ? nancial innovation  in a more constructive manner.  68 Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   68 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   68 13/07/2010   09:06:52 13/07/2010   09:06:52ARTICLES Shyamala Gopinath: Over-the-counter derivative markets in India  Issues and perspectives ANNEX Size of OTC derivative markets in India The BIS Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity in 2007 estimated  that the percentage share of the rupee in total foreign exchange market turnover covering all currencies  increased from 0.3 percent in 2004 to 0.7 percent in 2007. As per geographical distribution of foreign exchange  market turnover, the share of India at USD 34 billion per day increased from 0.4 in 2004 to 0.9 percent in 2007.  The activity in the forex derivative markets can also be assessed from the positions outstanding in the books  of the banking system. As of December 2009, total forex contracts outstanding in the banks balance sheet  amounted to INR 36,142 billion (USD 774.25 billion), of which over 86% were forwards and rest options (Table 1). Table 1 Outstanding derivatives of banks: notional principal account S.No Item March 2007 March 2008 March 2009 December 2009 INR USD INR USD INR USD INR USD  billions billions billions billions billions billions billions billions 1 Foreign exchange contracts 29,254 671.12 55,057 1,377.46 50,684 994.78 36,142 774.25 2 Forward forex contracts 24,653 565.57 47,360 1,184.89 44,669 876.72 31,190 668.17 3 Currency options purchased 4,601 105.55 7,697 192.57 6,015 118.06 4,952 106.08 4 Futures 2,290 52.53 2,743 68.63 3,511 68.91 3,447 73.84 5 Interest rate related contracts 41,958 962.56 85,430 2,137.35 44,803 879.35 46,434 994.73 6 Of which:  single currency interest rate swaps 41,597 954.28 85,159 2,130.57 44,377 870.99 46,073 987.00 7 Total -contracts/ derivatives 73,502 1,686.21 143,230 3,583.44 98,998 1,943.04 86,023 1,842.82 Source: RBI With regards to interest rate derivatives, the inter-bank rupee swap market turnover, as reported on the CCIL  platform, has witnessed a decline in terms of notional sum in 2009 over 2008 before some recovery in 2010,  mostly on account of early termination of the contracts through multilateral netting (Table 2). The outstanding  single currency interest rate swap contracts in banks balance sheet, as on December 31, 2009, amounted to  INR 46,073 billion (USD 987 billion) in notional principal while the amount of cross currency interest rate swaps  was relatively at a lower level. The overnight index swaps (OIS) based on overnight MIBOR has been the most  widely used OTC derivative for hedging interest rate risk. The market participation, however, remains much  skewed with the foreign banks as the major player. The size of the Indian derivatives market is clearly evident  from the above data, though by global standards it is still in its nascent stage. Table 2 Outstanding volume in IRS for various benchmarks 1 2 3 MIBOR MIFOR INBMK Notional sum No. of trades Notional sum No. of trades Notional sum No. of trades   INR billions USD billions INR billions USD billions INR billions USD billions End-march 2008 36,556 838.63 61,665 6,116 140.31 16,528 137 3.14 368 End-march 2009 13,940 348.76 23,732 4,680 117.09 11,803 187 4.68 461 End-march 2010 17,488 343.24 29,853 3,269 64.16 8,201 204 4.00 450 1 MIBOR: Mumbai Inter-bank Offered Rate: the benchmark rate published by NSE/FIMMDA based on polled rates from a panel of representative banks   2 MIFOR: Mumbai Inter-bank Forward Offered Rate: implied forward rupee rate derived from USD LIBOR and the USD/INR forward premia 3 INBMK: Indian Benchmark Rate published by Reuters. This effectively presents a yield for government securities of a speci? c tenor. Banque de France  FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   69 FSR14_GOPINATH.indd   69 13/07/2010   11:01:46 13/07/2010   11:01:46