I am thankful to Professor Nirvikar Singh for giving me this opportunity to be with a group of very eminent economists, with deep understanding of various aspects of Indias economy. I have set, for myself, a humble task of presenting before you, a consolidated account of financial reform measures undertaken so far, and indicate where we were before reform and where we are now. Comments and outlook in regard to some of the measures would also be in order, keeping in view internationally acceptable standards or practices. The main focus would naturally be on the RBIs role in banking sector and financial markets. I will conclude by highlighting what emerge as the most The financial system in India built a vast net work of financial institutions and markets over time, and the sector is dominated by banking sector which accounts for about two-thirds of the assets of the organised financial sector. The first phase of current reform of financial sector was initiated in 1992, based on the recommendations of Committee on Financial System (CFS or Narasimham Committee). Briefly stated, the main features of the financial sector reforms undertaken so far are: First, financial sector reforms (FSR) were undertaken as part of overall economic reform. Second, while the reform process itself commenced in India well after many developing countries undertook reform, FSR were undertaken early in the reform cycle. Third, these were orderly as designed by a high-level committee taking into account the prevailing circumstances. Fourth, while on the regulatory aspects and relevant financial ratios, there was discernible progress, on structural aspects, especially public ownership and incentive structures including autonomy of public sector banks, reform process fell short of expectations of CFS. Fifth, the reforms have brought about some efficiency, as for example evidenced by recent reduction in interest spreads or increasing trend in household savings, especially financial savings. Sixth, the financial system and in particular the banking system displays continued stability relative to other countries. While during the initial stages of the FSR, India was often criticised as being far too gradual, the financial crisis in the past two years which have afflicted a number of developing countries, not to talk about some developed countries, have shown the merits Finally, the progress that has been made in a substantial yet non-disruptive manner, has given confidence to launch what has been described as second generation or * Ajit for background notes. Mohanty, and Dr. D. M.S. Mohanty, I am also thankful to Messrs D.  Malegam for his kind advice on accounting standards. I am thankful to Mr.  A.Prasad for their valuable assistance. Gopinath and Dr. Shyamala I am grateful to Mrs.  Santa Cruz on November 20, 1998. Growth, Governance and Empowerment: The Future of Indias Economy at University of California, Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference on Keynote address by Dr. Y. V.  second phase of reforms - especially in the banking sector. of Indias gradual reforms. Main Features critical issues that need to be currently addressed. Financial Sector Reform: Review and Prospects*In this background, a second Committee under Mr. Narasimham, who chaired the CFS, was constituted to advice Government on banking sector reforms (CBSR ) . The Report of the Committee (April 1998) provides a framework for the current phase of reforms. The RBI has already acted on many of the recommendations as per announcements made in Governor Jalans October 1998 Monetary and Credit Policy RBIs approach to reform in financial sector has been ably articulated by Dr. C. Rangarajan in his speeches as Governor, RBI. The approach that governs both the first pancha-sutra  First, cautious and proper sequencing of various measures  giving adequate time to the various agents to undertake the necessary norms; e.g., the gradual introduction of Second, mutually reinforcing measures, that as a package would be enabling reform but non-disruptive of the confidence in the system, e.g., combining reduction in refinance with reduction in the cash reserve ratio (CRR) which obviously improved bank Third, complementarity between reforms in banking sector and changes in fiscal, external and monetary policies, especially in terms of co-ordination with Government; e.g., recapitalisation of Government owned banks coupled with prudential regulation; abolition of ad hoc treasury bills and its replacement with a system of ways and means Fourth, developing financial infrastructure in terms of supervisory body, audit standards, technology and legal framework; e.g., establishment of Board for Financial Supervision, setting up of the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology, legal amendment to the RBI Act on Non-Banking Financial Companies Fifth, taking initiatives to nurture, develop and integrate money, debt and forex markets, in a way that all major banks have an opportunity to develop skills, participate and benefit; e.g., gradual reduction in the minimum period for maturity of term deposits and permitting banks to determine the penalty structure in respect of premature withdrawal, syndication in respect of loans, flexibility to invest in money and debt market Reform measures have been grouped, for convenience, and presented in Annexure I. The pre-reform position, reform measures undertaken on an year wise basis, current status and comments on outlook are indicated. I will mention here only some significant Major problem faced by the banking system was on account of constraints, mainly in terms of massive preemption of banks resources to finance Governments budgetary needs and administered interest rates. Removal of these constraints meant a planned reduction in statutory preemption and a gradual deregulation of interest rate prescriptions. Since FSR, total effective preemption has been brought down from 54 per cent to less than 35 per cent. The effective CRR which was as high as 16.5 per cent has 2 Preemptions aspects to link up with critical issues that we intend identifying. Reform Measures and Outlook instruments, greater freedom to banks to borrow from and invest abroad. (NBFCs). advances, coupled with reforms in debt markets. profitability. prudential norms. or five principles. and second phase is similar and, could be summarised as  RBIS Approach Review statement.been brought down to 9.75 per cent. CRR in excess of 3 per cent is currently remunerated at 4 per cent per annum. Given that the CRR is a tax on the banking system it is better to gradually reduce the CRR rather than maintain a much higher CRR with a relatively higher remuneration on these balances. The medium-term objective of reducing CRR has to take account of money supply considerations and also the objectives of exchange rate stabilisation. Furthermore, reduction of the CRR would depend on manoeuarability on money supply impact presently constrained by degree of monetisation of fiscal deficit Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) has been gradually brought down from an average effective rate of 37.4 in 1992 to the statutory minimum of 25 per cent though at present, many banks hold SLR well in excess of statutory prescription. Further reduction in SLR, though desirable, would have to await reductions in fiscal deficit apart from needed improvements in prudential standards including internal risk management Structure of administered interest rates has been almost totally dismantled. Prescriptions of rates on all term deposits, including conditions of premature withdrawal, and offering uniform rate irrespective of size of deposits have been dispensed with. Currently, there is a prescribed rate of 4.5 per cent for savings bank accounts which are used by individuals virtually as current accounts and as the cost of servicing these accounts is high the remuneration on these accounts has necessarily got to be low. There is yet to emerge a consensus on further deregulation of interest rate on savings deposits. There is understandably a differentiated interest rate ceiling prescribed for foreign currency denominated deposits from non-resident Indians, and such ceiling will have to continue as part of managing external debt flows, especially short-term flows till fuller liberalisation of capital account. Lending rates for different categories, which were earlier prescribed, have been gradually abolished but transparency is insisted upon. Each Bank is required to announce Prime Lending Rates (PLR) and the maximum spread that it charges. However, there are three exceptions. Currently interest rate on smaller advances (i.e., up to Rs.200,000) should not exceed PLR. The element of concessionality of very small loans below Rs.200,000 has to be seen in the context of very small loans. As the figure up to Rs.200,000 has not been adjusted since 1990, the real effective protection for small loans has been gradually reduced by the inflation drift. Lending rate for exports are still prescribed. The prescription of interest rates for exports linked to the period of availment is to some extent used as an instrument to influence leads and lags in repatriation of export proceeds. Finally, ceilings are prescribed in respect of certain Prudential norms are being introduced gradually to meet the international standards. Consequent upon CBSR recommendations, action has already been initiated to increase the capital adequacy ratio; assign risk weights to Government approved securities, to take care of the market risks; and also assign risk weights to open position in forex and gold. In most of these, a time table has been indicated for the first phase only, so that banks are on notice for the first phase while the RBI has retained the 3 Prudential Norms advances in foreign currency, which could be reviewed. Interest Rates systems. Ofcourse, enabling legislative changes would also be needed. and uncertainties in forex markets.freedom to decide on the timing of the second phase. Given the normal growth of 17 to 18 per cent in credit, and the required level of capital adequacy after implementing CBSR recommendations, a substantial infusion of capital into the banking system will be warranted. This is likely to have significant implications for public sector. Government has to weigh the desirability of further budgetary support vis--vis substantial reduction in share of Government ownership of banks. Incidentally, as long as capital markets are sluggish, and their view on banks, bearish, a high proportion of divestment may be Similarly, internationally accepted norms of income recognition have been introduced except that income on asset is not recognised if it is not received within two quarters after it is past due, i.e., due date plus thirty days. The international norm is 90 days. Tighter standards, though desirable, have to be introduced gradually so that both banks and borrowers have notice to adjust their operations, and there is no serious disruption in the normal banking activity or erosion in public confidence in the banking system due to balance sheet impact. Also, a sharp tightening of the norms would pose an unbearable burden on banks and would serve no substantive purpose unless corresponding changes are made in credit appraisal systems and debt recovery Asset classification, which was introduced as per internationally acceptable practices early in the reform process is sought to be further strengthened gradually, as per CBSR. A significant decision taken relates to treatment of assets guaranteed by the State Government as non-performing under certain circumstances. This is a somewhat exceptional provision to take care of the temporary delays observed in respect of a few Competition is sought to be fostered by permitting new private sector banks, and more liberal entry of branches of foreign banks. The share of public sector banks in the banking business is going down, particularly in metropolitan areas. Competition is sought to be fostered in rural and semi-urban areas also by encouraging Local Area Banks. Some diversification of ownership in select public sector banks has helped the process of autonomy and thus some response to competitive pressures. The RBIs efforts to enhance competition do, however, take into account the response of public sector banks and their principal, the Government. There are some banking institutions such as cooperatives, regional rural banks and local area banks, which are yet to be brought fully into the discipline of reform process. The transparency and disclosure standards have been enhanced to meet international standards, though there are a few areas where we are lagging. These relate to maturity pattern of assets and liabilities, movements in provision account and NPAs and progress needs to be made in all these areas. To provide an authentic comparative information on the performance of banks, the RBIs annual publication `Trend and Progress of Banking in India presents, since the last two years, detailed information on 4 individual banks enabling public assessment of the working of banks. Competition and Transparency State Governments in honouring their guarantee obligations when invoked. mechanisms. needed to raise the resources needed, since share premia may be low.An independent Board for Financial Supervision under aegis of the RBI has been established, and consistent with international practice, focus is also on offsite inspections and on control systems internal to the banks. Status of implementation of Core Principles of Banking Supervision (Annex II) shows that of 46 principles, 33 have been implemented, 11 are partially implemented, while only two are yet to be implemented. These two relate to the critical aspect of adequacy of reserves against country risk and transfer risk; and consolidated reporting. While the former is not a major issue at this juncture in view of limited cross border exposure, the latter is of significance warranting early action. Even in respect of the Core Principles, which have been implemented, the RBI is making constant efforts to improve the quality of supervision and the skills of Selective credit controls have been dispensed with. Micro-regulation of credit- delivery has been given up, and there is a greater freedom to both banks and borrowers in matters relating to credit. However, there are apprehensions on two counts, viz., the discipline of priority sector lending and flow of credit to the needy and deserving, on a timely basis. The advances eligible for priority sector lending have been enlarged, interest rates deregulated and alternate avenues of investment permitted, thus making the priority lending far more flexible than before. No doubt, banks are averse to sub-ceilings in priority sector, and have some problems with procedural requirements. The major area of serious concern relates to Government sponsored programmes involving subsidies, where there are serious problems of both co-ordination and recovery. CBSR has made some There was a general consensus that the real issue in credit-delivery is more availability of credit than cost. Consequent upon the deregulation of interest rates, there was an expectation that credit flow to the needy will be enhanced, but there is some disappointment about the credit-delivery  especially to small industry. Procedural simplifications have been advised by the RBI for rural credit, credit to small industry and The most critical issue in financial sector reform relates to consequences of the extent of public ownership and special laws governing publicly owned banks. CBSR has devoted a significant part of its report to reform of public sector banks, on which Government, as the principal, needs to act. At present, public ownership has adverse effects on level playing field among banks, capacity and willingness to compete in the market place, incentives to perform, and binding work practices/methods that inhibit efficiency. The issue of efficiency in public sector banks has several dimensions, and legal is one of them. Again, issues of optimal efficiency, autonomy and ownership are intertwined and need to be resolved. Reduction of public ownership below the majority level prescribed would need an amendment to the three different laws that govern public 5 sector banks. Sale of shares already held by Government also needs amendments to law. Incentives and Legal Reforms more recently the RBI is working on procedural streamlining for export credit. recommendations and these are still under consideration. Credit Controls supervisors. SupervisionProgress in establishing and operationalising debt-recovery systems has been painfully slow, partly due to judicial review. CBSR suggested several legislative measures that would facilitate debt-recovery, securitisation, electronic systems etc. A serious consequence of tightening prudential norms and pressurising banks to reduce NPA without strengthening the debt-recovery system is the choking of credit. While large corporates may be partly spared by recourse to alternate sources such as debentures or commercial paper, the rest, especially medium and smaller corporates could face credit There is apprehension in some quarters that the Indian Accounting standards followed by the Indian banks are not in line with International Accounting Standards. Annexure III gives a comparative position of some of the significant standards relevant to banking sector and comparative Indian standards/regulations. It will be seen that on accounting and valuation, Indian standards and defacto practices are comparable with international standards. The major area of divergence in accounting is in respect of group accounting and consolidation. In India, currently consolidation is not required and investments in associated companies are not accounted for under equity method. In regard to disclosure, Indian banks do not, at present, disclose maturity pattern of assets/liabilities, concentrations of assets liabilities and off balance sheet items, net foreign currency exposure, movement in provisions account, and gross non-performing assets and related party transactions in the financial statements. However, as regards disclosure of related party transactions, banks are prohibited from granting advances to firms in which a Director is interested. RBI has formally stated that instructions on further disclosures will be announced in due course. Meanwhile, many banks are also Since April 1997, the RBI has been taking special efforts to develop the various segments of the financial markets, in particular, money market, Government securities market and foreign exchange market (Annexure IV to VI). Significant steps have been taken to introduce new instruments, strengthen the institutional infrastructure, widen the participant base, introduce efficient settlement mechanism, rationalise tax measures, and In order to facilitate the conduct of monetary policy, it is essential to improve the efficiency of transmission mechanism through the money market. Among the measures taken by the RBI in the recent past are: cautious entry to additional participants in the inter-bank call money market; actions to develop the term money market, the major among them being the exemption of inter-bank liabilities from CRR and SLR stipulations; and refinements in instruments such as Commercial Paper, Certificate of Deposit, inter-bank participation certificate and rediscounting of commercial bills. The RBI has also been conducting repos of 3/4/14 days both on auction and fixed interest rate basis, depending on prevailing situation in the market. The medium-term objective is to 6 Money Market improve transparency in operations. Financial Markets taking steps to build appropriate information systems, which some disclosures entail. Accounting Standards choke and hence the pace of introduction of measures needs to be carefully modulated. Debt Recoverymake the call/term money market purely inter-bank market for banks while non-bank participants who are not subject to reserve requirements can have free access to other money market instruments and operate through repos in a variety of instruments. The completion of documentation and operational details will pave the way for the introduction of interest rate swaps and other derivative instruments. With proper asset- liability management systems in place, the term money market can also be expected to develop. An electronic dealing system is envisaged to be operationalised by March 1999. The RBI recognises that a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) needs to be introduced, but this will depend on the replacement of General Refinance Scheme though not With the switchover to borrowings by Government at market related interest rates, and more recently, abolition of system of automatic monetisation, it was possible to progress towards a genuine market for Government securities. Reforms instituted by the RBI in this market include selling of Government securities through auctions; introduction of new instruments such as zero coupon bonds, floating rate bonds and capital indexed bonds; introduction of Treasury Bills of varying maturities; establishment of specialised institution, viz., Securities Trading Corporation; institution of system of Primary Dealers and Satellite Dealers; institution of the system of Delivery versus payment; prescription of standard valuation norms; and transparency in operations Future developments in the Government Securities market hinges on three main issues, viz., legal reforms, technological upgradation and achievement of standardised practices. The legislative measures relate to Public Debt Act, to be consistent with modern technology and market practices; Amendment to Securities Contract Regulations Act to allow derivatives and give formal jurisdiction to RBI to regulate the Government debt market; and abolition of Stamp duty to avoid transaction costs in debt markets. These are essential for enabling the development of the market. Development of technology is an integral part of reforming the debt market and the RBI has embarked upon the technological upgradation of debt market. Introduction of the Electronic Dealing System, a Real Time Gross settlement System, integrating the payments and settlement systems for Government securities are all part of the short-term agenda. Finally, standardisation of practices with regard to manner of quotes, conclusion of deals and Measures initiated to integrate the Indian forex market with global financial system include permitting banks to fix their own position limits as per international terms and aggregate Gap Limits; to borrow from and invest abroad up to 15 per cent of their Tier I capital; and to arrange to hedge risks for corporate clients through derivative instruments. Other measures such as permitting forward cover for some participants, and the development of the rupee-forex swap markets also have provided additional instruments to hedge risks and help reduce exchange rate volatility. There has been a temporary slow down in further progress due to uncertainties in the market. These 7 Foreign Exchange Market code of best practices are being evolved for repo transactions. through market process and dissemination of information. Government Securities Market necessarily on a review of export refinance.matters will have to be reviewed from time to time and the process of reform restored The road map for longer-term developments in the forex markets has been drawn by the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility but a view will have to be taken on each one of them depending on domestic and international developments, especially the pace of liberalisation of the capital account. In any case, the process of liberalisation of capital account itself will, to a large extent depend, inter alia, on progress of financial In identifying critical issues, it is necessary to recognise the strengths of the Indian banking sector. These include, long history of regulation, early start of financial reforms, stability imparted by reserve requirements, limited exposure to risky assets such as real estate or stocks or foreign currency, strict control over off-balance sheet transactions, and relatively well diversified credit exposures, rather than undue concentrations. However, greater efficiency can be brought about, only and only if co- First, the medium-term objective of reducing preemptions will be pursued, subject to reduction in fiscal deficit by Government, monetary developments vis--vis growth in real output, and uncertainties in forex markets. Reduction in CRR will help improve profitability of banks. No doubt, reduction in refinance window will give greater Second, on interest rate regime, reform objectives continue to be further deregulation and enabling environment for reduction in interest spreads. These would again depend on the progress in reduction of fiscal deficit; reduction in non-performing assets which in turn needs changes in debt recovery system as also improvement in credit appraisal systems by banks themselves; and rationalisation of interest rates in small savings, bonds, etc., which are alternatives for savers. Furthermore, inflationary expectations do play a critical role in determining interest rates, and these in turn, are Third, RBI will pursue with implementation of the first phase of reform announced in October, 1998 and mount the second phase of reform on prudential requirements soon. These requirements would, however, warrant significant additions to the capital of the banking system as a whole. Further progress will depend on resolution of issues in Government relating to budgetary support, permitting access to capital markets, the strategy for weak banks, mergers, possible changes in the percentage of Fourth, RBI will continue to foster competition between banks and in due course between banks and other financial intermediaries. The issue of competition with other financial intermediaries has to recognise the level playing field argument warranting special treatment to banks as long as they have large preemptions, especially CRR - again linked to fiscal deficit. As regards competition among banks, the issues relating to diversified ownership, incentive structure and reorganisation of public sector banks have to be addressed by Government to enable RBI to pursue measures to enhance competition 8 public ownership, etc. dependent on credibility of price stability. flexibility in this regard. Reserve Bank of India ordinated efforts are made by RBI, Government of India and banks themselves. Critical Issues sector reforms. with appropriate change.without serious systemic implications. RBI will intensify consultations with Centre and Fifth, RBI would also pursue vigorously, improvements in transparency, disclosure standards as also accounting standards to attain the best international practices. Similarly, compliance with Core Principles is being expedited. To focus on criticality of payment and settlement systems, the October 1998 statement on Monetary Policy has laid Sixth, credit-delivery systems will be improved to ensure smooth credit flow but this is facilitated only when legal systems and judicial processes are reviewed to replace cumbersome, and time consuming procedures. In addition to laws relating to debt recovery, changes in bankruptcy law, tenancy laws, urban land ceilings etc. would be Seventh, improvements in financial markets are being so attempted by the RBI as to address both technological and procedural/documentation issues. Development of money and debt markets would also require, among other things, reduction in preemptions, amendments to Securities Contract Act, replacement of Public Debt Act and It is very clear that further progress in financial sector would, to a significant First, sustainable level of fiscal deficit is of paramount importance. Furthermore, cost of raising resources, viz., interest payment for small savings and tax treatment on income from Government securities need to be reviewed. A view has to be taken on budgetary support for recapitalisation of banks and contingent liabilities in case Asset Reconstruction Company route is favoured. An appropriate approach is also needed on how the Government sponsored subsidised special programmes of employment Second, legislative changes that are essential for successful reform are many and CBSR had attempted to address these issues. In particular, legislative changes affecting debt recovery and growth of financial markets, as already listed, are very critical. Legislative changes may also be needed for greater flexibility in change of public Third, structural issues affecting public sector banks have been dwelt at length by CBSR, and suffice to say that the reordering of relationship between Government as principal/owner and banks as agents, through legislative changes or otherwise, would influence the further direction of reform, introduction of competitive pressures and incentive-structures for efficiency-enhancement. Key to financial sector reform is banking reform; key to banking reform is public sector banking reform; and key to public It is clear that actions of RBI and initiatives of Government provide enabling environment, incentive framework and to some extent punitive measures. The outcome will depend on the response of banks, i.e., boards of banks, management, officers and 9 Banks sector banking sector reform is Governments initiative. ownership. generation would operate in the new milieu. extent, depend on the resolution of fiscal, legal, and structural issues. Government of India resolution of Stamp Duty issue. needed to ensure that the collateral offered is in reality a realisable collateral. out a concrete programme of implementing the banking sector reforms. States, on issues relating to co-operatives and Regional Rural Banks.staff. There are, in particular, four broad areas of internal systems which may need Second, the placement, work practices etc., which inhibit incentives for efficiency Fourth, introduction and effective use of technology in banks, especially public I trust I have brought to your notice the efforts made by the RBI, the challenges before us, and the need for co-ordinated actions between the RBI, Government of India and banks themselves. You would appreciate that, by and large, we try to be aware of 10 Thank you. what is desirable and we are implementing whatever is feasible. Conclusion sector banks. Third, flexibility in obtaining and enhancing highly skilled or talented people. and improved customer service. First, the internal control systems in the banks, especially Public Sector Banks. thorough overhauling and which need to be facilitated by Government and the RBI.1. Removal of  CRR 15 percent on  1992-93  Incremental CRR of   CRR at 11 per cent on  Minimum CRR as per law is 3 per NDTL (excluding zero CRR cent.   The reduction in CRR has to take (a) Reduction of  Incremental CRR of CRR reduced in phases from 15  10 per cent incremental CRR into account the reduction in fiscal 10 percent on NDTL per cent to 9.5 per cent. on FCNR(B) deposits over deficit, reduction in overall liquidity over the level of However, CRR was increased the level as on April 11, position and developments in ( i) Cash Reserve NDTL as on May 3, temporarily in 1994 for financial markets in particular the monetary policy reasons. Inter-  possible spill over effects on the bank liabilities exempted from per cent incremental CRR CRR in 1997. During the period between May 3, 1991 and average CRR of 15 per cent was imposed gradually on non-   resident deposits and for certain categories of subsequently removed. In April foreign currency liabilities 1997 10 per cent incremental and net inter bank liabilities, effective CRR is 9.75 per  Interest on cash balances  December 1997- January 1998  maintained with RBI is paid CRR increased in phases by 1 to SCBs at 4 per cent per per cent temporarily for annum on eligible cash stabilising forex markets and   1991 forex markets. for stabilising  1998  CRR hiked to 11 per cent per cent of CRR. then reduced to 10 per cent. balances over the minimum 3 (Banks) Liabilities. cent Foreign Currency Non Residents CRR was imposed on increase in In view of exemption of CRR April 17, 1992. foreign exchange markets. Remaining balances under 10 Ratio (CRR) 1997. emptions pre- 1993-November 1997  Average liabilities). Liabilities (NDTL) constraints 10 percent on NDTL withdrawn. Net Demand and Time external Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Banking Sector Reform Annexure I(ii) Statutory  SLR 38.5 per cent on  1992-94  SLR reduced in  SLR is 25 percent on  Further reduction can be Liquidity Ratio domestic liabilities and which is the minimum contemplated with reduction in fiscal 30 per cent on non- reduction on SLR on resident liabilities - incremental deposits and by effective SLR 37.4 per bringing forward the base  cent. every time. SLR on increase in NDTL over the level as on to 25 per cent. The base level SLR was reduced to 33.75  1997  In April 1997 inter- bank liabilities was exempted from SLR and in October 1997 SLR reduced to 25 per cent on entire NDTL which is the minimum stipulated under Sec. 24 of Banking Regulation Act. Banks are maintaining on average 12 above 30 per cent. percent. September 30, 1994 was reduced date Regulation Act. deficit. prescribed under the Banking (SLR) phased manner through a steeper NDTL Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of(b) Interest rate  Administered interest  1992  Deposits rates were subject to only  The only administered  The deregulation of rates structure on all one ceiling rate as against prescribed rates interest rate on rupee rate interest rates on savings ( deposits including deposits is on savings bank deposits will be examined term deposits of  1993  New Foreign Currency ( Resident) Deposits (Banks) Scheme   The ceiling rate on foreign  Regulations on pre- introduced. Exchange risk has to be borne currency deposits will mature withdrawal of by the banks. Interest rates prescribed by continue for sometime as a   deposits and loans RBI. The earlier scheme was phased out interest on foreign currency measure of prudent debt  Interest rate on term  1995-96  Banks given freedom to fix their deposits uniform for own interest rates on domestic & NRE term deposits of same deposits with maturity of over two years maturity irrespective  1997  Interest rates on bank deposits of  Foreign Currency (  1997  Banks given full freedom to Deposits Scheme  determine interest rates on term deposits of Interest rates prescribed by RBI and  1997  Interest rates on foreign currency exchange risk also deposits to be determined by banks subject to ceiling rate prescribed by RBI followed by freedom to offer interest rates linked to  1998  Minimum lock in period of term  Banks advised to determine their own penal rates of interest on premature withdrawal of domestic term deposits  Banks given freedom to offer differential rate of interest based on  Banks allowed to charge interest rate on loans against fixed deposits not exceeding its Prime Lending Rate 13 (PLR). mn and over. size of deposits of Rs.1.5  and NRE deposits. deposits reduced from 30 days to 15 days. LIBOR. borne by RBI. 30 days and above. Non-Resident) less than one year linked to Bank Rate. of size. which was later reduced to one year. management. deposits continues. and closed by August 1994. against fixed deposits Differentiated ceiling rate of no interest is payable. On current account balances maturities. various  Non- at the appropriate time. deposits earlier. i) Deposit Rates deregulation Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Lending rates structure  1992-1994   Interest rates on advances above  Ceilings certain on advances in consisted of six categories Rationalisation of ,00,000 to be linked to PLR of foreign currency could be based on size of advances. lending rate structure Under one category the from the earlier six  Advances  upto Rs.2 ,00,000 not to RBI had prescribed a categories to three  Export credit rates regulated by RBI.  1994  Banks given freedom to fix their own  Certain advances denominated in Prime Lending Rate (PLR) for advances over   Rs.2,00,000/- (about US      Spreads over PLR to be 14 announced. be announced by banks Both PLR and LTPLR to reduced to two. Lending categories fixed at PLR of banks. ,000/- loans below Rs.25 1998  Ceiling rate on $ 4500/-) Loan against FD not exceeding PLR. currrency subject to a ceiling. foreign  concessional rate. Currently at  categories. minimum lending rate. exceed PLR. reviewed each bank. Rs.2 (ii) Lending rates Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of No capital adequacy  1992  Capital to risk asset  All banks comply with the capital  The  ratio of 8 per cent prescribed adequacy ratio of 8 per cent except suggested increase in capital for 4 banks in private sector and one adequacy ratio to 10 per cent. 9 to be achieved in a phased per cent to be achieved by  Capital adequacy ratio increased to 9 March 2000 and 10 per cent by Foreign banks by 31 March percent to be achieved by March  Decision about further Indian banks with international enhancement will be announced  Capital adequacy on market risk for Govt./approved securities has been announced which will be implemented in two phases. 2.5% 31, 2000. Balance of 2.5% will be  Capital adequacy on forex and gold  Investments in Government guaranteed securities of Government undertakings which do not form part of market borrowing will be subject  Risk weight on outstanding stock of the above securities as on 31 March 2000 will be implemented in two phases at the rate of 10 per cent each  Risk weights of 20 percent will be assigned for advances guaranteed by State Government where the State Governments have remained in default as on March 31 2000 in cases where the guarantee has been invoked.  The risk weight will be increased to 100 per cent if they continue to be in default after March 31, 2001 in respect of such invoked 1993 15 guarantees. in 2001-2002 and 2002-2003. 2000-2001. to additional risk weight of 20% from positions introduced announced later. 8% by March 1996 4% by March 1993 risk weight by the year ending March Other banks operations by 31 March 1994 later. 2000. 2002. manner as follows : bank in public sector. as per Basle Committee norms requirements. Adequacy Narasimham Committee has (a) Capital Norms 2. Prudential Income recognition based  Banks cannot recognise  Banks cannot recognise  The Narasimham Committee II has on health code system interest income on all non- income on assets where recommended that RBI should under which advances implement the international norm of were categorised into eight two quarters after it is past  Non performing assets categories. Of which four due. categories were deemed as interest is past due for a  Banks not allowed  period of four quarters recognise collateral or  ( ending March 1993, three government guarantees for  quarters ending March 31, 1994 and two quarters   ending March 31, 1995 and  (iv) debts classified as bad  could not   Interest on advances guaranteed by  which is past due for two quarters should not be  No clear definition of recognised as income. However the advances will   16 credits. classification of problem be treated as standard assets. Subjectivity in problem credits income on these categories. Government recognise Banks as 30 days beyond due date. and doubtful. onwards. Past due is defined (iii) decreed debts recognising interest income. (ii) suit filed accounts i) debts recalled non-performing assets viz. to defined as on asset on which 90 days in a phased manner by 2002. income is not received within performing assets. recognition (b) Income Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Asset Assets were classified into  1992  All advances have to be  The classification  The Narasimham Committee II has eight health code classified by banks into four broad standards as defined in recommended that an asset be column 3 continue. RBI classified as doubtful if it is in the a) has announced in October sub-standard category for 18 months b) 1998 that an asset will be in the first instance and eventually  treated as doubtful if it d) has remained in sub-  The Narasimham Committee II has standard category for 18  As asset is classified as sub-standard recommended that for the purpose of months instead of 24 when the bank stops recognising evaluating the quality of asset income on accrual basis i.e. when it months by March 31, portfolio Government guaranteed gets classified as non-performing advances which have turned sticky 8. Debts classified by the  Advances guaranteed by should be treated as NPAs. If State Government will be however for reason of the sovereign  An asset is classified as doubtful The classification was left when it remains in substandard classified as NPA if guarantee argument such advances to the discretion of each guarantee is invoked and are excluded from computation, such bank and was not the concerned NPAs should be separately shown as  A loss asset is an asset which is Government remains in an aspect of fuller disclosure and considered as irrecoverable and not default for more than two quarters with effect from  Further tightening of norms has not  In view of the large number of borrowal accounts classification of advances below Rs.25 ,000/- was allowed to be done in a phased manner but income recognition norms were applicable. This relaxation was allowed upto March   are not classified as non-performing asset even if income is not being .. 17 recognised on accrual basis. Advances guaranteed by Government 31, 1998. been announced. April 1, 2000. written off greater transparency of operations. objective. category for 24 months. banks as bad/doubtful asset (NPA). 2001. 7.Decreed debts 6. Suit filed accounts 5. Advances recalled 4. Sick  Non-viable/sticky Loss nursing for 12 months Doubtful c) 3. Sick  viable under Sub-standard 2. Irregular Standard 1. Satisfactory groups categories as under : Classification  (c) Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Provisioning  The provisions to be  1992 - 10 per cent general  The provisioning norms as  Narasimham Committee II has made by banks was provision on outstanding sub- indicated in column 3 recommended that in case of all left to the discretion future loans, asset classification and of the bank. RBI provisioning norms should apply  100 per cent provision on  RBI has announced that Inspecting officers unsecured portion of banks shall make a general even to Government guaranteed would however advances in the same manner as for provision of a minimum of determine whether 0.25 per cent for the year any other advance. For existing  20 per cent to 50 per cent provisions were Government advances, RBI, provision on secured portion of doubtful assets  Additional provisions arising real value of capital a mechanism for a phased from the revised definition of rectification of the irregularities in doubtful asset being phased    On non-performing advances  The Narasimham Committee II has below Rs.25 ,000/- banks had to March 2001 and 31 March recommended that a general make a provision on aggregate provision on standard assets of say 1 outstanding advances without percent may be introduced in a netting for collateral @ 2.5 per  Provisions on advances guaranteed by State cent in 1992-93 which was increased to 15% in 1997-98. invoked and remain in default for more than two had not classified the accounts. Banks had to complete quarters will be made over a classification of all such period of four years from the year ending 31 March 2000 to 31 March 2003 with the normal provisioning norms minimum of 25 per cent each  1993 - Banks were allowed to make provisions on substandard and doubtful assets in March 1993 spread over two years. In subsequent years no such 18 relaxation has been given. year. came into force. advances by 1997-98 after which banks which This applied only to  Government which have been phased manner. 2002. made over two years as on 31 in as on March 31, 2001 to be these accounts. 100 per cent on loss assets and reserves. three year period. over a  Government and banks may work out adequate to assess the ending March 31, 2000. doubtful debts. continue. standard advances standards  (d) Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of(e) Classification  Investments in  1992 - Banks were required to bifurcate  Banks have to  The Indian standards are quite and Valuation of Government and other investments in Government and approved mark to market 70 stringent and no further changes approved securities securities into permanent category and current per cent of the could be carried at investments in book value without cent of the portfolio as current investments to Government and recognising any facilitate valuing all the investments on fully diminution in the securities by 31    In the case of other approved securities from current to  RBI has investments banks had permanent and vice versa . These guidelines announced that in to make adequate ensure that latent losses are provided for at the the next three provisions for years the entire portfolio will be  1993 - The entire investment portfolio of banks other than investments classified as permanent has to be classified into six categories for the for each category of investments. While net depreciation has to be provided by debit to the Profit and Loss account, net gains have to be ignored. Permanent investments can be carried at book value. Premium will have to be amortised over the life of the investment but  1993-1998 The said minimum ratio of 30 per cent has been increased in a phased manner to 60 per cent as on 31 March 1998. It has further been decided to increase the ratio to 70 percent entire investments in approved securities from 19 31 March 1997. sector banks are required to mark to market their for the year ending March 31, 1999. New private discount cannot be recognised as income. purpose of valuation. The valuation will be done marked to market. diminution in value. time of such transfer. 1992  Guidelines were laid down for transfer of March 1999. value of the portfolio. marked to market basis. approved category. Banks had to classify minimum 30 per Portfolio. are required. Investment Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Entry of foreign  1991-1998 - A number of foreign banks were  India has made The Narasimham Committee has allowed entry into the Indian banking sector. commitments in the The number of foreign banks operating in India World Trade  Foreign banks may be allowed  No new private increased from 21 in 1990 to 43 in 1998. Organisation (WTO) to set up subsidiaries/joint sector commercial bank licensed Existing foreign banks were allowed 36 under the General ventures in India which will be Agreement on Trade subject to the same regulations  1993 In order to introduce greater competition in Services in 1995 to on directed credit as Indian grant eight licences in the banking sector, the Reserve Bank issued per year to new and  The licensing policy for setting of new banks in the private sector. The up new private banks may be The number was minimum paid up capital for these banks is reviewed and no category increased to 12 in 1000mn The banks will have to be publicly should be excluded on a priori listed. They are also required to start operations 1997. In actual grounds. These should be well practice India has in a fully computerised environment with state allowed foreign banks of the art technology. Foreign banks/foreign  Revamping of Regional Rural financial institutions are allowed to have 20 per to open 15 branches in banks and establishment of a year. In addition, cent stake within the overall non-resident limit Local Area Banks could off-site  which of 40 per cent as technical collaborator/partner facilitate competition in the require a branch    Co-operatives are involved in banking operations and these  Public sector still dominates and  1996  The Union Budget 1996-97 proposed  The licensing policy for new effective competition setting up of new private local area banks with private banks is under review to them is in jurisdiction over two or three contiguous districts. RBI issued guidelines in 1996 for setting up of new private local area banks. The minimum paid up capital for these banks will be 20 Rs. 50mn. metropolitan areas. a internal Working Group. by  are subject to dual control. allowed to convert to a private commercial bank. the private sector and one co-operative bank was limit of 12. 1994  1996 Nine new banks have been set up in licence are outside this semi-urban areas also. rural and  in private banks. ATMs defined. Rs. existing foreign banks. guidelines in January 1993 for the establishment banks. since 1972 additional branches. banks restrictive suggested that : 3. Competition Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Transparency The income in the  The whole format of Profit and Loss Account and  The transparency and  The Narasimham Committee II profit and loss Balance Sheet was revised in 1992 with a view to disclosure standards has recommended that there is account was shown ensure greater transparency and disclosure. The have been enhanced need for disclosure in a phased net of all manner of the maturity pattern provisions and  Instructions on further of assets and liabilities, The Balance Sheet also is presented in more movement in provisions disclosures will be detailed format with several schedules. Disclosure disclosed. Loss on  The annual statutory report on sale or revaluation  In 1996 banks were advised to include their Trend and Progress of Banking of investments and assessment of capital adequacy ratio in the balance by RBI gives a consolidated other assets could account of status of non- be deducted from performing assets of individual  In 1997 banks were advised to disclose percentage of shareholding of Government, percentage of net Only aggregate amounts under a Details of provision made category-wise i.e. towards few categories were disclosed in the Profit and Loss  value of investments less cumulative Account. There were no schedules   or detailed break- The Balance Sheet Interest income as a percentage of average working disclosure was also Operating profit as a percentage of average working policies were not  4. 21 Profit per employee Business (deposits and advances) per employee disclosed. Return on assets funds Accounting very limited. funds Capital adequacy ratio  Tier II capital up. Capital adequacy ratio  Tier I capital In January 1998 banks were advised to disclose. depreciation.  Gross Amount of subordinated debt raised as Tier II capital NPAs, depreciation etc. NPAs to net advances. banks also. income. sheet. of accounting policies has been made mandatory. NPAs. account and issued in due course. provisions were not therefore income items and expenditure items with schedules. substantially. revised format provides for detailed disclosure of all and Disclosure Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of5. Supervisory Dependence on on-  1994  In order to exercise integrated supervision The RBI supervisory The Narasimham Committee has site inspection of strategy consists of both recommended that an integrated over credit institutions in the financial system and to onsite inspections and off- system of regulation and ensure implementation of regulations in the areas of Focus on credit management asset classification income site surveillance. A detailed supervision be put in place to  priority off-site surveillance system regulate and supervise the recognition and treasury operations a Board for sector credit and based on prudential activities of banks, financial Financial Supervision was set up within the RBI in credit portfolio. supervisory framework on a institutions and non-bank finance Investment and risk quarterly basis covering companies ( NBFCs) the agency The supervisory strategy as finalised by BFS in 1994 management not important areas has been to be called Board for Financial given much i) made operational. In regard Regulation and Supervision to on-site inspections the (BFRS). The BFRS should be ii)  Long inspection iii) process is now on the given statutory powers and be  strengthening corporate governance internal evaluation of the total reconstituted in such a way as to Emphasis was on operations and performance be composed of professionals. At solvency and not on of the bank under the present, the professional inputs   other aspects like are largely available in an up with the primary objective of monitoring the capital adequacy, evaluating asset quality and advisory board which acts as a financial condition of banks in between on-site compliance with prudential examinations identifying banks which show norms focus is now on the The Committee, taking note of financial deterioration and trigger an onsite effective functioning of the formation of BFS has Board management, recommended that the process of  The new approach to annual financial inspection efficacy of internal audit separating it from the Reserve based on CAMELS (Capital Adequacy Asset Bank qua central Bank should Quality, Management Earnings, Liquidity and management. The entire begin and the Board should be cycle of inspection and invested with requisite autonomy  Two supervisory rating models based on CAMELS follow up action is now and armed with necessary powers and CACS (Capital adequacy, Asset Quality, completed within a so as to allow it to develop Compliance and Systems) factors for rating of maximum period of twelve experience and professional Indian commercial banks and foreign banks expertise and to function operating in India respectively have been worked out and would help RBI identify banks where to retain an organic linkage with  The role of the external auditors has been enhanced and enlarged. Besides audit of annual accounts Supervisory skills of RBI may need enhancement, especially to The system of concurrent audit has been introduced. Each bank has to designate Compliance Officer to act all 22 as nodal officer. new financial instruments. capture technological changes and balance sheets. aspects as also financial ratios to be disclosed in the auditors are now required to verify and certify other head of the BFRS. RBI, the Governor, RBI should be condition warrants special supervisory attention. effectively. However, with a view months. Systems) framework commenced from July 1997. and control systems and risk examination. management etc. distinct entity supporting the BFS. liquidity CAMEL system. Apart from 1995  An offsite surveillance function has been set controls and audit functions. iv) cycles enhancing the role of external auditors and setting up of offsite surveillance importance. restructuring system of inspection has four components. 1994. mobilisation deposit banks. SystemFocus was entirely on credit Having introduced credit Asset Liability Management risk and to a large extent on Introduction of income recognition and asset risk, management attention is guidelines are to be finalised. A the management of foreign now focussed on market risk view has to be taken on the exchange risk and operating Introduction of capital for credit risk as per Basle management particularly in introduction of capital for risk. the context of deregulation a) Drawing up loan policy and recovery policy by and liberalisation of interest Emphasis on toning up of rates. Comprehensive asset the appraisal standard, Extending the exposure norms to cover all forms strengthening post sanction supervision and intensive 1 April 1999 to take care of follow-up of large value A Committee looked into the entire gamut of interest rate, liquidity and Introduction of health code Consequent to the recommendation of this norms for classification of Committee, the method of computation of open advances, single and group position was refined and setting up of open exposure limits set up by position limits was made banks specific and RBI; and banks required  set up industry exposure Introduction of market risk capital for open Internal control guidelines Introduction of simple value at risk calculation in issued in a comprehensive manner in 1981. Main emphasis on setting up open Intensive monitoring of inter branch, inter bank position limits and Focus on fraud reporting Implementation of recommendations of  and preventive measures; emphasis on house keeping i.e. balancing of books and reconciliation of Introduction of standards for conduct of investment operations including audit and 23 accounting norms. and inter branch accounts. interbank e) Treasury Operations and audit system in banks Committee for strengthening of internal inspection Jilani c) Operating Risk Setting up of compliance officers Setting up of Audit Committee of Board Introduction of concurrent audit by banks aggregate gap limits. nostro accounts, reconciliation by RBI and  d) Operating Risk: respect of forward gaps More flexible setting up of aggregate gap limits; b) Foreign Exchange Risk position limits in foreign exchange and gold. norms. liberalised to currency risks. foreign exchange markets in India accounts. Forex Risk b)  are being introduced from of exposure in addition to credit exposure liability management systems banks Credit Risk: market risk. Committees recommendation classification norms; Management a) Credit Risk : 6. Risk Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of7. Credit  Credit delivery mainly in 1993  Banks were given freedom to There is no mandatory With pressure on banks to reduce Controls/ Credit consortium requirement NPAs and in the absence of effective the form of cash credit for of inventory and receivables of various and borrowers can either debt recovery systems the credit flow industries while assessing credit have single or multiple especially to medium and small sector  A system of credit banking arrangements or authorisation scheme 1993  The threshold limit of obligatory existed under which loans consortium lending raised from Rs.50 credit will form part of the a cut off point had to be 1995-1996  Loan system for Delivery of Bank Credit for working capital purpose formulated by each bank  Detailed regulations on how was introduced to bring about greater banks should calculate discipline in credit utilisation and to gain There is considerable permissible bank finance as flexibility with regard to also norms for receivables borrowers with assessed maximum credit delivery systems for and inventory holdings of permissible bank finance of Rs.200 various industries were million and above. The cash credit Procedural simplifications in regard to agriculture and  It was mandatory for banks and then gradually reduced to 60%, 40 small industry has been to form a consortium above per cent and 25 per cent in 1996. The brought about recently and system was also extended to borrowers such simplification for  Regulations on levy of with assessed MPBF of Rs.100 million to export sector is expected commitment charge and certain portion of book debt 1996  The levy of commitment charge was left to the discretion of banks.  Regulations on functioning Mandatory levy of additional interest on certain portion of book debt finance was  Limits on grant of term 1996  Participating banks in a consortium were permitted to frame ground rules of the consortium 24 arrangements. loans for projects by banks. also withdrawn. of consortium arrangement. finance. fixed at 40 per cent. levy of additional interest on soon. Rs.200 million and cash credit component Rs.50 million. component was initially restricted to 70% prescribed by RBI. borrowers. better control over borrowers in respect of with Board' approval. referred to RBI. loan policy which has to be million to Rs.500 million. availed by a borrower above method. The regulations on syndicate/consortium is reported to be choked. requirements of borrowers. working capital finance. Delivery System decide on their own the levels of holdings Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Selective credit 1997  In order to provide greater freedom in assessing working capital requirements all instructions relating to Maximum Permissible controls on sensitive Bank Finance (MPBF) were withdrawn and banks were advised to evolve their own methods for assessment.  Banks were required to lay 1997  Mandatory requirement on formation of consortium for borrowal accounts with limit of Rs.500 million and above from more 1997  Limits on grant of term loans for projects by banks was withdrawn. Banks are free to sanction term loans for projects within 1997  Loan component for all borrowers with credit limit of Rs.100 1997  Credit Monitoring Arrangement which replaced Credit 1996 - Selective credit controls on all sensitive commodities was 25 abolished except for sugar. Authorisation Scheme was withdrawn. million and above made uniform at 80 per cent. the ceiling of exposure norms. than one bank withdrawn. down loan policy for each industry for this purpose. commodities. Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of8. Priority Sector  Definition comprised 1992  Export credit target of 10 It is clear from the reforms  While priority sector lending as Lending or introduced in the area that the agriculture, small scale currently operated is not considered a industries (including 1993  Foreign banks target scope of priority sector credit has serious constraint on operations, there setting up of industrial revised to 32 per cent and which been increased and provides includes export credit with sub opportunities to banks to make estates), small road and programmes which are to be funded water transport operators, targets of 10 per cent for export loans on commercially viable by banks. The  terms. There is no element of small business, retail Committee has recommended that 1993  Target of 18 per cent for trade, professional and given the special needs of this sector, self-employed persons, agriculture for Indian banks to Further, the markets have an the current practice may continue. include indirect advances to the option to invest short fall in However, for ensuring greater extent of 4.5 per cent of Net priority sector lending in organisations for involvement and accountability and / , educational also appraisal of schemes on 1996  Export sub target raised freedom not to lend to loans granted to commercial considerations without commercially unviable activities. individuals by banks any extraneous influences, the branch under their schemes, 1993  1998  Definition of Since banks have freedom to managers of banks should be fully priority sector enlarged to invest in bonds, debentures, credit scheme for weaker responsible for the identification of shares etc., the resource base for sections and refinance by beneficiaries under the Government . i) loans to traditional calculating priority sector lending sponsored credit linked schemes. This plantation crops viz. Tea, is restricted to advances,  Target for Indian banks: Coffee, rubber, cardamom, 40 per cent of net bank  The  Committee has also etc. irrespective of size of credit of which direct noted the changes in the scope of agriculture 18 per cent, beneficiaries under the priority sector ii) loans for housing  advances to weaker since the earlier CFS Report was sections 10 per cent of submitted and proposes that given the iii) loans to transport operators importance and needs of employment  Target for foreign banks oriented sectors like food processing  advances to dealers of and related service activities in drip/sprinkler irrigation agriculture, fisheries, poultry and system and agricultural  these sectors should also be covered under the scope of priority  investments made by banks in special bonds of SIDBI,  Banks are also averse to sub ceilings NABARD, NHB, NSIC, in priority sector and procedure of HUDCO, SFCs, SIDCs and REC and contributions to Rural Infrastructure  banks investments in bonds issued by Rural 26 vi) Development Fund (RIDF). computation. sector lending. v) 15 per cent by March 1992 machinery 12 per cent by March 1990 dairying 10 per cent by March 1989 includes export sector: iv) upto 10 vehicles, bank credit Rs.500000. upto holdings Narasimham excluding expanding investments. is yet to be acted upon. RRBs sponsor banks to  include from 10 to 12 per cent NABARD/SIDBI, thus exercising Bank Credit. STs SCs State-sponsored interest subsidy. and 10 per cent for SSI. Narasimham are a variety of government sponsored Directed Credit per cent introduced. Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements ofElectrification Corporation (REC) for financing its Systems Improvement Scheme under Special Project Agriculture (SI- vii) advances to NBFCs for onlending to truck operators satisfying priority sector viii) advances upto Rs.10mn to 27 Software Industry .   norms SPA). Nationalised banks are  1993  SBI Act amended to enhance the scope of Currently out of 105 Related issue is "autonomy" commercial banks (excluding and inhibiting factors such as fully owned by the provision for private shareholding. RBI share Government, State Regional Rural banks), 27 are jurisdiction of vigilance, Bank of India by RBI publicly owned. As per investigative agencies as long  1994  Banking Companies (Acquisition and existing law governing Public as there is majority of public and the associates of SBI by SBI. In the Sector Banks, majority of ownership. Further, the public 15, 1994 permitting nationalised banks to raise public ownership should sector banks are governed by case of nationalised always be maintained. In the three different statues. banks there was no  1995  Banking Companies (Acquisition & provision for private case of SBI the RBI Narasimham Committee Transfer of Undertaking Act) amended to enable shareholding cannot be less recommended dilution of participation. As there banks to reduce the paid-up capital subject to the than 55% and for subsidiaries public ownership to 33 per was no capital condition that the paid up capital cannot be adequacy requirement of SBI, SBI shareholding cent. According to them the reduced at any time below 25 per cent as on the cannot go below 55%. In reduction of the minimum there was no need to date of amendment. This amendment enabled nationalised banks, the holding of Government below consider accessing the market. In certain minimum Government  1993  SBI first public sector bank to raise shareholding has to be 51 per major and clear signal about cases Government capital from the market (Rs.22120 million as the restoration to banks and capital). In 1996 SBI raised capital in the form of have so far raised capital from financial institutions of  19941998 - Oriental Bank of Commerce,  Bank, Bank of India, Corporation Bank, Bank of Public sector banks would Baroda, State of Travancore, State Bank of require additional capital to Bikaner & Jaipur accessed capital markets to meet their normal asset raise capital. Total capital including premium expansion as also the raised by all public sector banks amounted to enhanced capital requirements Rs.60150 million. (Premium Rs.52540 million). and more stringent The Government/RBI/SBI shareholding after provisioning standards. The public issue now ranges from 59.73 to 77% in minimum public share of 55/51 per cent may become a   constraining factor for some  1995-1998 - Till date four banks viz. Punjab banks unless the Act is National Bank, Bank of India, Bank of  and Corporation Bank have returned to Government of India paid up capital aggregating Rs.6421 million. The reduction of capital results in an improvement in earnings per share and helps the banks in better pricing of the share at . 28 the time of public issue amended. Baroda Refund of Capital these banks. Dena autonomy in their functioning. the public. GDRs. capital. provided the necessary cent. Eight public sector banks 51 per cent would in itself be a banks to set off losses against capital. upto 49% from the public. capital  Transfer of Undertakings) amended effective July not to fall below 55%. 9. Ownership Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of10. Legal and per law banks can realise the  In order to effect speedy  Government has set up so far  The functioning of the Tribunals securities pledged to them by filing a recovery of loans has not been effective as there suit against the borrower and retain Government passed the 22 states and 4 Union are several problems faced by the pledged goods as collateral till the Recovery of Debts due Territories. The constitutional them. A Working Group debts are satisfied or sell the goods by to banks and Financial validity of the Act has been appointed by RBI has made giving reasonable notice to the Institutions Act 1993 for challenged and is under several recommendations to borrower without the intervention of the creation of Special adjudication of the Supreme improve the functioning of the Court. The realisation of debts by Tribunals for banks and Court. However, the Supreme DRTs including amendments to financial institutions. Court stayed the operation of selling the pledged goods by giving Monetary claims above the Delhi High Court which  Amendments are being notice, very often banks do not have Rs. 1 mn and above quashed the notification introduced to the SICA 1985 in the goods in their possession as these adjudicated by the Debt constituting the Tribunals and the Parliament to provide that are mostly inventories and are only Recovery Tribunals. The the stay of legal hypothecated to the bank.  In case of immovable properties, the law of moneys or  etc mortgage is  banks and financial against the sick industrial right of sale without the intervention institutions within 6 companies should operate only of the Court is not available to months of such on the specific orders of the applications. The Board for Industrial and  Once a sick industrial company tribunals follow a defined as a company registered summary procedure that for not less than five years whose is expected to expedite the possibilities of misuse of the net worth has been fully eroded disposal of suits filed by stands referred to Board for  The Narasimham Committee II Industrial and Financial has suggested need for several Reconstruction, no proceedings legislative amendments to for the winding up of such existing laws which affect company or for execution of the operations of banks including recovery through sale without appointment of a receiver in judicial intervention, changes in respect thereof and no suit filed Transfer of Property Act to for recovery of money or for the facilitate  enforcement of securities shall lie or be proceeded with further, in law on matters arising from except with the consent of the computerisation and electronic funds transfer, structure of the  Banks and financial institutions therefore faced considerable  According to the Committee the difficulties in recovery of dues evolution of legal reforms has 29 banking system etc Board. reduction in stamp duties, clarity securitisation, properties of such company or for banks. provisions of the Act. rather than automatically to limit Financial Reconstruction (BIFR) banks/financial institutions. unsatisfactory as often the enforcements dispose of such claims of proceedings/suits for recovery of Tribunals are expected to DRTs to function. allowed the  are certain provisions. filing a suit takes very long As regards Reforms: 9 Recovery Tribunals covering Institutional  As Reforms Comments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements offrom the borrowers and not kept pace with the changing enforcement of security charged commercial practice and with to them due to the delays in the legal process. A significant result the economy has not been portion of the funds is thus able to reap the full benefits of blocked in unproductive assets, the values of which keep  In view of the wide-ranging deteriorating with the passage of changes needed in the legal framework, the Committee has  The Sick Industrial Companies recommended setting up  Act further enables borrowers to Expert Committee to formulate avoid meeting their obligations as specific legislative proposals to once the networth is eroded give effect to the suggestions automatically the Act applies and they come within the ambit of  The Finance Minister has BIFR. Thus all proceedings announced setting up of an against the company are stayed and banks are unable to effect 30 recoveries. Expert Committee. made by them. a time. the reform process. the financial sector reforms. As a   .   .     Principle 1, Part 6 Arrangements for sharing information  between supervisors and protection for confidentiality of 31 setup by GOI. the Expert Group  other supervisors. This will be looked into by authorising the Bank to share information with provision be incorporated in the Act It has also been suggested that a specific major supervisors will be represented. GOI to set up a Technical Group on which BFS has decided to refer their suggestions to such information, should be in place. inhouse group and the has been examined by an  cooperation amongst supervisors Interagency  reexamine Banking related legislation. GOI to  now be referred to the Expert Group set up by negligence is yet to be tested in law. This will good faith, the liability of supervisors in case of statutory protection is available for acts done in protection for supervisors. examined this and concluded that while legal including banking supervision is also necessary  setup by the RBI has A working group A suitable legal framework for Principle 1, Part 5 soundness concerns address compliance with laws as well as safety and banking supervision is also necessary including powers to A suitable legal framework for Principle 1, Part 4 ongoing supervision to authorisation of banking establishments and their supervision is also necessary including provisions relating Principle 1, Part 3 A suitable legal framework for banking operational independence and adequate resources. Principle 1, Part 2 Each such agency should possess banks. objectives for each agency involved in the supervision of supervision will have clear cut responsibilities and Principle 1, Part 1 An effective system of banking Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle STATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF CORE PRINCIPLES OF BANKING SUPERVISION Annexure II        32 risks or hinder effective supervision. not  expose the bank to undue affiliations or structures do  authority to establish criteria for ensuring that corporate Principle 5, Part 2 Banking Supervision must have the acquisitions or investments by a bank authority to establish criteria for reviewing major Principle 5, Part 1 Banking Supervision must have the Legislation. other parties. which will be examining the Banking related ownership or controlling interests in existing banks to been decided to refer this to the Expert Group to review and reject any proposals to transfer significant This matter has been examined and it has Principle 4 Banking Supervision must have the authority home country supervisor should be obtained. organisation is a foreign bank, the prior consent of its Principle 3, Part 3 Where the proposed owner or parent also being looked into by this Group, Licenses in future. The issues raised here are new banks and suggest criteria for issuing conditions, including its capital base. private sector, examine the need for setting up plan and internal controls and its projected financial envisaged for the new banks set up in the structure, directors and senior management; its operating fulfillment of the objectives critically evaluate should consist of an assessment of the banks ownership  A Group was set up earlier this year to at   minimum Principle 3, Part 2 The Licensing process  establishments that do not meet the standards set. right to set criteria and reject applications of Principle 3, Part 1 The Licensing authority must have the be controlled as far as possible. Principle 2, Part 2 the use of word bank in names should banks must be clearly defined institutions that are Licensed and subject to supervision as Principle 2, Part 1 The permissible activities of Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle  Principle 6, Part 2 For internationally active banks  requirements should not be less than those  established in        33 companies and individuals on arms-length basis, in place requirements that banks lend to related from connected lending, banking supervisors must have Principle 10, Part 1): In order to prevent abuses arising of related borrowers. to restrict bank exposures to single borrowers or groups Principle 9, Part 2 supervisors must set prudential limits portfolio enable management to identify concentrations within the that banks have Management Information Systems that Principle 9, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must be satisfied Reserves . Loss Provisions and Loan Loss  practices and procedures for evaluating adequacy of Loan that banks establish and adhere to adequate policies Principle 8, Part 2 Banking supervisors must be satisfied Assets practices and procedures for evaluating the quality of that banks establish and adhere to adequate policies Principle 8, Part 1 Banking supervisors must be satisfied and investment portfolios. procedures related to ongoing management of the loan system is the evaluation of a banks policies and Principle 7, Part 2 As essential part of any supervisory investments procedures related to the granting of loans and making of system is the evaluation of a banks policies and Principle 7, Part 1 As essential part of any supervisory the Basle Capital Accord. these absorb losses. components of Capital bearing in mind its ability to risks that the banks undertake and must define the minimum capital requirements for banks that reflect the Principle 6, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must set Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle    that banks have adequate policies and procedures for    34 hold capital against these risks. communicated to banks for implementation. control all other material risks and where appropriate to measures to be taken by banks. These will be identify  measures monitor and Management oversight) to  regarding Risk Management structures and process (including appropriate Board and Senior matter and made several recommendations banks have in place a comprehensive risk management  An in-house group has gone into the Principle 13 Banking Supervisors must be satisfied that market risk exposures if warranted. impose specific limits and/or a specific capital charge on Principle 12, Part 2 Supervisors should have powers to methodology as a minimum requirement. control market risks; Market Risk capital based on BIS standard satisfied that banks have in place systems that accurately Banks will now be required to provide Principle 12, Part 1: Banking Supervisors must be detailed study. particular aspect requires more regarding country risk, this several recommendations maintaining adequate reserves against such risks. Management Group has made Although the Risk Principle 11, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must be satisfied resubmitted. studies and the recommendations activities practice followed by different banks be transfer risk in their international lending and investment recommendations. BFS has desired that the identifying monitoring and controlling country risk and Group which has made several Management that banks have adequate policies and procedures for This issue was examined by the Risk Principle 11, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must be satisfied taken to control or mitigate the risks. that  other appropriate steps are in place requirements  from connected lending, banking supervisors must have Principle 10, Part 3, In order to prevent abuses arising extensions of credit are effectively monitored companies and individuals on arms-length basis  that such in place requirements that banks lend to related from connected lending, banking supervisors must have Principle 10, Part 2): In order to prevent abuses arising Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle       35 inhouse group. is being looked into by an accounting which consolidated consolidated basis. after introduction of a Reports and Statistical Returns from banks on  banks will be implemented means of collecting reviewing and analysing Prudential  Consolidated Reporting by Principle 18, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must have basis. Reports and Statistical Returns from banks on a solo means of collecting reviewing and analysing Prudential Principle 18, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must have understanding of the institutions operations. contact with bank Management and thorough Principle 17 Banking Supervisors must have regular supervision. should consist of some form of both on-site and off-site Principle 16 An effective Banking Supervisory System intentionally and unintentionally by criminal elements. being  used financial sector and prevent the bank  promote high ethical and professional standards in the place including strict Know Your Customer Rules that banks have adequate policies, practices and procedures in Principle 15, Banking Supervisors must determine that as well as applicable laws and regulations. compliance functions to test adherence to these controls and appropriate independent internal or external audit and reconciliation of these processes; safeguarding its assets; for  its assets and liabilities and proper accounts  that involve committing the bank, paying away its funds, authority and responsibility, separation of the functions should include clear arrangements for delegating adequate for the nature and scale of their business. These that banks have in place internal Controls that are Principle 14, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must determine adequate for the nature and scale of their business. that banks have in place internal Controls that are Principle 14, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must determine Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core PrinciplePrinciple 19 Banking Supervisors must have a means of  independent validation of supervisory information either  Principle 21, Part 1 Bank Supervisors must be satisfied  that each bank maintains adequate records drawn up in accordance with consistent accounting policies and practices that enable the Supervisor to obtain a true and fair view of the financial condition of the bank and the Principle 21, Part 2 Bank Supervisors must be satisfied  that the bank publishes on a regular basis Financial Principle 22 Banking Supervisors must have at their  disposal adequate Supervisory measures to bring about timely corrective action when banks fail to meet prudential requirements such as minimum capital adequacy ratios when there are regulatory violations or where depositors are threatened in any other way.   In extreme circumstances this should include the ability to  36 ventures  and subsidiaries. their foreign branches, joint  worldwide, primarily at by these banking organisations  prudential norms to all aspects of the business conducted will be now implemented. banks, adequately monitoring and applying appropriate inhouse group in this regard and these by an consolidated supervision over their internationally active  The BFS has approved the proposals made Principle 23 Banking Supervisors must practice global licence or recommend its revocation revoke the banking  Statements that fairly reflect its condition. profitability of its business examining related issues. inhouse group is implementation. An group on a consolidated basis. on the agenda of the Bank for the capability of the supervisors to supervise the banking Introduction of consolidated supervision is Principle 20 An essential element of bank Supervision is through On-site Examination or use of External Auditors. Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle   . 1. a) A Current investment is an investment that is In UK the investments are by its nature readily realisable and is intended to classified as current/non- current but in US there are  (ii) available for sale and (iii) 2113346 37 trading. maturity for debt securities only other than a current investment. be held for not more than one year. and permanent a) As per international standard. a) Definition of current I) Investments measurement: Asset recognition and Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue A comparative analysis Accounting Standards as relevant to banks Annexure III into by the Expert Group set up by GOI. with other supervisors. This will be looked consolidated Supervision authorising the Bank to share information Supervisors of those banks for the purpose of carrying out provision be incorporated in the Act powers to share information needed by the home country  It has been suggested that a specific Principle 25, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must have institutions . domestic same high standards as are required of  local operations of foreign banks to be conducted to the Principle 25, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must require the (primarily host-country Supervisory Authorities). will be now implemented. exchange with the various other Supervisors involved by an in house group in this regard and these Supervision is establishing contact and information The BFS has approved the proposals made Principle 24 A key component of Consolidated Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principleb) Investments classified as current assets should b) For the purpose of valuation all investments other Current investments are valued be carried in the balance sheet at market value or than permanent investments in Government and at the lower of cost and net the lower of cost or market value. The approved securities held as permitted by RBI has to be realisable value or at current comparison of cost and market value can be treated as current investments and marked to market. cost.   In US held to maturity performed  either on an aggregate portfolio basis, Banks have been advised by RBI to bifurcate all securities should be held at in total or by category of investments, or on an investments in approved and Government securities amortised cost. Trading and into current and permanent. The minimum ratio of available for sale securities  and losses can be included in income or can increased gradually from 30 percent to 70 percent for value. the year ending March 31 1999. RBI has already Gains and losses should be  should be carried in the balance sheet at securities but to shareholders The valuation of current investments is done category equity for available for sale (a) wise. Any net gains under each category is ignored but (b) losses have to be debited to Profit and Loss account The Indian accounting  in the case of marketable equity under Provisions and Contingencies.  If on valuation, standards laid down by RBI in securities the lower of cost and market there is an excess in the provision for depreciation consultation with the Institute account created by earlier debit to profit and loss of Chartered Accountants of 38 India is more conservative as account, it can be written back to profit and loss value determined on portfolio basis. (c) revalued amounts securities. cost either: investments have to be treated as current. be credited to revaluation surplus. individual investment basis. b)ValuationIf revalued amounts are used, a policy for the banks cannot classify frequency of revaluation should be adopted and However, such excess has to be transferred to Capital the 100 percent mark to market is achieved.  Further banks be recognised through the income statement or case of unquoted investments the value is to be cannot recognise unrealised net adjusted on owners equity as a revaluation determined on the basis of Yield to Maturity. surplus provided that the valuation is above cost. However the values have to be further discounted Any revaluation below cost is recognised as an expense in the income statement. The enterprise Permanent investments can be held at book value. should recognise any decline in value below cost However, any premium paid has to be amortised over other than on a temporary basis on an item- by- the life of the investment. Any discount has to be ignored. For the purpose of valuation, as stated above, banks are not allowed to treat  more than 30 percent of their portfolio has permanent investment and progressively over the next three years the intention is c) In cases where current investments are carried c) Banks have to recognise the depreciation in the c) Fixed to current at lower of cost and market, transfer has to be made at the lower of cost and carrying amount. Any revaluation reserve  remaining after the transfer has to be reversed.  Where current investments are carried at market, transfer carrying amount. Transfer any remaining revaluation reserve to income if the policy on current assets is to take gains and losses to d) Current to fixed d) Transfer at lower of cost and market or at d) the transfer will be at value net of depreciation. However, with banks moving to 100 percent mark to 39 market such transfers will be few. transfers market if that was the basis used. income. category at the time of such transfer. value of the investment when it is transferred to current transfers that the full portfolio should be marked to market. item basis. where interest or redemption are in arrears. gains   as income.  In capital and cannot be used for distribution of dividend. The resulting changes in carrying value can either Reserve which is allowed to be treated as part of Tier II investments should be valued in entire categories. investments as permanent  once account under the head provisions and contingencies . Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue transfers substantially all the risks and rewards.UK and US have laid down the books of the lessee. Indian Accounting Standard on lease accounting ensures that the lease rentals  useful life unless there is no certainty about repayment of the lease obligation. A matching eventual purchase when the shorter of useful annual charge is made to profit and loss account representing recovery of the net investment/fair  of either net investment or net cash   depreciation provided thereon. The lease  standard on this and each country adopts its own practice. However an international accounting standard on this issue is expected  has laid down norms for recognition of income and for provisions for loan losses or they rely on the assessment of the external 40 auditor such as in UK Germany etc. As far as banks are concerned, each regulator shortly. and provisioning. by RBI for income recognition, asset classification In India banks follow the detailed norms laid down iii) Impairment of assets obligation is shown in creditors. should be taken over the lease term. of finance leases apparent profit if recognised In the case of sale and lease back transactions character of the lease. investment used consistently according to the the lease. value of the leased asset over the primary period of life and lease term should be used. presumptions and conditions in this regard. capitalised in the books of the lessor and not in the ii) Lease accounting Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue2. Liability recognition  i) Contingencies and events occurring after the International Accounting Standard In regard to of Securities Companies has it is probable that future events will confirm off balance sheet items the external auditors and called for a review of the that an asset has been impaired or a liability measurement requirements of incurred at the balance sheet date; (b) a this standard as guidance is reasonable estimate of the amount of the required to define more clearly resulting loss can be made. The existence of the nature of contingencies. If a contingent loss should be disclosed in a this can be achieved the revised note to the accounts if it is probable that the distinguishing on-balance  date but before the date on which financial items. There is also a particular statements are authorised for issue may concern about the use of provisions in financial and liabilities or may require disclosure. The statements which will also be essential test is whether the event provides addressed when this standard at the balance sheet date or provides if normatiion relating to the applicability of the going concern assumption. For e.g. a borrower becoming bankrupt after the  deferred tax liability should be recognised deferred tax credit. The provision for taxation is for all taxable temporary differences (apart based on the estimated tax liability currently from some specific exceptions). A deferred payable. This is one area where Indian GAAP tax asset may be recognised (for the carry- differs from US/UK GAAP. As far as banks are forward of unused tax losses and unused tax credits) to the extent that it is probable that provisions made by them towards non-performing future taxable profit will be available against assets are not tax deductible and provisions are which the unused tax losses and unused tax credits can be utilised. Measurement of the tax rates which are expected to apply when the liability is settled or the asset is 41 realised deferred tax liabilities and assets should be at made gross of tax. concerned they have more of deferred tax credit as ii) Income taxes balance sheet date. will be reviewed additional evidence about conditions existing indicate a need to make adjustments to assets gain will be realised standard will provide a basis for have been provided for. RBI inspectors do verify whether contingent losses the balance sheet date recognised as an expense and a liability if (a) and measurement Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue  January 1 1996 in view of the increasing use of governed by conservative limits on positions etc  for each class of financial asset, liability and products. The standard will be applied when we equity instrument disclosure is required of  conditions and accounting policies, interest rate  future economic benefits will flow to the are allowed to recognise interest and other enterprise and these benefits can be measures income on accrual basis. However, if interest is past due for two quarters, it cannot be recognised    proportion basis that takes into account the  shareholders right to receive dividend is  4. Effects of changes in foreign exchange rates in two ways. The exchange rates in respect of foreign currency enterprise may undertake transactions in , alternatively it may operate  part of its business in a foreign country which overseas branches of Indian banks, the RBI instructions are that any translation gains should not be recognised as income but transferred to a 42 separate account in the balance sheet. has a different currency. foreign currency are as per international standard. transactions  foreign exchange rates established. effective yield on the asset following basis. royalties and dividends. by others of enterprise assets yielding interest, of goods, the rendering of services and the rise on accrual basis. reliably. 3.  Revenue Recognition Revenue is recognised when it is probable that risk, credit risk fair value and hedges. introduce these products in the banking sector. terms derivatives interest rate swaps etc. and Presentation instruments: Disclosure managing for foreign currency liabilities which are (iv) Financial International Standard. and loss account iii) Employee benefits Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue.  recorded in the reporting currency of the enterprise by applying the exchange rate relevant at the date of the transaction exchange differences arising from settlement or reporting of monetary items should be recognised as income or expenses in the  integral to the operations of the reporting enterprise or whether it is an operation which enjoys a significant degree of autonomy from 5.  statements should consolidate all subsidiaries  example where a subsidiary operates under severe long term restrictions which  one of the core principles for effective banking supervision, it is proposed to call for a off-site  with many of the problem areas of group nature of a business combination; consolidated financial statements and investments in subsidiaries; investments in  43 accounted under the equity method. associates and interests in joint ventures. accounting such as foreign exchange rates; the reporting on consolidated basis. to the parent. significantly impair its ability to transfer funds carried at cost. accounted for under equity method. Investments are foreign and domestic with few exceptions. For Consolidation is not required. Group accounting the reporting enterprise. depends on whether the foreign operations are period in which they arise. Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue6. Disclosure and presentation  International Accounting Standard 30 which specifically deals with disclosure in the financial statements of banks and other similar 2. Income statement: A bank should present an 2. income statement complies with international income statement which groups income and expenses by nature and discloses the amounts of 3. Income and expenses should not be offset except for those relating to hedges and to assets and liabilities where there is a legal right to set off and the offsetting represents the expectation as to the realisation or settlement of the asset or 4. a bank should present a balance sheet that 4.  groups assets and liabilities by nature and lists them in an order that reflects their relative 5. a bank should disclose the market value of 5. Market value of current investments is disclosed. dealing securities and marketable investment securities if these values are different from the 6. the amount at which any asset or liability is stated in the balance sheet should not be offset by the deduction of another liability or asset unless a legal right of set-off exists and the offsetting represents expectation as to the realisation or 44 settlement of the asset or liability. 6. IAS compliant carrying amounts in the financial statements Market value of permanent investments is not disclosed. Investments liquidity. Assets listing reflects liquidity but not the liabilities. Balance sheet liability. 3. IAS compliant the principal types of income and expenses standard 1.  Accounting policies are disclosed 1. Accounting policies disclosure Income statement financial institutions Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue7. a bank should disclose specified contingencies 7. IAS compliant  as per assessment of external and commitments and events occurring after the 8. a bank should disclose an analysis of assets and 8. Banks are yet to build up information on maturity liabilities into relevant maturity groupings based pattern. RBI has advised banks to put in place suitable on the remaining period at the balance sheet date 9. a bank should disclose any significant concentrations of its assets liabilities and off sector Government and banks. Secured and unsecured balance sheet items. Such disclosures should be made in terms of geographical areas, customer or industry groups or other concentrations  of risk. A 10. a bank should disclose the following in regard    the accounting policy which describes the basis on which uncollectable loans and   advances are recognised as an expense and   details of the movements in provisions for losses on loans and advances during the   the aggregate amount of the provision for losses on loans and advances at the balance   the aggregate amount included in the balance is not being accrued and the basis used to determine the carrying amount of such loans are prohibited from giving loans to companies/firms in 45 which directors are interested transactions 11. Not disclosed.  However, as per Banking Law, banks 11. .related party transactions should be disclosed Related party and advances. sheet for loans and advances on which interest sheet date and period. Indian regulations not IAS compliant. written off. net non-performing assets to net advances provisions made during the year accounting policies to losses on loans and advances: advances 10 The following disclosure is mandatory. Losses on loans and net foreign currency exposures. bank should also disclose the amount of significant exposures are also disclosed. balance sheet items liabilities and off- 9. The banks disclose exposures to public sector priority Concentrations of assets, to the contractual maturity systems to capture this information. assets and liabilities Maturity pattern of balance sheet date as already stated above. auditors commitments Contingencies and Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue IV                                                               on  46 Minimum size of CP to Requirement of minimum individuals can invest in with. available repatriable basis and current ratio dispensed Facility of stand-by NRIs on a non- FIs, Banks,  Requirement of minimum working capital) rated. abolished. The issue requires to be linked to fund based Facility of stand-by aggregate amount of CP lakh. Rs.25  cent of working capital Bank Borrowing (ceiling on The minimum size of CP is and floating rate CP. Ceiling increased to 100 per Maximum Permissible maturity of 1 year. Issue of CP linked to such as coupon bearing CP dispensed with days and maximum Variation to instrument Prior permission of RBI required. minimum maturity of 15 Prior permission of RBI Electronic Dealing System. Discounted instrument discounted instrument for a Discounted instrument duty structure permitted to issue CP as a issue CP Rationalisation of stamp PDs are Corporates and PDs are also allowed to corporates Issued by  2. Commercial Paper Telephone oriented market statutory ceiling on NDTL. CRR and SLR subject to exempted for purpose of Interbank liabilities stipulated ceilings. periods 3-6 months within term money market for permitted to borrow from money market. EXIM Bank and NABARD exposure of banks in call IDBI/ICICI/IRBI/SIDBI/ ALM guidelines to limit crore. Reuters/NSE. Electronic Dealing System. reduced gradually to Rs.3 emerging through operationalise Proposal to crore, which was at Rs.20 Telephone oriented market. liabilities. Reference rate repo. minimum size of operations liabilities. interbank exempted for  DFHI as lenders with interbank maintained  Others to operate through to lend. CRR/SLR allowed to entities through CRR/SLR required to be borrowers. PDs are permitted through  Routing of transactions allowed as lenders. operating as lenders and funds/corporate entities PDs with only banks/ companies/mutual allowed as lenders. Financial institutions Private Mutual Funds interbank market purely an FIs/insurance borrow. borrowers and lenders. call/term money market permitted to lend and lenders and borrowers. participate in market as Market Proposal to make the PDs are Banks and Primary Dealers allowed as Only banks were allowed to 1. Call/Notice/Term Money Comments/outlook Current Status Reform Status Pre-Reform Status Elements of Reform Money Market  AnnexureCP.     lakh.           of  3      lakh.                           47 debentures/bonds with Units could be issued to invest in corporate days MMMFs permitted to Subsequently reduced to 15 period  46 days. schemes. have floated MMMF Initial Minimum lock-in- Mutual   Funds Pioneer repatriation basis. Kothari IDBI, UTI and NRIs can invest on non- facilities. MMDA or MMMF Consider cheque issuance MMDAs. MMMFs/ existing mutual funds as 15 days. and institutions to set up directly or through the minimum holding period of been given for 10 banks PFIs Commercial Banks/ Consider reduction in In principle approval has Can be set up by Scheduled Did not exist. 4. Money Market Mutual Funds days. Initial lock-in period of 45 year. deposits in the previous outstanding aggregate fortnightly average CD at 1 per cent of days. Bankwise limit on issue of reduced gradually to 15 year. Initial lock-in period not more than 1 maturity  lock-in period is 15 days. later withdrawn. months and maximum lakh and the minimum Rs.5 raised up to 10 per cent and should not be less than 3 The minimum size of CD is Bankwise limits gradually Minimum maturity of CD rate CD. discounted instrument. lakh. multiples of Rs.25  interest bearing CD and floating CD is issued as a gradually reduced to Rs.5 crore, and issued in Variation to instrument such as Minimum size of CD CD : Rs.1 Minimum size of  years, respectively. structure. Rationalise stamp duty months to 1 year and 1 to 3 1-3 years. a discounted instrument. structure of CDs. CDs for maturity also issue CD for maturity RRBs) as banks (excluding  FIs can issue Banks and Financial institutions can Issued only by commercial Rationalise the maturity 3. Certificate of Deposits Rating required. Rating required year. months. maturity elongated to 1 days and maximum Maturity range of 3-6 gradually reduced to 15 Minimum maturity denomination of Rs.25 crore in at Rs.1  lakh. Rs.5  lakh with denomination of Minimum size of CP issue investor reduced to Rs.25 current ratio (1.33 :1)              48 rediscounting. No minimum period of No ceiling on interest rates. participants in this market. days. money market are for a minimum period of 15 rediscount commercial bills (April 1995). All participants in the call money market can prescribed for rediscounting bills not to exceed 30 days. Rediscounting All participants in the call Minimum period of 15 days Maturity of commercial 5. Commercial Bills from RBI. fund with liquidity support Launched 100 per cent Gilt less than one year. Securities with maturity CP/T-Bills/CD/Dated market instruments such as Investment in money (April 1996) year, within limits. par with other mutual funds maturities less than one Corporates and others on   Limit                                 49 commission introduced in replaced the system of (since June 1997). This PDs) Primary Dealers ( amount underwritten by A portion of the notified each auction (Oct 1998). of preannounced in respect  Notified amount bonds, etc. paid stock, capital indexed floating rate bonds, partly such as zero-coupon bonds, Variety of instruments used security on prevailing conditions. and also on tap, depending not more than 10 years. vanilla fixed coupon Maturity of security usually Instrument used was plain preannounced coupon rate auctions. related market auction (June 1992). issued. market clearing  yields at Securities also sold at Discriminatory type of 20-30 years were being totally Aim to move to auction process. 1992). Long-Dated Securities of instruments. through discriminatory auction process (June preannounced coupon rate. Securities Can consider new Securities generally sold Securities sold through Dated Securities sold at low 2. Dated Government (since April 1, 1997). Day Intermediate T-Bills Tap T-Bills replaced by 14- 2 percentage points. overdraft at Bank rate plus debt officials. Maximum period of 4.6 per cent. constituted with RBI and agreed limits  at Bank rate. and Debt Market advances (WMA) within System of Tap T-Bills at Monitoring Group of Cash system of ways and means interest rate of 4.6 per cent. after March 31, 1999. 1997) and introduction of system of ad-hoc T-Bills at crore. permitted beyond 10 days second half at Rs.7,000 hoc T-Bills (since April 1, budget deficit through a No overdraft will be crore and for the Rs.11,000 of  system of Ad- Abolition monetisation of Automatic  reviewed further. half of 1998-99 fixed at policy . management policy Limits of WMA to be of  WMA for the first Active debt management Absence of internal debt 1. Policy Comments/Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Measures Elements of  Reform Government Securities Market Annexure V                        PDs.                         50 an SRO PDs have formed (March 1996) and can raise issued market. of the notified amount. borrowers and lenders Consider introducing when- money market both as underwrite more than 30 % PDs have access to call notified amount. PDs cannot Individual  underwriting to 100 % of commitments. 1998). Increase the proportion of principle approval (October PDs given bidding PDs. number of have been given in- (March 1996). Consider increasing the PDs Recently, seven new PDs licensed Initially six Did not exist. 5. Primary Dealers Government Securities. markets and retail primary and secondary established to activate 1996) have been Satellite Dealers (December Dealers (March 1995) and of  Primary A system  status. Government Securities. STCI has acquired PD 1994) to develop trading in minority shareholder. Promoted by RBI (July holdings in STCI and is a Corporation of India Ltd. RBI has diluted most of its Securities Trading No specialised institution 4. Institutional Development underwritten by  T-Bills auction amounts. kept outside notified Day and 91-Day T-Bills) (allowed in respect of 14- market conditions. Non-competitive bids prevailing depending on  Notified amount varied announced Notified amounts pre- respect of 91-Day T-Bills. uniform type auction in 1992). and 364-day T-Bills and auction basis (since April used in respect of 14-day T-Bills sold through gained. Discriminatory auctions depending on experience withdrawn. or discriminatory auctions alternate Wednesdays. Day. 182-day T-bills Could sell through uniform and 364-Day auctions every 14-Day, 91-Day and 364- auctions held every Friday exist  A variety of T-Bills  Bills. 14-Day and 91-Day T-Bills 182-Day T-Bills and reintroduce 182-day T- (April 1, 1997). introduce 28-day T-Bills auctions. Day Intermediate T-Bills coupon of 4.6 per cent Announced intention to T-Bills sold through Tap T-Bills replaced by 14- 14-day Tap T-Bills at a 3. Treasury Bills July 1996.) .            SDs                                       51 TDS abolished. Boards. needs ratification by bank increase in broker limits fixed for banks. Any Individual broker limits recognised stock exchange. transactions. they must be through a from secondary market If routed through brokers of  income (TDS) in respect  two way quotes. active  Tax deducted at source PDs are expected to give counterparties. limits may be considered. directly between brokers. secondary markets. Ease in individual broker Transactions are usually Transactions routed through usually active in the being put in place. private sector banks are conducted over telephone. over telephone. Electronic Dealing System PDs, foreign banks and new Transactions continue to be Transactions conducted 8. Secondary Market Trading banks, etc. constituent accounts with encouraged to open accounts with RBI and PFs asked to close SGL for constituents. transactions and the other Delivery Versus Payment. SGL accounts, one for own Manual Accounting and no Participants  given two SGL accounts. settlement. PFs holding FIs, Banks,  current account. current account with RBI. with DVP system for Debt Office of RBI. To integrate SGL and /SHCIL have SGL and Computerised environment maintained in the Public PDs/NSE/NSDL FIs/ Banks/ settlement system. maintained in PDO of RBI General Ledger Accounts To move to real time gross DVP system in operation. Through SGL accounts Through Subsidised 7. Settlement System call/notice money market. do not have access to (June 1998). given to banks (Nov 1997). SDs permitted to issue CP approval Two in-principle  SDs. number of PDs. graduated as initially (Nov 1997). Consider increasing the SDs have Four out of nine SDs registered Nine Did not exist. 6. Satellite Dealers (August 1998). notified amounts in auction PDs underwrite 50 % of market (September 1996 intercorporate and from the  Association. by way of loans from banks called Primary Dealers funds through issue of CP,                   repos.             52 and secondary markets. Bills also in both primary permitted  investment in T- FIIs Since May 1998,  markets. primary and secondary operate Dated Securities in Investors  can Institutional  Bodies/ Foreign NRI/ Overseas Corporate 11. Foreign Investment volume tender (Nov 1997). auction basis and fixed rate necessary. Repos conducted both on conducted as and when volume tender basis. contemplated and will be repos  on fixed rate 3 /4 day repos. repo being 1 day conducts Currently RBI RBI conducts 3 /4/14 day Repos 10. RBI  repos. standardised contracts for for market practices and Introduce code of conduct Introduce different form of Government debt. dematerialisation of non- 1998). Encourage reduced to 1 day (October dematerialised form one day repo Minimum period of  Non-Government debt in repos is Minimum period of repos (April 1997). market in Government and holders can lend through repo allow access to the repos. select Mutual funds/other  market can lend through all non-bank participants to are lenders in call money (June 1994). The sequencing will require interbank. market purely Non-bank participants who repos and lend through  PDs can borrow Banks and  interbank call money repos. and borrow through  the It is proposed to make PDs can lend Banks and Heavily restricted Freely done Repos 9. Inter-Bank                                           and         53 for small value instruments like (screen-based dealing). form of NSE and a stock exchange National Stock Exchange set up electronic stock exchange in the regulatory body SHCIL.There is an custodians like Issues abolished. India set up as a depositories like NSDL and Office of Controller of Capital Exchange Board of Development SEBI is the regulator. There are SEBI accorded statutory status. Securities and Institutional rates, deep discount bonds, etc. instruments and put options, step-up interest Traditional debt debentures, debentures with call deposits. optionally fully convertible cent of incremental convertible instruments, debentures at 1.5 per Zero interest fully  bonds and corporate with detachable equity warrants, investments in PSU notes, Non-convertible debentures banks Ceiling of  deferred interest secured payment compulsory Innovative instruments such as introduce interest rate swaps debentures PSU bonds removed. Announced the intention to of convertible banks investments in Ceiling on  instruments. Conversion in respect introduced. can invest freely in such choice of investor. debentures Derivatives will be Conversion made optional at the instruments are available. Banks 14% on taxable Innovation will continue. A variety of corporate debt Interest rate ceiling removed. Interest rate ceiling of 2. Corporate Debt financial institutions deposits. PSUs and public in bonds of  cent of incremental 15% of their incremental deposits debentures at 1.5 per PFs initially allowed to invest bonds and corporate bonds increased to 30 per cent. PSU bonds removed. investments in PSU PFs investment in PSU Limit of  banks investments in Ceiling of  Ceiling of banks awaited. as Stamp Duty clearances  recognised stock exchanges through NSE. But, yet to take off fixed at 10% demat form and through rate on tax-free bonds demat form and done are in  Repos permitted in PSU bonds in Maximum interest Repos are permitted if PSU bonds to 10.5 per cent. at 14%. variety of bonds in the market. Ceiling on tax-free bonds raised freely in PSU bonds. There are a rate on taxable bonds freed Maximum interest market trading. taxable bonds. Banks can invest Interest rate on taxable bonds promote secondary on tax-free bonds and no ceiling on issued. stamp duty structure to issued. There is ceiling of 10.5% continue to be permitted. bonds permitted to be Proposal to rationalise Taxable and tax-free bonds can be Tax-free and taxable bonds Tax-free and taxable 1. PSU Bonds Reform Comments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Status Elements of Non-Government Debt Market        54 Credit Rating Agencies set up. Ltd. (Depository). National securities Depository India set up (custodial services). Stock Holding Corporation of securities). OTCEI set up (for small value OTCEI.Elements of  Exchange rate  officially  A significant two stage downward adjustment  Exchange rate of the rupee determined by RBI in terms of a weighted basket of currencies of on the demand and supply India's major trading partners. The  Simultaneously EXIM Scrip scheme was regime was characterised by daily introduced. LERMS was in place during 1992-93, under which 40 per cent of the  Given the RBI's obligation to buy proceeds of the exchange earners had to be and sell unlimited amounts of the surrendered at the official rate and 60 per cent intervention currency i.e., pound at the market rate. With effect from March 1, sterling, arising from the banks' 1993, the exchange rate of the rupee was merchant purchases, its quotes for unified and the era of fully floating market- buying/selling effectively became the fulcrum around which the  RBI discontinued quoting of  buying and selling rate from October 4, 1995. The RBI  now quotes its buying rate to any authorised  With effect from July 3, 1995  Debt Service Uniform limit of Rs 15 crore on the  Consequent upon the recommendations of the   Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Market advised to report  (at close (Chairman: Shri O.P. Sodhani), the uniform of business everyday) their Rs 15 open position as at 10.a.m. of the ADs was removed with effect from as also their peak intra-day January 4 1996. Banks allowed to operate on the limits fixed by their managements and  Aggregate Gap Limit (AGL) was left to be depending upon their foreign exchange operations, risk taking capacity, balance sheet size and other relevant parameters subject to 55 the approval from the Reserve Bank. fixed by the individual banks since April 1996 vetted by RBI. position ADs). Dealers ( Authorised crore on the overnight positions limit of  six times the net owned funds of a bank. Limits (AGL) of  AGL not to exceed US $ 100 million or Aggregate Gap ADs. overnight positions of Positions/ ADs Since August 20, 1998,       - 2. Overnight Payments routed through the market. dealer on receiving a specific request. through foreign exchange reserves. Debt Service Payments were routed market moved. determined exchange rate began. price setting by RBI. of  foreign exchange. July 1 and 3, 1991. is market determined, based in the exchange rate of the rupee took place on Rate Regime              - 1. Exchange Reforms Comments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Status Foreign Exchange Market Annexure VIElements of  No cross currency  Since April 1996, ADs were allowed to options/derivative products were initiate cross currency position overseas, to cancel and rebook cross currency options and offer derivative products to enable their  Banks  not permitted free trading opportunities in the overseas  Since August 1996, ADs allowed to offer (a) Interest rate swaps (b) Currency swaps, )Coupon swaps, (d) Purchase of interest rate caps/collars and (e) Forward rate agreements to their corporate clients for their asset-liability management either by booking the transactions overseas or on a back-to- back basis, without prior approval of  the upfront premia as well as other charges incidental to the hedge transactions could also be effected by ADs without prior  Since September 1996, ADs accorded freedom to offer to their customers cost reduction strategies and risk-reduction option strategies like Range Forwards, Ratio Range Forwards etc. subject to the condition that there is no net inflow of premium to the customers by shorting volatilities.  were allowed to freely book and cancel  Banks not allowed to offer foreign Banks permitted in October 1996 to provide foreign currency denominated loans to their 56 resident deposits. FCNR(B) deposits. customers out of the pool of Loans. currency loans from the pool of non- Currency           -         - 4. Foreign options. Corporates of  the Reserve bank. approval  government or the Reserve Bank. Payment of (c markets. customers to hedge their external liabilities. Products derivative available. Options and Currency      -        - 3. Cross Reforms Comments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform StatusElements of    ADs advised informally not  As the forex market from their overseas offices/ correspondents as to arbitrage  between the deepens further and the well as to invest funds in overseas money money and foreign markets become market instruments up  to US $ 10 million. In exchange markets which integrated, this  October 1997, this limit was raised to 15 per could bring in additional cent   The Report on Capital  Limit modified to include overnight Account  investments out of nostro account balances of recommends that  the only restriction should 1949 and open  To access the forward market    permitted to book forward cover for   The need for documents corporates were required to exporters and importers on the basis of a based on presumptive to enter into a forward produced ocuments evidencing declaration of exposures supported by past exposure temporarily contract would be withdrawn since December   Unlimited cancellation and the total forward contracts outstanding at any 2, 1997 in view of  the point of time did not exceed the average rebooking of forward contracts not and presently forward cover  Corporates were given complete freedom in is allowed based only on  The participants in the forward documents evidencing 1992 to actively hedge their exposures by freely booking and cancelling forward  Facility for rebooking of  cancelled contracts is presently available only for contracts on non-trade transactions for the same underlying exposure was banned and exports. Rebooking of cancelled contracts is not allowed in case of non-trade  Since August 20, 1998, it was decided to withdraw the facility of rebooking cancelled contracts for trade related transactions covering imports. However, contracts can be  Participants in the forward market have been increased considerably. In August 1997 ,   were allowed to cover their debt exposures in  In October 1997, the facility of forward cover was extended to NRI depositors in respect of 57 the forward market. FIIs rolled over before maturity. transactions and imports. only rollover was allowed. Since December 1, 1997 rebooking of forward contracts. exposures. market were limited. allowed. export/import turnover of  the last two years. forex market volatility in the  withdrawn. performance and business projection provided exposure. Market Booking of forward contract ADs 6. Forward position/gap limits. be Section 25 of BR Act, the banks. Convertibilty volatility in the market. of  the Tier I capital of the banks. would be raised. limit banks. investments by borrowings/   were permitted  in April 1997 to borrow ADs Banks not permitted 5. Overseas Reforms Comments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Statusdeposits held in Non Resident (External) Rupee accounts [NRE(R)A] and Foreign Currency Non-Resident (Banks) [FCNR(B)]   facility for equity investment by FIIs was (over and above the level of investment in equity prevailing at the end of business on  Since August 20, 1998, ADs were allowed to offer forward cover facility to FIIs to the extent of 15 per cent of the value of their investments as on June 11, 1998. This facility was in addition to the facility already  Forward contracts have also been allowed for remittance of dividend in respect of direct 58 foreign investment. available for incremental investments. June 11, 1998). made available for  "incremental investments" With effect from June 12, 1998, forward cover schemesElements of  No rupee based derivatives were  In April 1997, RBI permitted  ADs  to offer  Once this was permitted the Rupee based derivatives would be developed further dollar-rupee swaps to corporates market has seen forward and run  a swap-book within their open deals upto 5 years whereas with the deepening of the position/gap limits without prior approval of earlier a price beyond 6 forex market and  emergence of a stable rupee 8. Exchange The ultimate objective is to  Exporters and exchange earners   were not allowed to retain  any retain 50 per cent of their foreign exchange allow exporters and exchange earners to retain earnings in the Exchange Earners Foreign 100 per cent of their  100 per cent EOUs are allowed to retain 70  Since August 20, 1998, it was decided to permit exporters to use the balances in EEFC accounts for all business related payments in India and abroad at their discretion including 59 payments of airfare and hotel expenditure. per cent of their earnings in such accounts. Account proceeds. (EEFC) Currency (EEFC) accounts. Currency portion of their proceeds. Foreign Earners' Exporters and exchange earners are allowed to                  - yield curve. month was not available. the Reserve Bank of  India. the corporates available. derivatives 7. Rupee based Reforms Comments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Status