March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 * Credit Policy, Systems and Culture Y.V. REDDY Coming to the Institute kindles a feeling on January 21, which would also provide this of festive occasion and it is a privilege and an Institute an opportunity for exploring further honour to be here with you. There have been avenues of learning through collaboration and significant achievements, in training, in interaction with others. diversified fields, with new initiatives and a wider Financial Deepening coverage in the area of research and Among the major indicators that we consultancy. Admittedly, there is more of would have to look at from a longer term sponsored research now. Incidentally, one of my perspective of financial sector development, former colleagues Ms. Indrani Banerjee, who are some of the financial ratios that signify along with others worked with me on a money- the nature and extent of financial deepening. laundering Report in the Reserve Bank, is with The data shows that banking and insurance the Institute now. I am happy that the Institute as a percentage of GDP has grown from just is beginning to use RBIs human resources about 1.6 per cent in 1969 to 6.5 per cent. productively. The exchange of knowledge Within the services sector, its share has grown resources amongst our institutions is bound to from about 4.2 per cent to 11.8 per cent provide increasing returns to both. It is good to indicating that the financial sector has rapidly note that distinguished banking colleagues are gained prominence in the overall economic taking advantage of the services of the Institute activity. The flow of funds accounts for the and surely they will continue to do so in a Indian economy which are available till 1995- greater measure in the years ahead. 96, show that the finance ratio, i.e., the ratio There is a reference in Dr. Sahas report of total financial issues to national income, has to the possibility of making our presence felt grown four times between 1969-70 and 1995- in the neighbouring countries and this seems 96 from 10.4 per cent to 41.1 per cent very appropriate because we have a SAARC indicating considerable financial deepening. It Finance Group which is likely to meet in April is interesting that the intermediation ratio has 2004. Also, as Dr. Saha knows, Ms. Anne grown at a much lesser pace i.e., 57.8 per Krueger, the first Deputy Managing Director of cent to 70.2 per cent during the same period. the IMF who was also the Chief Economist of This means that although the Indian financial the World Bank 10-15 years ago, is visiting system is largely bank-oriented, the financial this Institute shortly. She will deliver a lecture deepening has been supported, both by Speech delivered by Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at National Institute of Bank Management * (NIBM) during the NIBM Annual Day celebrations on January 6, 2004, Pune. 303March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 financial intermediaries as well as financial monetary and credit policy. In India, we now markets. We have to constantly take note of call our policy statement as Monetary and some of the characteristics of the financial Credit Policy Statement. Upto 1992, our deepening and the nature of development of statement was called Credit Policy Statement the financial markets. and the Cell (in RBI) was called Credit Planning Cell. Beginning 1998, it is renamed Of particular interest to our country is the as Monetary Policy Department. This denoted share of commercial banks in rural household the shift in the policy from a planned and debt which rose from barely 0.3 per cent in administered interest rate system to a market- 1961 to 29 per cent in 1991. The question that oriented financial system but while making the arises is what has been happening thereafter. shift, we have been sensible enough not to There is some quantitative indication and discard the importance of credit and focus certainly a strong perception that commercial only on conducting monetary policy. The real banking activity for the rural households may issue is to define the nature of the link not be increasing at the same pace as before between monetary and credit policies, how it 1991. It is good to note that during the reform is changing and how we have to manage it. period, the role of capital markets improved but Past experience shows that credit allocation is it good to learn that the presence of banks and administered pricing certainly ensure a in the rural households is not increasing reasonable level of credit flow in the desired commensurately? This leads to the real issues direction at the desired price, but at a cost of credit delivery mechanisms, which we along with inefficiencies as well as distortions. flagged in the monetary policy this time. What In such a situation, the cost has to be borne are the constraints which are affecting the flow in different ways  including pre-emption of credit? What is the role of credit flow in a through Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR), which at deregulated financial environment in an the time of initiation of reforms had touched emerging country? Emerging country by the statutory maximum of 15 per cent definition, has structural or institutional (excluding the incremental CRR on bottlenecks. In such a situation, how to incremental NDTL) and Statutory Liquidity maintain a balance between deregulation that Ratio (SLR) at 38.5 per cent, almost touching brings about medium to long term efficiency the statutory maximum of 40 per cent. Since gains and the credit flow that is urgently the reform, the focus of the policy environment required to various sectors? It is critical at this has been to remove most of these constraints juncture, to address these issues at this stage but the question is whether the purpose of of our economic development and state of credit delivery at a reasonable price of credit financial sector. has been served and whether the new system Monetary, Credit and Regulatory Policies is admittedly superior in all respects? Basically, there is a recognition about the Recent experience shows that policies differentiation as well as the link between of liberalisation, deregulation and enabling 304March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 environment of comfortable liquidity at a of India has? The central bank, until a decade reasonable price do not automatically translate ago, was focusing on growth and price stability themselves into credit flow. There are glitches and the trade-off between growth and price or hurdles in a well intentioned monetary stability. A more recent addition reflecting the policy to be translated into desired credit developments in the financial markets has system, and these, I believe, are the linkages been the third objective, viz., financial stability. to be explored. The monetary policy looks at this third objective also and there are certain trade-offs There is another aspect to the issue of involved between the three objectives, credit pricing and credit delivery flagged in the particularly in the short run. There are also Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit complementarities between the three more so Policy statement this time. The regulatory over the longer run. policies relating to banks have a bearing on While there are three objectives with credit flow. For example, tightening of the their own interrelationships, we also have regulatory policies in particular cycles, three instruments  monetary policy, credit especially the downside cycle, will sometimes policy and regulatory policies. The three worsen the situation. The regulatory regime instruments are also used interchangeably to has a tendency to be pro-cyclical and, serve different objectives. For instance, therefore, it has implications for both, interest rate changes serve as monetary monetary and financial stability, especially policy signal, while at the time changing the when the regulatory regime itself is price of credit as also ensuring stability in transforming. In brief, there is an imperative asset prices. The use of instruments results need to clearly discern the links between in short-term trade offs, requiring some other monetary policy, credit policy, and regulatory complementary measures. In highly integrated regime in a dynamic situation, involving the economies with no institutional bottlenecks, overall structural transformation of the real monetary and regulatory policy co-ordination sector, the financial sector and the opening is essential, but for us, because of transitional of the economy. As you are aware, RBI is also problems and transactional costs, we have to regulator of banks, non banking financial have a credit allocation policy and, therefore, companies, Primary Dealers, government one should look at the changing dynamics of security markets and money markets. these relationships in what may be called the Therefore, in policy making, RBI now looks at 3 x 3 matrix. what may be called the 3 by 3 matrix and see how we can capture these linkages. The Credit Systems 3 by 3 matrix consists of three policy There are three pillars on which our objectives and three policy-instruments. credit system was based in the past  one Let us start with the objectives. What are was fixing of prices of credit or interest rate the policy-objectives that the Reserve Bank and on occasions even quantum linked with 305March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 purpose; second, insisting on collateral; and take recourse to the more costly informal third, prescribing the end-use. One pillar finance in preference to the formal lender if relating to interest rate prescription and fixing the borrower has shortage of funds. Currently, quantum has been significantly reduced. since there is no way for the formal sector to There are issues in security-based or be able to cater to all the credit requirements, collateralised lending and how do we handle especially for consumption purpose, perhaps that? What will happen to the services sector, we should think about what suits our own which accounts for slightly more than 50 per culture such as family-based credit in rural cent of GDP if we keep insisting on collateral? areas rather than consumption credit, Similarly, if technology is more important than production credit, etc. Ultimately, we should try the material component what is the role of to bring about a degree of convergence collateral? The third is the end-use between formal and informal sectors perhaps specification. Given the fungibility of by pushing the supply of credit from the formal resources, multiple sources of flow of sector in a supply leading approach to reduce resources, as well as application of funds, are the price or interest. How do we go about it? end-use restrictions relevant and operationally We would appreciate suggestions from the feasible? I would solicit views of the bankers bankers and others assembled here. so that we can move forward with changes. Micro-finance is in a way bringing about There is another issue relating to the link the convergence. In micro-finance, whereas or absence of the link between formal and there are no collaterals and, interest rates are informal sectors which is still persisting. high, the level of NPAs is low. Is there a Normally, in a fairly liberalised environment, if lesson for our banks? A possible explanation markets are reasonably integrated, the is in terms of what is called apparent cost divergence in credit terms, especially interest and total real cost. Apparent cost is what rates, between the formal and informal sectors is shown on the loan document, whereas the should not be large. However, almost total real cost includes cost incurred on everybody in our country concedes that formalities including documentation etc. The significant divergence in lending terms between number of photocopies that are required, trips the two sectors still persists. The interest rate to the Sub Registrars office, the paper work, in informal markets, particularly in rural areas, the aspect of timeliness  if all those are is 3 per cent per month or annualised rate of added to the apparent cost, then it becomes over 38 per cent whereas in formal sectors, it the total real cost. There is a view that the is 10 or 12 per cent per annum. The divergence between the formal and informal persistence of divergence means that, with all is only because of the differences in the the deregulation, the formal credit mechanisms apparent cost indicated in informal sector are not able to pierce the informal system. The and total real cost in the formal sector. These incentives emanating out of the divergence in are some important areas of studies in credit terms of credit is such that the borrower will systems, that should perhaps be undertaken. 306March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 Another aspect with which we have been there is a credit, there are two sides of the going along till now is that credit business has credit  the lender and the borrower. I am to be a stand-alone credit business and I think sharing the above thoughts with NIBM for a we have had the purist approach, viz., that possible inclusion of the action points bank credit should not be contaminated with stemming therefrom in its research agenda. other business. The telecom revolution was Micro Aspects started with STD kiosks, which in reality Between March 2001 and end 2003, i.e., rendered several other services. There is over the last two and a half years, while the need to think of combining credit with physical lending rates of banks have been reduced by supplies of inputs/outputs. Perhaps, in about 1 per cent, the deposit rates of 1 to 3 considering credit delivery in rural areas, we years duration have been reduced by about have to look at the delivery mechanisms, by 3 per cent. It is difficult to justify this. While it studying production, distribution and can be said that the term deposit rates are consumption processes, especially their fixed for two to three years and so are less linkages. flexible as compared to lending rates which Credit Information are far more flexible, the divergence should have been bridged over time. This asymmetry A Credit Information Bureau has been in the treatment by banks, between depositors set up, but it collects information only about and borrowers needs some analysis. the borrowers and their track record and One has to recognise that there is a makes it available to banks. We are passing widespread perception about the asymmetrical a law where Credit Information Bureau will treatment by the financial intermediaries, as give credit information that is needed by the between different borrowers also. That the bank. But there is no similar publicly-available size of the borrowing, as well cost of service, information about banks to the borrowers. The do warrant some amount of differential pricing same Credit Information Bureau should be is known, justifiable and acceptable. But if able to give information about banks to the there is a feeling that such a differential pricing customers, such as, on the interest rates that is not justifiable or that it has reached such are available for different types of loans, the proportions that the difference is not justifiable, requirements for loan etc. Where the there could be a backlash. borrowers track record is given to the bank, the borrower should also have the track I shall give you an illustration of what record of all the banks in dealing with has happened more recently. Essentially, borrowers. This is an issue which has been PLR was meant to be the prime lending rate rarely addressed because we are oriented for prime borrowers. A facility has been given more to handling the banks problem rather to charge below PLR in exceptional cases. than the banks customers problem. Is there On this assumption, a particular interest rate an asymmetry? From a social point of view, if was fixed for the Food Corporation of India 307March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 (FCI) as the average of PLRs of five banks. differences in pricing of credit to different When the FCI found in the last four years classes of borrowers by banks. that all the market interest rates have been Another interesting point which has been moving down, whereas the banks PLRs raised about NPAs is that there is an have not come down as much, they have impression that priority sector lending has expressed their preference to raise funds large NPAs. The statistics may or may not from the capital market. As Reserve Bank of confirm this. If you take priority sector and India, we have no way in which to say, that remove the government-sponsored the FCI cannot raise funds from the market. programme on the one side and if you remove The FCI argues that they have a virtual public sector (IOC, ONGC, other banks) government guarantee; have not defaulted component from non-priority sector, there may and have virtually no NPAs. Hence in their be only a marginal difference in NPAs of view, it is not justifiable for banks to charge banks lending to priority sector and banks them even PLR. This shifting away from lending to private corporate sector (many of banks may start with big customers but there whom incidentally enjoy rescheduling or will be small customers also responding in restructuring facilities that are not reflected in different ways. In other words, it is not only the risk premium). Therefore, the issue that bottom line calculation that is relevant in needs to be addressed in this context is banking business; but banking is based on whether the risk premium charged to different trust on both sides  trust from the people, segments of borrowers is disproportionate to who are depositing money in the bank, and the difference in the NPAs that have been trust from the people who are borrowing generated in the past or on reasonable money from the bank. Similarly, some of the assumptions? State Governments started relating the banks The issue is similar in respect of small subscription to debt papers issued with State industries. Many small industrialists have guarantees at different interest rates to the mentioned to me that in the last 10 years extent of their default in the last five years. despite servicing interest and principal The State Governments contend that though regularly they are still charged 11 per cent - default is negligible, the rates of interest 12 per cent. On enquiry, I was told that there charged are way above those applied to is a thumb rule of some sort in banks  small large corporates. They claim that they are industry means 11 per cent, agriculture means honouring their guarantees of borrowings by 10 per cent, somebody else means 7 per State level enterprises reasonably well and cent. Is it possible that we have still not yet corporates who have the options of debt developed the systems for risk assessment restructuring, rescheduling of debt, etc. are of the individual customer? Is it possible that able to get loans at 300 basis points less as a result of the old administered interest than State guaranteed debt. It is necessary rate structure, inspite of deregulation of to be able to explain the basis of such 308March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 interest rates, banks have moved from the banking system will become a conduit to administered interest rate into category-wise channel deposits from one area, say rural, specification of interest rate which is consistent and one sector, say agriculture to lend to with the age-old culture of India? According another sector (urban or industries) which to Manu, the interest rate for Brahmin per counters the intention of the public policy. month was 2 per cent, for Kshatriya, 3 per Institutional Aspects cent per month, for Vaishya, it was 4 per cent We have to look at the monetary policy, per month and for Shudras it was 5 per cent real sector policy, and financial stability but we per month. So charging interest rate on an also need to do further work on the legal and attributable basis of a category rather than institutional structures to see what needs to be actual assessment of risks of each case is changed. For example, State Financial both consistent with the ancient culture and Corporation (SFC) Act enables seizure of and legacy of planned administered interest rate. sale of property of borrower by SFC. I We have to get out of that, if deregulation remember many banks wanting a similar power and competition has to really make sense. to be vested with them. But, as many of you Banks should, therefore, analyse systems of may be aware, most of the SFCs are sick. So, risk assessment not only for their own the power by itself is no answer to the issue satisfaction but to be able to justify to the of NPAs. Further, if one sees the total amount borrowers the basis on which the risk realised by SFCs, by invoking such powers, it assessment is made. is barely 20 per cent, on average, whereas Another interesting aspect I found is that one-time settlement of the banks has given an the share of public sector banks in the average of 40 per cent to 60 per cent. So the deposits is more or less maintained, but empirical evidence is not in favour of such lending is coming down. They have 79 per powers, but still we persist with the same cent of the share in deposit and 74 per cent approach. Is it that banks want power to be in credit, in the system, but foreign banks with able to do something? We have to look at it 5 per cent deposits lend 7 per cent. Private very carefully. banks with 16 per cent deposit, lend 19 per Similarly, many people seem to believe cent. Is it that in a way some banks are that to stop something that is considered to gradually becoming only deposit-taking banks be bad for the financial system, make it a and others are becoming only lending banks? crime and the problem will be solved. We This may or may not be good, but I have a had Foreign Exchange Regulation Act problem from a policy point of view with the (FERA), a tough legislation, under which one way the existing branch network is spread could be easily put in jail. As long as we had over the country, with wide geographical and the apparatus of stringent FERA, foreign sector-wise coverage only for some banks. exchange virtually went underground and we Given this type of spread of branch network, even had several foreign exchange crises. if some banks become deposit-taking, then 309March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 We removed the FERA, realigned several compete? In fact, the overhang problem of policies consistent with appropriate incentive problem ridden banking sector in other framework for compliance, and introduced countries was isolated first. They created a FEMA which is far less stringent and we have level playing field between private and other no forex crises or forex shortages. In other banks or new private banks, old private banks, words, the issue is that prescribing a serious by solving the overhang problems i.e., the non- punishment by law does not automatically performing assets, etc., and then there was discourage illegal activity. Criminals may be competition. In our banking system, the fraudulent people but they are also good overhang problem of the NPAs, staff rational analysts of costs and benefits as well regulations, etc., of PSBs has been left to the as probabilities. They analyse the probability public sector banks themselves. The public of being caught, the probability of being taken sector banks are required to absorb the to court, the probability of being punished, the overhang problem over a period. So in a sense degree of punishment and when the there cannot be a situation where opening up punishment is likely  in their lifetime or after! is envisaged without a level playing field. These Once they examine these probabilities as they are the dilemmas which have to be resolved, exist and operate now, what we state in law if a central bank, as a regulator of banks has often appears at best irrelevant and to move ahead with full-fledged competition in occasionally useful for harassing. So one must banking industry. No doubt, PSBs have the look at this in a realistic way and work on the advantage of large branch network and basis of incentives to comply or otherwise and established relationship with savers and not proceed on the basis that enactment of borrowers. law would ensure compliance. I am mentioning Sometimes, and of late, one notices this in the context of demand from some that there is less of a relationship banking bankers to make diversion of funds a criminal and that savers will always be with banks. If offence and to imprison willful defaulters. banks want to be in business, the base is I want to be quite open in terms of the the savers, and they have to be taken care constraints on monetary and credit policy as of. Banks may have to revisit the relationship they relate to institutional structures. The between banks and savers if they want to dominant players in Indian banking system are continue to be in business of banking, the public sector banks (PSBs) and the particularly in the context of the recent trends dominant role in the banking system is that of in the capital markets. The sensex has now the PSBs. From a regulatory point of view, a surpassed 6000 mark. If equity premium in regulator cannot proceed with any policy relative asset returns rises, banks should change without taking into account the possible consider its potential impact on the core response from this biggest chunk of regulated banking business. Then, regarding entities. How far does the biggest chunk (i.e., borrowers, the most important aspect that PSBs) have adequate manoeuvrability to needs to be recognised by banks is the 310March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004 system of risk assessment of individual excessive? (b) others are paying reasonably? borrowers and realistic pricing of risks. The (c) these taxes are unnecessary? and, (d) the whole idea of banks vis--vis other financial money which is collected as tax is used intermediaries in the intermediation business appropriately. These are all the factors that has to be considered. Therefore, the whole influence tax compliance. Now the same issue of credit culture and credit system principle can be applied to credit. In credit, is should encompass the legal and institutional honest repayment by a borrower honoured, aspect of the policy environment, the way the recognised or are others who are not as good, saver or depositor and the borrower  both being charged less interest?. Though policy small and big are treated and the way banks environment is very critical, there are several position themselves to face these challenges. aspects to credit culture. Credit culture is a question of sense of fairness in India, since Credit Culture people repay loans out of moral compulsion as there are difficulties in forcing borrowers to Finally, let me complete with the issue of pay, in view of the complications and delays in credit culture in a broader sense. We, the legal processes. Now, if we do not ensure a students of economics, assume that human sense of fairness, this moral compulsion may beings are rational and they work on the basis be eroded. Therefore, we should apply our of enlightened self-interest. But, the reality is mind to the issues of credit culture in addition that in every human being, in the context in to institutional, legal changes and policy which one is maximising self-interest, there initiatives. We have to work towards evolving is also a strong sense of fairness. The sense a conducive credit culture and perhaps the of fairness also influences economic behaviour. critical factor on which it anchors is fairness. I can give an illustration first with taxes and Are we fair to savers? Are we fair to then pose it as an issue for credit. When tax borrowers? Are we fair to all employees ? Are is being paid by an individual, there is a we fair inter se ? I leave the thoughts for your tendency to not just look at the tax rate in best judgement. isolation but also to compare whether (a) it is 311