October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006 New Economic Geography and * Monetary Policy in a Flattening World RAKESH MOHAN Let me first thank Tom Hoenig and his colleagues for economic activities in large urban agglomerations. Gene inviting me again to this symposium. It is always a treat Grossman and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg characterised todays trade pattern as trade in tasks in trying to to be here in more ways than one: to partake of the rich feast of insightful and interesting papers, illuminating understand the burgeoning off-shoring trends in production and service activities. I would like to draw your attention commentaries and discussions, accompanied by the warm hospitality of the Kansas City Fed in this incomparable to some particular characteristics of Asian urbanisation that setting in the shadow of the majestic Tetons. have, in my view, contributed to the whole off-shoring process as we now know it  first in terms of merchandise It is difficult to provide an overview of this rather trade in East and South East Asia and later in the disparate set of sessions reflecting various facets of outsourcing of service activities for which India has come globalisation ranging from the new economic geography to attention in recent years. to monetary policy. Only someone as skilled as Martin Feldstein can do that effectively. As it happens, however, To begin with, one may note that a key characteristic speaking on a personal note, the sequencing of this of Asian urbanisation has been the heavy concentration 1 symposium coincidentally reflects my own evolution as a of economic activities in coastal based urban regions. In professional economist. I started out in research and policy fact, Japanese economic growth in the 1950s and 1960s as an urban economist, made my way through policy owed much to the conscious strategy of concentrating making in industry, trade and fiscal areas; while finally economic activity in the 500 km Tokkaido urban corridor ending up as a central banker in charge of monetary policy. stretching from Tokyo through Nagoya to Osaka. Douglas So I will go through a similar sequence in my remarks in Irwin talked about the absence of policy effects in this overview, but perhaps spending more time on my first Venables, paper. The concentration of economic activity love, urban economics, since that is central to in this corridor in Japan was policy driven through focused understanding the new economic geography. Depending infrastructure investment in the region as typified by the on the time I may not be able to get past my first love Shinkansen - the bullet train. By 1970, 60 per cent of today. In any case I feel more comfortable with my first Japans urban population (and a larger proportion of the love than my current marriage to monetary policy! economy) was concentrated in this region. This economic concentration economised on infrastructure investment that would have been larger had it been spread out over a ASIAN U RBANISATION: PROXIMITY P ROMOTING larger part of the country. The geographical proximity of PRODUCTIVITY different activities gave rise to agglomeration economies Anthony Venables set the stage for this symposium that aided rapid productivity growth and also enabled innovation in traditional production processes through the through his succinct presentation on the new economic geography. Among other issues, he focused on the introduction of new systems such as Just-in-Time (JiT) modes of inventory management, great outsourcing of productivity promoting aspects of proximity through the realisation of agglomeration economies from clustering of components, and total quality control processes that Comments by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, as an Overview Panelist at a Symposium sponsored * by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24-26, 2006. All the papers presented in the Symposium are available at http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2006/Sym06prg.htm 1 For detailed discussion see Mohan (2006). 1143October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006 contributed to the drastic reduction in manufacturing costs and in Taipei/Kaohsiung in Taiwan. By the late 1970s/ that was the foundation of Japans competitiveness. The early 1980s, 70 per cent of urban population in South more efficient inventory management resulting from JiT, Korea was concentrated in the Seoul and Pusan regions. overall supply management, total quality control systems This concentrated pattern of development later spread from also enabled significant reduction in corporate need for the tigers to the cubs, the Bangkok region in Thailand, bank financing, leading to significant change in bank Jabotobek (Jakarta and its environs) in Indonesia, and portfolios. Furthermore, the Japanese economy benefited Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia. It then moved on to the coastal from high savings and investment rates, in excess of 40 regions of China - specifically to Pearl River Delta Special per cent of GDP by the late 1960s, a pattern repeated by Economic Zones and Shanghai. Once again even a large some of the later star performers of East and South East country like China decided to concentrate economic Asia. Thus high economic growth has been achieved in activity in specified coastal regions. much of Asia, the main growth story of the latter part of What were the common characteristics of all these the last century, without significant absorption of foreign regions? First, there was heavy investment in transportation savings. It is no wonder then that Raghuram Rajan and links with rest of the world, such as, airports, ports and his colleagues cannot find correlation between the use of communication infrastructure. Second, export oriented foreign capital and economic growth. outward oriented labor using manufacturing gained I describe this process at some length to essentially prominence while consistently ascending the technology make the point that this was the precursor to todays ladder over time. off-shoring of tasks. The idea of outsourcing components Did all these lead to a death of distance? Consider in the engineering industry, particularly the automobile the following. An urban coastal corridor emerged from industry, originally emerged in the Tokkaido corridor Tokyo to Sydney, through Seoul, Taipei, Shanghai, Hong of Japan where economic distance between suppliers Kong, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and Jakarta. If we extend and assemblers was reduced through investments in Venables argument on productivity enhancement through efficient transportation and other infrastructure. What increase in size of urban agglomerations, we can begin to was traditionally done at one plant location under the appreciate the productivity effects of this mega urban same roof got outsourced to many distinct companies corridor in East Asia. Business and production linkages located within striking distance in the same region. Thus within this corridor are intense: there is a great deal of intra-regional trade in tasks arose: the way the production off-shoring and task trade within the corridor resulting process was organised in the region locally has now been from the death of distance. It is the emergence of this extended through to its logical conclusion across borders corridor that has brought off-shoring into its own with through long distances. If task trade could be done within the grafting of these dense linkages within Asia to the a region, with the fall in transportation and communication outside, particularly to the US. These productivity costs it can be done across borders and long distances as effects have presumably contributed to the overall well. As Venables mentioned, the product market effects downward pressure on prices of products produced in can be long range  firms in New York may benefit from this multi-country Asian region: the globalisation effect a large market in California, and reductions in international on relative prices that Rogoff has talked about. shipping costs will increase market access for firms from The various examples given by Gene Grossman and a continent away. Rossi-Hansberg on the one hand and by Friedman (2004) To the extent that a good deal of the off-shoring on the other, mostly concentrate on the interlinkage activity is concentrated in Asia, there are good reasons between these countries and with and within multi-national for it. The strategy of concentrated spatial development corporations (MNCs) from the US and Japan. The in urban concentrations was emulated by the flying geese manufacturing flat world essentially spans the Asian coastal of Asia mentioned by Venables. The focus of growth in corridor linked with the US. The dense inter-linkages have the 1970s and 1980s shifted to the tigers like Singapore, also been possible because of an unusual degree of Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan. Singapore and openness to external ideas that can be observed throughout Hong Kong being city states naturally exhibited strong the region, particularly through receptivity to high level natural economic concentration. Furthermore, economic professionals. Even Beijing is now said to be host to about activity got concentrated in Seoul/Pusan in South Korea, 100,000 foreign citizens. It is the physical location of these 1144October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006 international professionals that has also promoted off excess of 45 per cent of GDP, and growing at about 20 shoring and trade in tasks. per cent a year. This figure was just under 20 per cent in 1990-91. There is perhaps no other country which has a What is interesting is how India is somewhat similar composition of merchandise and service exports different, but how this difference itself promoted the trade and illustrates the large role of service off-shoring in the in services. First, the ethos in India was of dispersal of flattening world as it extends to India. The openness of development. In fact, urban concentration was frowned the Indian economy is quite high now, even on the capital upon and discouraged. Second, as described by T.N. account as indicated by the large increase in gross capital Srinivasan, the import substituting inward oriented flows, (i.e., both inflows and outflows), which are now in manufacturing approach persisted till the 1980s. Third, excess of 25 per cent of GDP. investment in infrastructure, particularly urban infrastructure was of lower intensity - this includes ports, It is in this way that East and South East Asia have led airports, railways, and highways. Furthermore, no attempt the way in facilitating the flattening of the world in was made to concentrate activity in coastal areas. Imagine merchandise trade and trade in associated tasks, and Indias what would have happened if India had developed her different pattern of development to the outsourcing of East coast in accordance with the East Asia miracle  a information technology activities that have enabled wider point similar to that made by T.N. Srinivasan. Interestingly, trade in services. The flat world therefore extends from the metros like Calcutta, Madras and Bombay slowed down United States through East and South East Asia to India. in the 1980s and 1990s and became Kolkata, Chennai and The distinction I have made between the merchandise trade Mumbai, while inland cities like Delhi, Pune, Bangalore, and that in services is now getting blurred as East Asian Chandigarh and Hyderabad have prospered. Though countries also partake in information technology outsourcing infrastructure investment in transportation hubs and and as Indian firms get their act together in manufacturing. logistics is finally receiving importance now, biases against labour using manufacturing continue and hence India has WHERE DO WE GO IN THE FUTURE? still not followed the labour using export-oriented manufacturing strategy that was in vogue in East and What of the future role of Asia in the flattening world? South East Asia. What are the features of the cities that What are the implications of on going Asian urbanisation have prospered? They all exhibit affinity to high patterns on the future direction of capital flows and world technology, have concentration of higher education, culture real interest rates? Let me address some of these questions of meritocracy, a high knowledge base and research & in a futuristic scenario. development laboratories. All that was needed was Asian urban population is expected to double in the communication infrastructure, which appeared in the 1990s next 30 years; about 1.3 billion people, equivalent to about and Y2K was an added bonus. It was this very lack of 60 per cent of total expected urban population growth in investment in transportation and communication the world, and equivalent to the urban population growth infrastructure, both within the country and to the outside in Asia that took place over the last 50 years, are likely world, that has ironically led to these inland cities to be added to urban areas in Asia during this period. 12 becoming software off-shoring concentrations. All that was of 21 cities of over 10 million by 2015 will be in Asia. needed was investment in communication and electronic So the doubling of the global labour force talked about infrastructure that could enable information technology by Venables will accelerate adding to the further flattening transmission at low cost across the world: again the death of the world, especially if we take account of the of distance for services off-shoring. resurgence of Eastern Europe and Africa as talked about If one looks at the pattern of outsourcing in India, by Svejnar and Collier. If large urban agglomerations one finds that outsourcing of service activities got born promote productivity growth, as posited by Venables, the in Bangalore and then spread elsewhere. T.N. Srinivasan shift in the mega city fulcrum to Asia is itself suggestive talked about the relatively slow growth of Indias of relatively higher productivity growth in this region. merchandise trade: what he didnt mention is that gross Since Asia is still a technology follower, with much Indian service exports are now almost equivalent to its catching up to do, the potential for further significant merchandise exports. Gross exports and imports of productivity growth is high, and hence the likelihood of merchandise trade and services put together are now in continuing low inflation in the world. 1145October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006 Chairman Bernanke has earlier talked about the challenges that we, as monetary authorities, will face in savings glut. Since world savings havent really grown the years to come? How soon will this reversal take place since the late 1990s, while investment has fallen, in global imbalances? Will they be gradual or sudden? If particularly in Asia after the 1997 financial crisis, he could this scenario is correct, the commodity price boom that perhaps have talked instead about the investment drought Paul Collier talked about will continue for some time; in in Asia. The relatively higher decline in investment in which case additional demand will arise from Africa as Asia, compared to savings rates, has probably contributed well. We should, therefore, expect an acceleration of cross to the emergence of foreign exchange surpluses, and border global capital flows, with the usual implication for consequent rapid accumulation of foreign exchange exchange rate and monetary management in the recipient reserves, after the 1997 Asian crisis. The mirror image, countries. of course, is the US current account deficit, reflecting its Another interesting comment on off-shoring that the opposite savings/investment imbalance. The question is Venables and Grossman papers have talked about is whether the Asian relative investment drought will off-shoring low skill activities. What is intriguing is that continue well into the future? great investment is taking place in human resources in The expectation of urbanisation in Asia in the next Asia as well: Tokyo has 113 universities, Beijing has 59, 30 years in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Vietnam, and Hong Kong and Singapore are becoming educational Indonesia and China would suggest that there will be centres. US and European educational institutions are unprecedented demand for investment in infrastructure in competing with each other to off-shore their activities in the coming decades in this region. Chinese infrastructure Asia. So where will this off-shoring stop? investment is shifting inward from the coast: this may be 2 less efficient than on the coast and hence the demand for CONTEMPORARY MONETARY PUZZLES resources could well be correspondingly higher. Although Much of discussion in this symposium has centered India and other countries in South and South East Asia around the rearrangement of economic thinking to take may concentrate investments more towards the coast, the account of the efforts of globalisation and the new backlog of infrastructure investment in India is so high economic geography. What have the implications been for that its demand for resources can be expected to be central bankers? Rogoff has shown how monetary stability correspondingly higher. has been accompanied by price stability and output The question that I am concerned with is whether stability, but not asset price and exchange rate stability. regional savings will be adequate for meeting this demand He goes on to say that exchange rates do not really reflect as they have been in the last decade. Will the globalising fundamentals and act more like asset prices. How do we world face the opposite of a savings glut or investment then to look at exchange rates as equilibrating price drought? With the kind of urbanisation pattern that I have mechanisms? Does this mean that shifts in the Chinese outlined for Asia in the next 30 years, and the associated exchange rate determination will have no effect on other demand for enhanced resources for infrastructure variables? Given the complexity of trade patterns and off- investment, it is likely that the demand for external savings shoring of tasks, and complex production patterns behind will re-merge. If we add the possible emergence of similar many products, it would perhaps not be surprising that demand from Africa, the likelihood is that we will revert exchange rates are no longer to be seen to reflect to the traditional pattern of financial capital moving in fundamentals. If a product consists of a large number of the right direction, from the rich to less rich countries in components that have been produced over a dozen Asia and also in Africa. If Raghuram Rajan repeats his different countries, and even assembled across two correlation exercises in 2030 he might emerge a happier countries, how will any bilateral exchange rate changes man. This will, however, coincide with the adverse be expected to affect trade patterns? Moreover, with the demographics of Europe and Japan contributing to proportion of value added in upstream (e.g., research and contraction of world savings. development and design) and downstream (e.g., marketing Various questions arise. Will we then see a hardening and trading) activities increasing, the role of exchange rates of world real interest rates? What will be the new in effecting trade flows becomes even more complex. In 2   This draws on earlier research; see Mohan (2005). 1146October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006 fact we have seen low pass through of exchange rate foreign exchange reserves and excessive domestic liquidity, depreciation to inflation  both in developing and amplifying the Feds policy stance. Examination of the developed countries. data clearly reveals a global glut of liquidity, which has facilitated highly leveraged positions, debt financed I would like to reflect on a few other contemporary consumption and booming credit growth, raising financial puzzles as well. stability concerns. The great puzzle in current global developments is indeed the co-existence of abundant LOW C ONSUMER I NFLATION IN THE P RESENCE OF liquidity and low consumer inflation. Even soaring oil ABUNDANT LIQUIDITY AND INCREASING ASSET PRICES prices and the elevated prices of non-fuel commodities First, we have been experiencing low global inflation have yet to affect the overall price level significantly. Such despite abundant liquidity in the last few years, with little low levels of inflation have not been witnessed since the sign of change. Is this a result of globalisation or effective pre-World War period. So I remain puzzled: is Asia not worldwide monetary policy? exporting deflation despite overall increases in global Kenneth Rogoff in his paper has argued plausibly that monetary aggregates? Or, will we inevitably see global high productivity Asia, particularly China, could not have inflation eventually because of this global glut of liquidity? exported deflation. As he says, But hyper-competitive Or, is the spill over essentially in asset prices? Chinese exports only affect the relative price. As long as the central bank targets inflation in the overall price level, STRONG GLOBAL GROWTH DESPITE SOARING OIL PRICES which it can over sufficiently long horizons, cheap goods The second puzzle is the continuing strong global from China simply imply that other goods must become growth despite high oil and commodity prices. Can we expensive. From this perspective, we might actually say attribute this to increasing oil use efficiency along with that China is exporting inflation to other sectors of the productivity effect of globalisation alluded to earlier? global economies. Whereas I naturally find Kenneths After the oil shocks of the 1970s, the first half of the theoretical argument persuasive, is it borne out 1990s witnessed deflationary pressures in terms of real empirically? The global economy is currently awash with oil prices. However, this lull in oil prices turned out to be liquidity. As we all know, around eight years ago, the US short-lived. Soaring oil prices have characterised the period Fed responded to the `low probability but highly adverse since 2000. Oil prices are scaling new heights every day events (Blinder and Reis, 2005) leading up to the Russian driven mainly by growing or unchanged demand, low debt default and the LTCM collapse by an emergency cut inventories, lack of spare capacity, and geo political in interest rates in September, October and November tensions and uncertainties. While the accommodating 1998. Even though the reduction was just 25 basis points global monetary conditions have placed oil futures in the each month, it shifted the monetary policy stance to class of sought-after financial assets, the persisting high accommodation. Later, prompted by a deflation scare, the levels of oil prices increasingly indicate that a large part fed fund rate was cut over a 42-month stretch from of the oil price hike has attained a permanent character. December 2000 to June 2003 to a 45 year low of 1 per Yet, global growth remains remarkably on track. Indeed, cent, taking the real federal funds rate into negative the growth momentum has only improved from the second territory. Thus, real policy rates were effectively zero or half of the 1990s to the first half of this decade. The negative until very recently in the US and perhaps remain growth in world trade volume (goods and services) has below the Wicksellian long-term neutral rate. Real policy also recovered after some slowdown in 2001 and 2002. rates in the UK and Euro area are also generally hovering Obviously, global activity has benefited from the stunning around zero. Coupled with the benign policy rates, money decline in output volatility observed by Rogoff which supply growth has increased worldwide during this period. would have also cushioned the oil shocks. The policy accommodation pursued until recently by the US and the European Central Bank has had a global SLOWDOWN IN G LOBAL S AVING AND I NVESTMENT VS impact, flooding the rest of the world with an abundance STRONG GLOBAL GROWTH of liquidity. Low interest rates in the US have encouraged The third puzzle that I would like to mention is high capital to flow into emerging market economies. For the global growth despite slow down in savings and countries that prefer some form of managed parity against investment. the US dollar this has resulted in a large build-up of 1147October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006 Global saving and investment rates have declined in Friedman, Thomas (2004): The World Is Flat: A Brief recent years. Notwithstanding the declining saving and History of the Twenty-first Century, New York: Farrar investment rates, global growth has continued its surge Straus & Giroux. from period to period. While consumption has arguably Grossman, Gene and Esteban, Rossi-Hansberg(2006): The played a critical role in the industrial countries growth Rise of Offshoring: Its Not Wine for Cloth Anymore, momentum, exports might have played a similar role in paper presented at Symposium sponsored by the Federal the emerging markets. The sustenance of consumption as Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, opposed to investment-led growth has thus given rise to on August 25, 2006. new controversies on present versus future allocation of Mohan, Rakesh (2005): Some Apparent Puzzles for resources as also on the relevance of overlapping Contemporary Monetary Policy, key note address at the generation outlooks. Raghuram Rajan and his colleagues Conference on Chinas and Indias Changing Economic attempt to reconcile this phenomenon as they try to explain the role of foreign capital in developing countries. Structures, organised by the IMF, the China Society of Finance and Banking and the Stanford Center for Once again, this unusual phenomenon can presumably International Development in Beijing during October 27- be explained by the productivity increasing pattern of the 28, 2005, printed in Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, current Asian growth process, coupled with the positive December 2005. Asian demographic effects promoting both consumption and investment growth. Thus, high growth is continuing Mohan, Rakesh (2006): Asian Urban Century: Emerging from resource availability due to demographically effected Trends, Keynote address at the Conference on Land Asian savings patterns, along with positive productivity Policies and Development at the Lincoln Institute of Land effects. The resource diversion due to rising oil and Policy and Development, Cambridge, Massachusetts on commodity prices is accordingly being compensated. June 5, 2006, printed in Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, I therefore feel that, in whichever way we characterise July 2006. the current new phenomenon: globalisation, the flat world, Prasad Eswar, Rajan Raghuram and Arvind Subramanian or as the new economic geography, economics faces now (2006): Pattern of International Capital Flows and Their questions that still need to be answered. We central bankers Implications for Economic Development, paper presented have benefited from the great moderation but we need by  Rajan Raghuram at Symposium sponsored by the to understand better to what extent we have been Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, responsible for this fortunate turn of events. I hope that Wyoming on August 25, 2006. the Kansas Fed will continue to organise such meetings to address these continuing puzzles. Rogoff, Kenneth (2006): Impact of Globalisation on Monetary Policy, paper presented at Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, REFERENCES Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 25, 2006. Blinder, Alan and Ricardo, Reis (2005): Understanding Venables, Anthony (2006): Shifts in Economic Geography the Greenspan Standard, paper presented at the Federal and Their Causes, paper presented at Symposium Reserve Bank of Kansas City symposium, The Greenspan sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Era: Lessons for the Future, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 25, 2006. August 25-27, 2005. 1148