*
Y.V.Reddy
It gives me great pleasure to be here in your midst.  Dr.C.Rangarajan,
Governor, Reserve` Bank of India was originally slated to address this seminar but
could not do so due to compelling circumstances.  I shall try and partly make up for his
absence, by drawing heavily from his speeches, in making this presentation.  I thank
the Adam Smith Institute, and in particular, Professor Carlos – Alberto CAMPOS, for
giving me this opportunity to be with you and participate in the discussions on
2. I shall initially give a brief review of the factual account of the performance
of the Indian economy during the last three years, to illustrate the positive impact of
economic reforms in India.  I would set out the broad contours of conducting monetary
policy in India, i.e., the objectives, the instruments used; the transmission mechanism;
and the relevant institutional framework .  I will then go over to the recently announced
Monetary and Credit Policy for the first half of 1997-98 and the developments in the
securities market.  I would conclude with the investment climate and the emerging
opportunities for foreign investments, especially in the context of capital account
Indian 
3. The growth in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the last three years
ranged from 6.8 to 7.2 per cent, and the current year (1997-98) should, from all
indications, be no exception .  While growth in industry averaged 10.4 per cent in the
last three years, that of agriculture was 2.5 per cent inspite of negative growth in 1995-
96.  Investment rate has been on the rise, largely on account of sharp improvement in
the domestic saving rate, in recent years.  The latest data available for 1995-96 indicate
that the saving rate was 25.6 per cent and investment was as high as 27.4 per cent.
Given the improvement in real GDP, there have been productivity gains.  The overall
4. Gross Fiscal Deficit of Government of India as a percentage of GDP has
come down from 6.1 per cent to 5 per cent in the last three years and is estimated to go
down further to 4.5 per cent in 1997-98. The liabilities of the government in relation to
GDP is also down correspondingly .  The rate of inflation as measured by the
Wholesale Price Index moved down from 10.4 per cent in 1994-95 to 5.0 per cent in
1995-96, but has edged up to 7.3 per cent in 1996-97.  In the current year, we would
like to contain it at around 6.0 per cent.  Consistent with this, broad money growth is
targeted to grow only by 15 to 15.5 per cent in 1997-98, slightly lower than the growth
achieved in 1996-97. Growth in non-food credit, however, was sluggish at 10.1 per
cent in 1996-97 but we expect it to move towards a figure of over twenty per cent,
actuals in 1994-95 and 1995-96.
1
closer to the very high 
macro picture on the real side of the economy is highly positive.
Economy : review and Outlook
liberalisation that we have been contemplating.
Monetary Policy and the Prospects for Investments in India.
Monetary Policy and Prospects for Investment in India5. Growth of exports and imports in SDR terms averaged 13.4 per cent and 17.6
per cent, respectively, in the later three years, but the performance last year was below
the average at 9.5 and 11.6 per cent.  The current account deficit relative to GDP has
averaged at a little over one per cent.  The exchange rate has been under pressure on
occasions but overall, while the nominal exchange rate vis-à-vis the US dollar
exhibited a steadily depreciating trend, the real effective exchange rate has been
appreciating during the last three years.  Foreign currency reserves are currently over
$24 billion, implying an import cover of about seven months.
6. There has been a significant structural transformation in the economy that
holds a promise for maintaining a strong and sustained performance.  These include,
the expanding role of the private sector and private investment; the commercialisation
of agriculture, especially the opening up of agriculture for exports; the liberalisation of
financial sector coupled with strengthened regulatory framework; the public-private
sector interface to improve physical infrastructure; and  the gradual empowerment of
State or Provincial Governments vis-a-vis the Federal Government in the process of
economic reform.
Monetary 
7. The broad objectives of monetary policy in India have been (a) to maintain a
reasonable degree of price stability and (b) to ensure adequate expansion in credit to
assist growth. The relative emphasis as between the two objectives depends upon the
conditions prevailing in the year in question.  Price stability as an objective is viewed
not just as an end in itself but as a means to promote sustainable and more important,
equitable growth.  This leads us to the inter-relationship between money, output and
prices.  Empirical evidence, as far as India is concerned, is clear that the demand for
real money function is reasonably stable .  It is this function that helps us in estimating
the appropriate growth in money supply, given the expected increase in real output and
the tolerable level of price increase.  An increase in money supply not only results in an
8. We have been targeting broad money expansion as an intermedia te target to
achieve the ultimate objectives.  The concept of monetary targeting that we have been
using is, however, a flexible one which takes into account the various feedbacks .
Monetary aggregates as intermediate targets are appropriate in the Indian context for
two reasons: First, since the money demand function for India has remained reasonably
stable, it continues to predict price movements with reasonable accuracy at least over a
period of years.  Second, the money stock target is relatively well understood by the
public at large.  With the money supply target, the stance of monetary policy is
9. Monetary authorities in India do not confine their attention to just one
aggregate.  A range of aggregates including aggregate credit are continuously
monitored .  In the literature, the alternative  to monetary targeting is the interest rate.
This, however, is more appropriate when various segments of financial markets are
2
unambiguously defined and gives a clear signal to market participants.
increase in demand but also influences output through the availability of credit.
Policy : Objectives and Analytical Framework:closely integrated, with interest rates in the various markets influencing one another.
This is hardly the case in India, even though one does see in the last few years, the
beginning of such a financial market integration .  Under these circumstances, it is
better to target money rather than interest rate, although the monetary authority
watches the behaviour of interest rates in the various markets and intervenes
appropriately.  This, we feel, is not necessarily inconsistent with an overall monetary
Instruments of Monetary Policy and Transmission Mechanism
10. It is well- recognised  that the two major indicators of effectiveness of
monetary policy are : output growth and price stability.  Data in the Indian context
show that, in the recent past, real growth rate went up sharply during the last five years
while price increases were contained.  No doubt, the monsoon conditions have been, by
and large, favourable and stable, ensuring impressive performance of agriculture,
thereby influencing the growth of the economy.  But, industry too performed well,
responding positively to the economic reforms unveiled since about the middle of
1991.  The propitious circumstance of relatively high growth with reasonable price
stability has contributed to a gradual move towards indirect instruments of monetary
policy.  Alongside, there were refinements in interest rate structure, greater autonomy
in policy making, effected by changes in fiscal-monetary relationship, and quick and
appropriate response to developments in the external sector.
11. In the last five years, monetary policy in India has sought to carefully
modulate the liquidity in the system by a combination of measures – direct and indirect
methods of control.  Reserve requirements and open market operations are the main
instruments of action in this regard.  Institutional changes have also been effected in
the Indian financial system, which helped, in the Indian context, in shifting from direct
to indirect instruments.  Financial reforms have been undertaken on a wide front in the
last five years to improve the allocative efficiency of resources, and to integrate the
various segments of financial markets.  The latest monetary and credit policy for the
first half of 1997-98 went a step further – it has paved the way for the re-emergence of
the Bank Rate as a signaling mechanism, thereby providing a potential support to the
efficacious use of open market operations.
12. The interest rate developments in the transition to financial market
integration would emit important signals for the conduct of monetary policy.  The
monetary authorities would need to  influence market rates through their actions
relating to not only quantity but also rate variables.  One of the ways to effect this is to
make refinements in the lending rate structure.  Lending rates which were determined
till 1990 have been gradually freed .  They are now totally freed except for two
concessional rates of interest for small borrowers in recognition that the credit markets
in India are imperfect.  Progressively, as in many other countries, the Reserve Bank
should be able to influence the level of economic activity by actions that impinge on
3
the cost of funds and the overall liquidity in the system.
target.13. The Reserve Bank has also taken some significant steps to bring about a
greater degree of flexibility in the operation of monetary policy.  Recently we moved
away from a system of automatic monetisation of budget deficit to a loan system,
widely known in India as the system of ‘Ways and Means Advances’.  The Reserve
Bank, however, will continue to hold Government paper, of course at its own
discretion.  While the direct support to budget will over time be limited, there are
aspects of fiscal policy which will continue to have a bearing on the conduct of
monetary policy .  For example, a high level of fiscal deficit can come in the way of
effective use of open market operations as an instrument of  monetary control.  At a
time when the Government borrows heavily in the open market, sale of securities by
the Reserve Bank as part of open market operations, would result in interest rates rising
to unduly high levels .  Hence, there is a continued need for monetary policy to take
14. With the progressive opening of the economy, monetary policy is being
increasingly co- ordinated with policies relating to the external sector, in particular, the
exchange rate policy.  To the extent the capital inflows add to net foreign exchange
assets of the Reserve Bank of India, it will have a monetary impact.  On the other hand,
if capital inflows are not taken into reserves, it may result in an appreciation of the
domestic currency.  There is here a policy dilemma, faced by many countries including
India, which have received substantial capital inflows.  The recent surge of capital
inflows in our country has been absorbed into the country’s foreign exchange reserves,
even though it has a monetary impact ;  this has been done essentially with a view to
maintaining the competitiveness of our exports, although some portion of the asset
accretion was sterilised through open market operations.  But, there are limits to
,  both in terms of costs and availability of stock.
Transmission Mechanism:
15. The financial structure can have an important bearing on transmission of
monetary policy.  Some of the aspects that have an impact on the transmission are the
nature of balance sheets of entities, viz., banks, financial institutions, households,
firms, etc., the extent of interest rates deregulation, the substitution between foreign
currency and local currency denominations in the composition of loans and deposits,
the access to finance from outside the banking system, the extent of 
and the depth and liquidity of secondary markets for debt and equity .  In this regard,
there are some characteristics of the Indian financial structure which need to be
reckoned .  A substantial part of financial intermediation is still occurring in the
informal sector.  Non-banking financial companies have been only recently brought
under regulatory framework.  Banking sector is still dominated by public sector banks
which have significant quantum of non-performing assets .  Debt markets have just
begun to develop.  Insurance sector is still a Government monopoly and most of long-
term savings, especially contractual savings in household sector are pre-empted by
public sector .  Significant progress has been made to reform, liberalise and 
the structure, but some of the rigidities persist.  But, we realise that market integration
is essential to reduce transaction costs and to help improve the transmission mechanism
4
modernise
disintermediation
sterilisation
into account the stance of fiscal policy.of policy.  If this integration is not rendered possible, monetary policy will have to
continue to depend heavily on direct control (such as reserve requirements) for policy
effectiveness.  So, we need to monitor market conditions in order to get  at an interest
rate structure that is ‘optimal’, in the equilibrium sense of demand for and supply of
funds.
16. There are genera lly four channels of transmission of monetary policy viz.,
credit availability effects, interest rate effects, wealth effects and exchange rate effects.
Financial deregulation with greater emphasis on competition would help integrate
financial markets and promote the effectiveness of interest rate in the monetary
transmission mechanism in general.  There is, however, a concern that interest rate may
not have a significant impact, if the corporate sector relies more on internal resource
generation and equity finance for its financing requirements than on bank borrowings.
In India, a recent RBI study on selected Financial Ratios of the Private Sector in India
revealed that debt to equity ratio of firms in the private corporate sector in India was in
the range of 110 to 120 per cent in the early 1990s.  Interest cost to value of production
in private corporate sector was below 7 per cent in early 1990s but as a percentage to
gross profits it was as high as 60 per cent.  These facts imply that firms in the private
corporate sector in India are highly leveraged and could be susceptible to interest rate
shocks.
17. The wealth channel effect is very important in industrial countries where the
mortgage market is the prime mover of financial markets and mortgage is the main
collateral for borrowings of households and firms.  But in the Indian context, the real
estate market has a dynamics of its own, which at the present stage, is only loosely and
indirectly connected with the mechanisms that form part of the conduct of monetary
18. The importance of exchange rate effect channel depends on how open the
economy is; the more open the economy, the more important would this channel be.
Judging by this criterion, the share of foreign trade sector (exports plus imports) in
India is not substantial.  But with the major policy initiatives in respect of trade and
payments including the market determined exchange rate mechanism and convertibility
on current account, this channel has been assuming increasing importance in recent
years.  In the second half of 1995-96, the foreign exchange market in India experienced
considerable volatility, and the Reserve Bank of India had actively intervened in the
forex market.  The exchange market intervention (net sales) by the Reserve Bank in the
spot market led to withdrawal of a fairly large amount of liquidity from the money
market leading to sharp increase in call rates.  Another issue relating to this channel is
how far the balance sheet position of players in forex market (banks and 
limit the scope of monetary action in defence of a pegged exchange rate.  The answer
to this question depends on the nature of openness of the economy and the exposure of
19. It is clear from our p resentation so far that financial markets in India are not
yet fully integrated and that the economy is ‘open’ only to a limited extent.  Given
5
domestic firms to external markets.
corporates)
policy.these elements, the interest rate and exchange rate channels may not be as powerful at
the present stage of Indian development as the credit availability channel.  Viewed
Institutional Framework for Monetary Policy:
20. As already alluded to, significant changes have occurred and are occurring
in the institutional framework in India within which monetary policy acts.  These are in
the areas of : fiscal-monetary relationship; pre- emption of resources through reserve
requirements; structure of interest rates; growth of the non-bank financial sector and
21. A historic reform relating to the fiscal monetary relationship was the
abolition of the system of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit taking place through
the issuance of ad hoc Treasury Bills by the Government and the introduction, in its
place, of the system of the Ways and Means Advances effective April 1, 1997 .  Under
the new system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA), financial limits have been
fixed to accommodate temporary mis-matches in Government receipts and payments.
Interest rates on WMA  would be market related.  Moreover, for two years beginning
April 1997, overdrafts would be permitted for periods beyond ten  consecutive days,
but at a cost.  After these two years, no overdraft will be permitted beyond ten
consecutive days.  The new system is expected to give more autonomy to the central
22. Historically, two direct monetary policy instruments, namely, the Cash
Reserve Ratio (CRR) and the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) had to be maintained at
very high levels because of high fiscal deficits and a high degree of monetisation of
deficits.  This ‘external constraint’ had a bearing on the profitability of the banking
system.  Easing of these constraints has formed a major agenda for the reform of the
financial sector since mid-1991.  Progressive reduction in reserve requirements has
been effected.  The Statutory Liquidity Ratio has been brought down from 37.5 per
cent to 25  per cent on an incremental basis and the Cash Reserve Ratio including
incremental CRR has been scaled down from 25 per cent  to 10 per cent.  These
changes in the reserve requirements have implications in relation to both CRR and
23. For long, the Indian financial system has been characterised by an
administered structure of interest rates.  This was aimed at directing implicit subsidy to
certain sectors enabling them to obtain funds at concessional rates of interest. In the
process, an element of cross- subsidisation got built into the system whereby
concessional rates provided  to some sectors were compensated by higher rates charged
to other borrowers.  The regulation of lending rates, ipso facto, led to the regulation of
deposit rates mainly to keep the cost of funds to banks in reasonable proportion to the
rates at which they could lend.  The reform of the interest rate structure has, therefore,
constituted an integral part of the financial sector reform.  Since September 1990, the
process of simplification began with the reduction in the number of slabs for which
6
open market operations as instruments of monetary policy.
bank to conduct its monetary policy.
changes in exchange rate policy.
thus, monetary targeting would gain in importance in the conduct of monetary policy.lending rates had been prescribed.  In a major move, the minimum lending rate was
abolished and the lending rates were freed in October 1994 for credit limits of over
Rs.2 ,00,000.  We are now having only two concessional rates on the lending side (one
for credit limits up to Rs.25 ,000 and the other one for over Rs.25,000 and up to
Rs.2,00,000), apart from prescribed ceilings for interest rate and export finance, and
only one administered rate on the deposit side, i.e., the maximum rate, which applies to
term deposits of maturity up to one year.  Banks, however, will be required to lend to
24. Three changes in the struct ure of  financial institutions, markets and
products that have been witnessed in recent times, carry significant implications for the
conduct of monetary policy.  First, the growing prominence of capital markets as seen
in the increasing mobilisation of resources directly; secondly, the reduction in the
barriers to capital mobility leading to increased linkages between domestic and foreign
financial markets; and thirdly, a spurt in financial innovation resulting in emergence  of
new financial products and services and blurring of the distinction between banks and
non-banks.  Clearly, the issue that arises in this context is as to how the monetary
transmission mechanism will get altered as non-banks and capital market begin to play
a larger role in the financial system and how the channels of policy need to be rendered
25. The far-reaching changes in the external sector of the Indian economy
witnessed in recent years, as reflected in the substantial elimination of quantitative
controls on imports, the reduction in tariffs, a market determined exchange rate system,
the convertibility on the current account, the encouragement to foreign direct
investment and the greater access to external capital markets, have contributed to a
closer link between the domestic markets and external markets and made the traditional
transmission channels more complex to operate.  This is especially because exchange
rate is now determined by demand for and supply of foreign exchange in the market .
The RBI intervention in the market is limited to reducing rate volatility and to ensuring
that the market rate is not too divergent from what the economic fundamental dictate.
Besides, greater access to international capital markets also means that the corporates
are able to access funds at rates lower than the domestic interest rates.  These new set
of factors arising out of external sector liberalisation would need to be reckoned in
working out the desired rate of expansion of money and credit as well as the optimal
level of interest rates.
Monetary Policy – An Update:
26. The recent Monetary and Credit Policy for the first half of 1997-98 went
beyond these principles and has, therefore, come to be described as a ‘big bang’ by
several observers of the markets.  The policy contained significant features in the area
of institutional and structural reforms.  There are elements of continuity, contextual
response and important structural changes.  I would like to highlight some of the
7
changes that were ushered in through this policy.
effective.
priority sectors to a stipulated extent.First, the policy seeks greater market orientation in the financial sector by
empowering banks with greater operational flexibility.  The RBI has moved out of
microregulation.  Now banks are given total freedom on consortium arrangements and
methodology of assessing working capital requirements. No doubt, prudential
guidelines will continue to be prescribed by the RBI.  These measures signify changes
in the relationship so far developed between the RBI and banks.
Secondly, borrowers have also been em powered to reinforce 
These measures have changed the relationship between the banker and the borrower.
Borrowers can choose to go through a single bank or multiple banks or take the
syndication route.  Access to commercial paper is freer now.
Thirdly, macromanagement by the Reserve Bank has, perhaps for the first time,
emphasised the need to recognise the rate variables as the potential instruments of
influencing the liquidity situation.  The Bank Rate will emerge as a signal of the stance
of monetary policy and determined the rate at which funds will be available to the
Fourthly, integration of the money market, the Government Securities Market
and the Forex Market is sought to be furthered .  Measures towards this end include
exemption of CRR/SLR on inter-bank liabilities, permission to Authorised Dealers
(Ads) to borrow from and lend in overseas market, permission to ADs  to book forward
cover on the basis of past performance, permission to undertake rupee/forex currency
swaps, allowing repos in all Government Dated Securities, reverse repos for all SGL
Sixthly, to signal continuing consultations with market participants, 
Committee for Money Markets has been constituted soon after the policy
announcement.  This would be similar to the Technical Advisory Committees on Forex
and Government Securities Markets which were established in early 1997 .
Significantly, it signals a difference in the relationship that has hitherto been in
existence between the Reserve Bank and market participants and has placed it at an
Government Securities Markets:
27. The authorities have sought to make the Government securities market an
active segment of the Indian financial system so that the conduct of monetary policy
could be rendered effective. A number of reforms have been initiated in recent years.
These include: (I) the setting up of a comprehensive system of primary Dealers ( PDs ) –
six PDs have already begun to operate (ii) licensing of Satellite Dealers (iii) the
provision of liquidity support by the RBI to mutual funds exclusively dedicated to
Government securities to the extent of 20 per cent of their holdings of Government
securities, which is expected to facilitate the emergence of the retail segment of the
Government Securities market, (iv) a progressive movement towards a mark-to-market
system for valuation of Government securities which would impart depth to the market
8
informal level.
a
account holders, reducing the minimum period of Commercial Paper (CP), etc.
system from the RBI.
marketisation.by encouraging trading, (v) adoption of the Delivery versus Payments System (DVP)
which ensures that transactions in Government securities are secure, (vi) insistence of
greater transparency of operations rendered by dissemination of information to market,
and (vii)introduction of indexed linked bonds (viii) abolition of tax deduction at source
on Government Securities (ix) allowing  to invest in Government  Stock, and (x)
introduction of Treasury Bills of various .  All of these changes, both in
relation to interest rate and government securities market, open up opportunities for
using open market operations as an instrument of monetary control.
Investment Climate
28. The contribution already made and efforts underway, in the conduct of
monetary policy and reforms in financial sector as a whole to the investment climate, is
.  I will highlight a few facts here:
First, growth, at around 7 per cent per annum in real terms, with a large size of
Secondly, price stability has been demonstrated.
Thirdly, exchange rate management is characterised by the absence of undue
Fourthly, fiscal stability and consolidation is being assured.
Fifthly, transparent regulatory framework in both real and financial sector has
been mounted.
Sixthly, large and critical market for Government securities is being improved
Seventhly, capital markets are rapidly ev olving – in terms of size, depth,
infrastructure and quality.  The institutional framework for regulating both debt and
equity markets is firmly in place.  Access is provided liberally and on a transparent and
assured basis to foreign investors.
stments in India have been growing in recent years.  From 23.4 per cent
of nominal GDP in 1991-92, gross aggregate investment rate has gone up to 27.4 per
cent in 1995-96.  In general it has been a gradual rise, with a minor exception in 1993-
94 when the rate slid down slightly.  The domestic saving rate was lower than the
investment rate by an average of 1.18 percentage points over the five year period 1991-
92 through 1995-96, representing capital inflows.
30. As a result of economic reforms and change i n foreign investment policy,
there has been a shift in the structure of capital flows in favour of non-debt creating
capital flows.  The total inflows of foreign investment, which includes both direct and
9
29. Inve
with access extended to domestic retail investors and foreign institutional investors.
volatility.
the domestic market, is an attractive feature.
noteworthy
maturities
FIIsportfolio investment, has arisen from a mere US $ 154 million in 1991-92 to US $
5,561 million in 1996-97.  As a result, the share of investments in net capital flows
which accounted for less than 1 per cent in 1990-91 has gone up to close to 50 per cent
in 1996-97.
Foreign Investments : Policy and Structural Changes:
31. The development of domestic institutional structure in the financial sector
from the view point of foreign investment is aimed towards availability of reliable
information to prospective investors in a relatively low-cost manner; appropriate
monitoring of transactions; and transparent guidelines for participation of foreign
investors in the domestic economy, including the stock market .  In this direction, a
series of policy initiatives have been taken since 1991 regarding the approval
procedures, the investment restrictions, the limitation on foreign equity participation,
the restrictions on acquisitions and take-over by foreign investors, the local content
requirement, the restrictions on remittance of funds abroad and the special incentives to
32. In respect of approval procedure regarding foreign direct investment (FDI),
a transparent framework is followed under which all the sectors have been opened,
with full repatriation benefit, to foreign investors except in the case of agriculture and
plantation.  The Reserve Bank provides automatic approval in the case of foreign direct
investment up to 74 per cent equity in the case of 9  high priority sectors industries and
51 per cent equity in the case of 51 priority sector industries and export/trading/star
trading houses.  The proposals involving higher equity participation are cleared by the
Secretariat of Industrial Approvals/Foreign Investment Promotion Board.  In the case
of Non-Resident Indians (NRIs)/Overseas corporate bodies (OCBs) this equity limit
can be extended up to 100 per cent.  Wholly owned foreign subsidiaries are allowed in
the power sector, 100 per cent Export Oriented Units ( EOUs) and units in Free Trade
Zones ( FTZs) and Export Processing Zones ( EPZs).  Similarly, approvals are given in
mining and telecommunication industries up to 50 per cent and 49 per cent of the
33. The policy towards foreign portfolio investment too has been substan
liberalised.  Portfolio investment in any of the listed companies of Indian stock
exchanges/over the counter exchange can be made by foreign institutional investors as
well as NRIs/OCBs subject to the condition that the aggregate holding of
shares/debentures of the FIIs/NRIs/OCBs put together does not exceed 30 per cent of
the voting equity capital of the company .  They are also permitted to invest in the
public sector/private sector mutual funds and Government Dated Securities.  Dedicated
debt funds up to 100 per cent from FIIs have been permitted recently.  There is no
lock-in-period for the remitting of the funds brought in, even in the case of preference
shares acquired by the foreign investors .  The taxation guidelines are also transparent
with capital gains tax of 10 per cent and 30 per cent on long term and short term,
10
respectively and exemption of withholding tax on the dividend earned.
tially
equity capital, respectively.
the foreign investors, especially in direct investment.34. The impact of these measures was clearly evident from the spurt in the
value of foreign investment approvals as well as inflows since 1991.  The amount of
foreign direct investment approved during the year 1996 has been US $ 11,142 million
which gives an indication of the likely volume of future inflows under direct
investment.  As against a direct investment of US $ 150 million, US $ 341 million and
US $ 586 million during 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94, respectively, the actual
foreign direct investment flows for the year 1994-95 has been US $ 1,313 million
which further leaped to US $ 2,133 million which further leaped to US $ 2,133 million
during 1995-96 and US $ 2,695 million during 1996-97 .  Since 1992-93, most of direct
investments has come from the USA, followed by the UK, Japan and Germany .  The
direct investment has mainly been garnered towards the engineering industries, the
financial services sector, the electronics/electrical equipments and the chemical/allied
products, in that order.  Still, the proportion of direct foreign investment in our country
is low at around 3 per cent of the overall FDI flows to developing countries during
1995 and, therefore, in keeping tandem with the overall structure of the economy
efforts are made to raise the amount of FDI to around US $ 10 billion every year.
Keeping this in view, a Foreign Investment Promotion Council has been set up while
FIPB has been reconstituted to approving and encouraging FDI flows.
35. Similarly, portfolio investment has taken quantum leap in recent years.  Not only
have the Indian corporates raised funds abroad through Global Depository Receipts
( GDRs) and Offshore funds, FIIs and NRI/OCBs have also remained bullish on the
Indian market during this phase.  The inflows into India arising from GDR were of the
order of US $ 1,602 million and US $1,839 million during 1993-94 and 1994-95,
respectively.  While GDR issues were somewhat subdued in the first half of 1995-96,
the same has picked up during 1996-97 with the amount repatriated to India by the
Indian corporates from the GDR proceeds amounting to US $ 920 million.  Portfolio
investment flows on account of FIIs have been encouraging with an average of around
US $ 1,687 million coming during 1993-94 to 1995-96.  Moreover, the total FII
inflows during 1996-97 were US$ 1,926 million.  The dimension of the flows should
be assessed in the light of the overall slump in global portfolio flows to developing
countries witnessed during 1995 and 1996 following monetary tightening and rising
interest rates in the US from February 1994, bullish stock markets in the OECD
particularly in the US, and the Mexican crisis in December 1994.
Foreign Investments and Emerging Opportunities
36. An expert committee set up to lay out the road map towards Capital
Account Convertibility (CAC) has come to the conclusion that based on the assessment
of the current macroeconomic situation, the time is now appropriate to initiate a move
towards CAC.  The Committee has stated that fiscal consolidation , a mandated
inflation target and strengthening of the financial system should be regarded as crucial
preconditions/signposts for CAC in India.
37. Successful efforts to liberalise the capital account have typically been
preceded by a strategy of fiscal reforms which significantly reduces the fiscal deficit
11and finances the remaining deficit with a minimum recourse to inflation tax .
Accordingly, the committee has recommended a reduction in the GFD/GDP ratio from
the budgeted 4.5 per cent in 1997-98 to 3.5 per cent in 1999-2000.  On the inflation
front, a mandated rate of inflation for the three-year period 1997-98 to 1999-2000 has
been placed at 3-5 per cent by the Committee .  This would break the inflationary
expectations in India and bring inflation rates in close alignment with international
inflation rates.  The Committee has also recommended full interest rate deregulation in
1997-98 and reduction in the non-performing assets of the banking system.  Quite
clearly, the load of a high level of NPAs cannot be borne by the banks if the financial
system is opened up fully to the forces of competition.  In addition, the Committee has
suggested that the conduct of exchange rate policy, the balance of payments and the
adequacy of foreign exchange reserves should be assessed on an on-going basis.
38. In the current situation, one way of assessing the emerging opportunities
could be on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee.  It would be
reasonable to expect that it provides a basis for what needs to be done by the
authorities in future.
 Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Adam Smith Seminar on
“The outlook for emerging markets : The Middle East/The Indian Ocean”, Paris on June 11, 1997.
12
*