The Future of India's Debt Market 1997, inaugural 
address by Dr Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor 
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai at Invest India 
Conferences at the Taj Mahal Hotel, Mumbai on 
October 9, 1997 
I am happy to be amongst you this morning. This Conference gives me an opportunity to sharpen 
my thoughts, and gain insights from the deliberations. The subject has gained importance over 
the years, and in particular, more recently after the Monetary and Credit Policy of April 1997. In 
fact, there is a sudden spurt in Conferences on this subject, as for example, the SBICAP Debt 
Market Seminar held last month. Also, there was a pretty elaborate coverage of this subject 
during the last two days in the discussions of Bank Economists' Conference on Second Phase of 
Reforms in the Financial Sector.  
The objective of this national conference, as I understand, is to assess recent changes and 
examine issues which merit urgent consideration in order to achieve an efficient and vibrant debt 
market. In the Seminar organised by the SBICAP, Governor, Dr. C. Rangarajan had flagged 
some specific issues which would help in formulating an agenda for further reforms in the debt 
markets. I would urge upon this audience to give serious consideration to these issues. 
2. Let me, therefore, begin by highlighting the reforms initiated by the Reserve Bank of India and 
Government of India in the debt market in the recent period. These include:  
• setting up of a comprehensive system of Primary Dealers,  
• adoption of DVP system for settlement of Government Securities transactions,  
• abolition of tax deduction at source on Government Securities,  
• permitting FIIs to invest in debt instruments including Government stock and allowing 
them to hedge their foreign currency risk in the forward market,  
• introduction of Treasury Bills of varying maturities, and  
• placing investments of banks in preference shares / debentures/bonds of corporates 
outside the five per cent limit.  
In a bid to increase transparency in operations, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been 
disseminating information on its transactions in Gilts and publishing the calendar of auctions in 
respect of Treasury Bills and repos.  
Soon, the RBI proposes to publish data on banks’ investments in corporate and PSU debt in the 
Weekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin.  
To foster inter-institutional coordination, a Technical Advisory Committee for Government 
Securities and a Standing Committee on Money Market have been set up. Major issues 
confronting the debt and money markets are discussed in these committees. These committees 
have been found to be useful to all participants.  
3. As I observe, the discussions in this conference are structured around five sessions, viz., 
primary market, secondary market, legal issues, risk management and future directions. For the 
sake of convenience, I will follow broadly the same structure and pose issues for further 
deliberations. 
Primary Market 4. Lack of market clearing yields at primary auctions of Government debt is often being cited as a 
significant factor slowing the development of the secondary market. The arguments run as 
follows: 
First, it hampers efforts to broaden the investor base.  
Second, at times when cut-off yields in the primary market are lower than prevailing secondary 
market yields, it curbs secondary trading.  
Third, to the extent the cut-off yields are lower than secondary market yields, it constrains 
inventory build-up by primary dealers. Finally, to the extent volumes of pick-up in primary auctions 
are reduced due to interest rate considerations, it reduces the availability of floating stock in the 
secondary market.  
5. What are the factors that inhibit market clearing mechanisms? There are four important issues, 
viz., notifying auction size, type of auction, element of non-competitive bids and frequency of 
auctions of Treasury Bills. Another issue of concern relates to large private placements of 
corporate debt. 
6. At present, there is no preannounced notified amount in 364-Day and 14-Day auctions. This 
procedure enables the RBI to determine either the cut-off price or the amounts to be accepted in 
a flexible manner. Notifying amounts in auctions will bring more transparency in the auction 
procedure by removing the uncertainty about volumes in auctions. In this context, it needs to be 
emphasised that the capacity of primary dealers to absorb auction supply as an underwriter is 
limited. Currently, primary dealers underwrite to the extent of 50 per cent of the amounts in 
auctions with notified amounts. In this scenario, there is a danger of devolvement on the RBI, if 
there is a preannounced notified amount. The extent of the devolvement on the RBI can be 
minimised by increasing the underwriting amounts to primary dealers. The RBI could also change 
the notified amounts between each auction, depending on prevailing market conditions, in order 
to minimise the devolvement risk on itself. 
7. Presently, there are six primary dealers. The institution of primary dealers has partly 
contributed to a significant increase in secondary market transactions in Government Securities. 
Authorising primary dealers is an on-going process. All eligible applicants will be considered by 
the RBI for primary dealership. While on this subject, an issue that needs to be considered relates 
to the when-issued market. At present, the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 prohibits 
short-selling of securities. Two options could be considered. First, whether to give exclusive 
access of primary auctions to primary dealers and simultaneously permit them to engage in short 
sales of Government Securities. Second, whether to continue with the existing system of access 
to primary auctions and allow all participants to engage in short sales of Government Securities. 
The timing and sequencing of this reform - whether to introduce it now or wait until the number of 
primary dealers have enlarged are aspects that need to be carefully considered. I would urge 
upon the participants to discuss the pros and cons of these options and the international practices 
in this regard. 
8. There is some debate over the type of auction that is most suitable for selling Treasury Bills 
and Dated Government Securities in India. There are advocates for both the discriminatory and 
uniform price auctions. But, international practices seem to be in favour of discriminatory price 
auctions. In a switch over from one auction system to another, a number of considerations arise 
such as easy entry, cost to issuer, return to investor, role of primary dealers, incentive to gather 
information, etc. This is another area fit for a careful assessment. 
9. As you are aware, non-competitive bids are allowed in 91- and 14-Day Treasury Bills auctions. 
Major issue relates to the treatment of non-competitive bids. Country practices show that non-
competitive bidders are made allocation within the notified amount. However, the non-competitive 
bidders in other countries consist essentially of the small, retail and inexperienced investors. 
Since the maximum bid is restricted to a small value, the competitive bid prices do not get distorted. There is a view in the Indian market that non-competitive bidders should also be 
allowed as competitive bidders. However, in our country, since State Governments are major 
non-competitive bidders, their volatile surplus funds position could make their participation in 
Treasury Bills auctions very uncertain. Thus, there could be large swings in terms of volumes in 
auctions. Another view is to make allocation for non-competitive bidders outside the notified 
amount. 
10. There is a view in the market that the high frequency of auctions recently brought about by 
introducing 14-Day Treasury Bills auctions (along with frequent repos) tends to hinder secondary 
market activities by reducing investor participation in the secondary market in favour of waiting for 
a few days for primary issues. Also, the staggered settlement dates for Treasury Bills falling on 
different days in a week make secondary market trading across different maturities of Treasury 
Bills less efficient. Perhaps, it would be useful for this Conference to discuss the need, if any, to 
reduce the auction frequency and adjust settlement dates of different maturity Treasury Bills to 
fall on the same day in a week so as to improve fungibility and thereby price discovery and 
market efficiency. 
11. Finally, an increasingly important concern relates to the issuance of PSU bonds and 
corporate debentures through private placements. Although, the private placement market is 
playing a crucial role in enabling corporates to raise resources, certain vital issues need to be 
considered for a well-directed and efficient functioning of the market. At present, there is no 
transparency in this market and virtually little information. In developed markets, the regulatory 
authorities indicate the framework within which the private placement has to function, like number 
of persons per placement, arrangements with only qualified investors and strict regulations to 
access certain qualified investors. We have to assess the adequacy of regulatory framework to 
protect the interest of investors from risks associated with subscriptions in the private placement 
market. With a proper regulatory framework and more transparency, the private placement 
market can develop further as an integral and important constituent of the primary market for 
raising of resources by the corporates; hence, the need to deliberate on the status of regulatory 
framework. 
Secondary Market 
12. As part of reform process, a number of technical impediments that prevented more active 
secondary market trading in Government Securities and Treasury Bills have been progressively 
removed. Let me briefly recall these:  
• abolition of the system of TDS,  
• issuance of benchmark securities, and  
• operationalising the DVP system at all centres.  
The RBI is encouraging banks to open SGL II accounts for constituents, thereby enlarging the 
coverage of book-entry holding of Government securities. Recently, the National Stock Exchange 
has been authorised to open a SGL II account and current account with the RBI. A decision has 
been taken to extend a similar facility to Stock Holding Corporation of India. These steps would 
further streamline transfer and settlement procedures in the Government securities market.  
13. In respect of PSU bonds and corporate debentures, which are held mostly in scrip form, a 
proper settlement system is yet to be put in place. The National Securities Depository Limited 
(NSDL) was expected to dematerialise a sizeable stock of non-Government debt. But, at present, 
NSDL has been able to dematerialise only those securities which are exempt from stamp duty. 
Suitable amendments to stamp duty regime appear, therefore, necessary to avoid transaction 
costs and enable active use of the facility. An appropriate solution is needed since an efficient 
transfer and settlement system in the PSU bonds and corporate debt segments could usher in the resumption of repos in these instruments. Once it is assured that risk free and transparent 
payment and settlement systems are put in place through a depository like NSDL in 
dematerialised form, it should be possible to permit such repos. 
14. Another issue that has been raised frequently relates to permission to financial institutions to 
borrow through repos in eligible securities. While there is a risk of generating asset-liability 
mismatches among non-bank participants, the conference could discuss the operational 
feasibility of allowing such participants in the repo market under suitable safeguards. 
15. The Reserve Bank of India is considering a range of options to increase the interest of 
individual investors in Government securities. There is an inherent potential for households to 
diversify their investment portfolio encompassing Government securities. It would be useful to 
quickly review marketing and distribution strategies adopted in other countries for reaching 
Government Securities to households. Australia, Ireland, Netherlands and Sweden adopt direct 
sales of Government Securities to the retail sector through special registration facilities. Hungary 
and Switzerland, the UK and the USA retail through non-competitive bidding arrangements. 
France and Norway use the primary dealers network. Germany, Spain and Turkey have retailing 
arrangements through the banking system while Denmark, Ireland, and Poland retail Government 
Securities through the stock exchanges. Italy uses both the banking and stock exchange network. 
The conference can do well to consider strategic options for this important phase of market 
development. 
Legal Issues 
16. The most important segment of the debt market being Government securities, let me start 
with the relevant law on this. The law relating to Government Securities and their management by 
the Reserve Bank of India is the Public Debt Act, 1944. The present act dates to pre-
independence days when marketable debt comprised almost the entire borrowing of the 
Government. This is no longer valid with almost over Rs.300,000 crore worth of other liabilities of 
Government comprising inter alia instruments like NSS, Indira Vikas Patra, etc. falling outside 
the purview of this Act. Further, provisions of the Public Debt Act relate to issue, servicing and 
repayment of Government securities and do not provide regulation of trading/marketing of 
Government securities. For instance, under the present Act, the Reserve Bank has no 
substantive powers to design and introduce an instrument of transfer suited to computer 
environment. There are other constraints such as those which preclude the RBI from issuing 
Government Securities in the form of promissory notes in the name of Trusts, nonavailability of 
nomination facility in respect of Government Securities, barring a minor from holding Government 
Security, etc. A new Act on Government Securities is proposed to take care of these issues. Any 
suggestions on this reform are welcome. 
17. It seems appropriate to consider extending the use of Depositories established under the 
Depositories Act to Government Securities. The Depositories Act came into force in 1996 
providing for a legal framework for holding of equities, bonds, debentures, units and other market 
instruments in dematerialised form in a Depository. Such deposits come under the regulatory 
framework of SEBI. Since the RBI manages the public debt of Central and State Governments, 
Public Debt Offices (PDOs) of the RBI are in effect depositories under the Public Debt Act. Thus, 
giving permission to Depositories to hold Government Securities in dematerialised form would 
make the provisions of the Depositories Act applicable to the Reserve Bank as an issuer, bringing 
into focus the respective regulatory roles of the Reserve Bank and SEBI in Government 
Securities. One of the suggestions to resolve this is by way of incorporating a provision in the 
proposed Government Securities Act, excluding the provisions of Depositories Act being 
applicable to Government Securities. 
18. It would certainly be useful to survey the international experience in this regard. In Canada, 
Germany and Switzerland, there is Central Government prudential regulation of depository institutions and provincial or state supervision of securities trading. The Bank of England used to 
provide regulation of depository institutions, although after the passage of the Bank of England 
Bill, responsibility for banking supervision will be transferred to the new and strengthened 
Securities and Investments Board (SIB). SIB will also take direct responsibility for the regulatory 
regime covered by the Financial Services Act. In Australia and New Zealand, the central banks 
provide prudential regulation of depository institutions, but there is no specific regulation of 
Government securities market. The Japanese Ministry of Finance and the Danish Supervisory 
Authority for financial affairs provide centralised regulation of the Government Securities. As you 
would have observed, the international experience is varied. 
19. Another legal issue which is often alluded to relates to forward contracts. This forum would do 
well to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the repeal of the Government notification 
issued in l969 prohibiting forward contracts in securities. 
Risk Management 
20. Investors in debt instruments face three major components of risk, viz., credit risk, interest 
rate risk and foreign currency risk. In case of Government bonds, credit risk is zero. The foreign 
currency risk is relevant only to non-resident investors like FIIs who are investing in debt 
instruments. Recently, the 100 per cent debt funds dedicated to the debt market were allowed to 
take forward cover to enable them to hedge their exchange rate risk. Investments in all debt 
instruments are exposed to interest rate risk. This risk can be better hedged if a futures market in 
interest rate exists or if short-selling in securities is allowed. However, the futures market will be 
meaningful only in an environment of totally deregulated interest rates and the existence of a term 
money market which itself is dependent on a credible yield curve. Thus, while eventually 
introduction of interest rate futures and permission for short-selling are inevitable, the real issue is 
one of timing of these reforms, so that it does not entail any systemic risks. 
Future Direction 
21. Consistent with the spirit of financial sector reforms, the RBI is in the process of divestment of 
part of its shareholding of DFHI and STCI so that the RBI does not have majority of share 
holding. As you aware, the RBI had taken initiative to promote STCI and DFHI. The RBI is now a 
minority share holder in DFHI and after the second round of disinvestment in l995, its share is 
only l0.5 per cent. It has also been decided to disinvest shares of STCI so that after the first 
phase of disinvestment, the RBI’s share holding will be less than fifty per cent. 
22. Second, Non-Banking Financial Companies are now required to maintain a higher level of 
liquid assets in the form of Government securities and Government Guaranteed Bonds. This will 
increase the demand for Government Paper in the market. This will be in addition to the demand 
generated due to opening up of provident funds to debt market instruments, emergence of 
MMMFs and investments by l00 per cent FII debt funds. 
23. Third, I would like to flag the vital issue of the role of market participants. Standard practices 
have to be evolved by the market with regard to the manner of quotes, the conclusion of deals, 
the manner of pricing and accounting standards. Code of best practices has to be evolved also 
for repo transactions in eligible securities. In the context of moving towards a liberalised and 
market oriented environment in the financial sector, it will be desirable if such standard practices 
are evolved and accepted in a common forum of a self regulatory body. At present, I understand 
that there are moves to create such self regulatory body/bodies among the PDs and among 
banks and financial institutions covering transactions in money and fixed income securities 
markets. This is a welcome trend and the RBI would be willing to nurture such developments in 
the market. 24. Finally, the time has come to accord priority for establishing electronic links between Deposit 
Accounts Department and Public Accounts Department/Public Debt Office of the RBI for 
achieving synchronisation of funds and securities transfers. We should also begin planning 
electronic links between banks, primary dealers and others who have access to the system so as 
to pave way for a more information-efficient and transparent securities market. These plans can 
succeed only with the concerted efforts of all - the Government, the Reserve Bank of India and 
the market participants. I would appreciate your detailed suggestions. 
I wish this conference all success.  
I would be interested to learn about the outcome of the deliberations.  
Thank you. 
 