Inaugural Session on Technical Session I – Reorienting Structure
Introduction
It gives me great pleasure to address this gathering of professionals from the financial
sector.  I have been impressed by the arrangements which have been made for the
conduct of the program, and hope that the proceedings will also match the
organisation in grandeur.
I have had the opportunity to go through the papers which are being presented at this
session and I am very happy to note that they are of a high quality and raise very
pertinent issues. In fact, I find that the papers presented at BECON have been
improving in quality every year and this trend should be nurtured.  The provision of
incentives in the form of awards for outstanding papers this year is a good innovation
and should be continued.  After all, an important goal of this conference is to
stimulate thinking on financial sector issues and to strengthen the linkage between
research and policy.  I look forward to this event being elevated to the level of an
international conference where meaningful interaction and experience sharing can
take place on issues of common concern.
In my address for today, I would like to dwell upon the issues raised in the papers
being presented in this session and present the regulatory perspective on these issues
as relevant to the Indian context.  As you are aware, this session broadly covers the
area of “Reorienting Structure” and is more specifically intended to cover topics on
Corporate Governance, Reforming Capital Structure, Universal Banking and the New
Capital Accord.
Corporate Governance
The fact that many papers have been received on the subject of Corporate
Governance in banks, is an indication of the interest that this issue continues to
generate.  The papers have dwelt on crucial issues such as the professionalisation of
Boards through selection of competent independent directors, role of the audit
function, conflict of interest of having regulators on the Boards and the role of the
CEO.  Some suggestions have also been made regarding expanding the role of the
Board for Financial Supervision (BFS) to oversee the bank audit function.  I would
like to clarify here that the role of the BFS is to provide expert advice and guidance to
the Reserve Bank on matters relating to oversight of banks, financial institutions and
NBFCs and it cannot directly undertake audit/inspection of the entities mentioned
above.
The papers have highlighted the relentless march in the corporate world towards
better corporate governance standards and adoption of uniform accounting standardsand disclosure requirements.  The appropriateness of these twin requirements is much
more to banking sector where depositors’ funds are many times higher than
promoters’ equity.
Corporate governance is no longer a concept to be discussed endlessly; rather it
should be an action point to be addressed at the earliest with all the seriousness it
deserves.  In my view, this should be so even without any regulatory or other
pressures but as an inevitable adjunct in a highly competitive market.  It is also true
that the obligations of corporate governance are becoming more and more mandatory
through listing and other requirements with the capital markets placing greater
demand on corporates including banks for information flow.  The obligations of
directors to furnish corporate governance reports to shareholders under the listing
agreement with SEBI is a clear pointer in this regard.
The lines of responsibility in the banks’ Board therefore need to be clearly drawn to
ensure that  :
(a) the policy initiatives to keep the wealth of the bank growing are clearly drawn
(b) action plans towards their implementation are conceived realistically
consistent with available human and other resources and
(c) there is a constant review mechanism to get a feed back on the
implementation efficiencies for course correction.
The demands on the Board of banks are therefore going to be truly onerous.
We have come across instances of members of certain bank Boards showing
reluctance to ratify and adopt the covenants circulated by the Reserve Bank
containing the recommendations of Dr. Ganguly Committee on the
professionalisation of the bank Boards.  I truly hope that the bank Boards will rise to
the occasion and discharge their fiduciary duties to the fullest in all respects.  After
all, good corporate governance can not be enforced by regulatory dictates but is a
larger issue of ethical standards.
Role of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
It is the CEO who is the most important instrumentality for implementing corporate
governance in banks and who has the duty of carrying all the stakeholders with him,
including the Board and the bank.  There are some areas where the CEOs have to
particularly focus their energies in the coming year. First and foremost is the effort to
build a team of performers and motivate the organisation as a whole.  CEO’s job
should not always be aimed to improve the bottom line of the bank.  Efforts should be
made to go into the staff psyche and HRD issues to create a vibrant structure.  No
organisation can ever stand on a disjointed and non motivated personnel structure,
however efficient and high performing the CEO is.  We have shining examples of two
2weak public sector banks having been turned around where the CEOs have proved
how much an institution could achieve with the same set of staff by identification of
talent and proper motivation.
Another area is that of induction of new talent – many banks, particularly public
sector banks and a few private sector banks, have successfully implemented VRS
schemes,  but how many of them have taken steps to put in place special talent
scouting plans.  Similarly, while banks often announce new products, sometimes only
as a matter of competition, I am not sure  whether issues like strategic planning,
mobilization and recruitment of appropriate talent and provision of required training
facility to the staff to handle such new products are adequately addressed by them.
Successful banks have invariably spent a lot of time in product planning and
marketing which has provided them the cutting edge in this area.
Then there is the issue of education of non official directors on the Boards of
banks.  Non-official nominees play an important role in the deliberations of the
Board and it is essential that the CEO carries them along with him.  This applies in
the case of all banks cutting across ownership pattern.  Whether it involves promoter
directors, or government nominated independent directors, I will exhort the CEOs to
spend significant time in briefing the new entrants on organizational structure,
strengths and weakness of the institution, gray areas of internal control and regulatory
gaps observed in the past audit/inspections, business plans both near term and long
term, and seek their suggestions for addressing the issues in these areas.
This brings us to the crucial issue of the interaction of the CEO with the Board.
When we talk of disclosure, what is also included is proper disclosure to the Board by
the CEO.  There have been instances in banks and financial institutions where the
Board has not been kept properly informed but has been held responsible for the
actions taken by these institutions.  The blame for this often falls upon the Directors
nominated by the Government or RBI, as they are seen to be more responsible than
the others for safeguarding the institution.  There is of course a larger issue in this
which has been mentioned in the papers being presented, and that is of the conflict of
interest in the role of the RBI as a regulator and as a director on the Board of a
bank/financial institutions.  I must clarify here that we too are more than aware of this
conflict  and are reluctant to take on this role, and do so only in cases where we have
no option – either where it is a legal requirement or where a bank’s condition
financial or otherwise, warrants presence of RBI nominee.  Even in these situations,
to minimise the conflict, officials from the areas of supervision or regulation are not
nominated on the Boards of these institutions.
There are certain other areas in which the CEOs should bestow their personal
attention.  I shall mention three important ones: housekeeping, fraud prevention
and NPA management.
3(a) In the area of housekeeping, there must be a concerted effort to clear backlog
in balancing of books especially in large branches, tighten control to ward off clearing
differences which are fraud prone and streamline inter-branch and nostro accounts
reconciliation.   Systems should be put in place for control over unusual build up of
outstanding entities in suspense and sundry deposit accounts, a fertile field for
perpetration of frauds.  Strict observance of Know Your Customer (KYC) procedures
is essential to prevent reputation risks emerging in the area.
(b) Coming to fraud prevention, CEOs should ensure that there is follow-up  and
quick disposal of cases relating to large value frauds of say Rs.1 crore and above
within the time limit of 4 months as prescribed by CVC.  They should also implement
fraud control procedures by the early implementation of Mitra Committee
recommendations and adopt best practices, strengthen internal audit and control
systems and put in place accountability process for audit and inspection staff.  They
should also establish systems and procedures for immediate reporting of large value
frauds to RBI/CBI/CVC, co-operate with investigation agencies for tracking down the
culprits and complete the disciplinary proceedings as quickly as possible.
(c) A lot has been said about NPA management in different forums, but given
the magnitude of this ailment, I do not have any hesitation in reiterating some
important points in this forum.  CEOs should adopt dynamic approach in going for
compromise settlements.  Fear of CVC/CBI need not exist as long as banks follow a
transparent system through constitution of Settlement Advisory Committees,
adoption of committee approach, obtention of Board approvals whenever needed etc.
Banks should also make effective use of DRT / Lok Adalats, and the CDR
mechanism to further the cause of NPA resolution.  Finally, now that the SRFAESI
Act has been passed by the Parliament, banks must set up task forces to make judicial
use of the Act’s provisions with appropriate back up framework to take over, manage
and dispose of assets of the defaulting borrowers.
I am happy to note that the issue of a regime of corporate governance in urban co-
operative banks has also been raised in some papers.  Whatever I have mentioned
earlier regarding corporate governance in commercial banks holds equally true for co-
operative banks.  In fact, it takes on an even greater meaning in the urban co-
operative structure because of the influence of political personalities, the regulatory
gray areas on account of dual control and the weak regime of audit to which they are
subject.  I would, therefore, exhort all stakeholders of urban co-operative banks to
work towards strengthening corporate governance structure in this sector also.
Universal Banking
The presentations on Universal Banking have appropriately flagged the burning
issues in a very topical area.  It has been mentioned that the speed of consolidation in
banking has begun to slacken, and the model of universal banking which was earlier
4being hotly pursued by the big banks is now considered as flawed.  It is also pointed
out that recent events have brought to the fore the inherent conflicts of interest
between commercial banking and investment banking being conducted within one
bank.  Further, despite the theoretical arguments in support of cross-selling of
products such as insurance, there are few success stories possibly because this
requires team building and selling skills, which all banks do not have.
Extending the above arguments to the Indian context, it is mentioned that the merger
strategy to create size is likely to be witnessed here and is likely to result in the take
over of the old private banks by public sector banks.
I would first like to comment on the issue of mergers.  Let me very clearly state that
the regulators are interested in seeing a banking sector which has a diverse array of
well-capitalized and sound banks which have the skill and appetite to serve different
segments of the population.  However, we do not prefer any particular method by
which this should be achieved and certainly do not promote mergers between public
and private sector banks as the best solution.
Mergers, especially those between banks, are not easy.  First, finding suitable partners
is not an easy task and once this is done, getting agreement on a suitable swap ratio is
equally difficult.  Finally, all this requires the blessing of the regulators and is also
subject to scrutiny at a later stage.  If the merger is approved, then there is the
vexatious issue of management control, which is always a bone of contention whether
it is a merger or an acquisition. Compulsory mergers are not always a good solution
because they invariably involve one weak bank and lead to a loss for the shareholders
and the depositors and also has the potential to create a systemic problem.
It is our view that mergers are best left to the markets to decide and regulators should
only create an environment which can facilitate consolidation among willing
institutions.  However, regulators may have to step in where a weak bank can no
more exist and compulsory merger is the only option in the interests of both the
depositors and the system.
However, in the Indian context, mergers have raised another type of policy issue.  I
refer here to the reverse mergers between the DFIs and banks.  With the DFI model
increasingly becoming unviable, one DFI has already merged with the bank floated
by it; another is contemplating converting itself into a bank while a third is likely to
be reduced to a narrow bank.  The main incentive for this is of course the access to
the cheap and stable bank deposit base, but the consequence of this is the drying up of
sources of long term finance for the economy.  Banks, therefore, have to fill this gap
by funding long term projects which are viable.  At the same time, they have to find
suitable ways to mange their ALM mismatches which would arise from using the
lower duration deposits to fund the higher duration projects.
5On the issue of diversification and universal banking, I share some of the concerns
expressed here, given that many banks have not made significant gains in allied
activities handled through subsidiaries. The reasons for this may have been
indiscriminate entry into different lines of business.  It is heartening to note that banks
have taken stock of the situation and begun to exit from businesses in which they did
not have either skill or scope.
Capital Structure
From the presentations on capital structure of banks, it would appear that this is the
right time for banks to begin planning for their capital needs for the coming years,
since their performance has been better and since the markets are receptive.  Although
the average capital adequacy of the banking system is over 11%, this is not enough.
The need for capital can go up in the coming years on account of two events.  First, if
there is a pick up in credit demand, then banks would need to re-align their risk
weighted portfolio to meet this.  Currently, they have invested 10-15% over the SLR
requirements in Government Securities, which attract 0% credit risk-weight and 2.5%
market risk weight.  If this quantum is required to be redeployed in the loan book of
banks then this loanable surplus will attract 100% risk-weight and warrant allocation
of  additional capital.
The second reason why banks will need to augment their capital in the coming years
brings us to a key topic that was listed for this session but on which no papers have
been received – the New Capital Accord, which is also termed as Basel II.
The Accord represents the ultimate convergence of research and practice in
supervision as it attempts to apply state of the art financial modelling techniques to
the prescription of capital adequacy.  I will briefly mention the progress being made
in the consultative process, what will be the likely shape of the final proposals and
how these would impact our banks.
Basel II: The New Capital Accord
We have been actively participating in the international discussions on the proposals
and have also been in the forefront of an initiative with other non G-10 supervisors to
promote the recognition of a feasible approach which could be adopted by less
complex banks without imposing significant costs.  We support the move towards
enhanced risk sensitivity in the capital allocation process.  However, our basic
concerns regarding the proposed framework, have been that the Standardized
Approach (SA), which the majority of the banks in the world are expected to apply, is
based on the ratings of bank borrowers by external agencies.  This approach is
deficient because penetration of such ratings is very low and not expected to increase
significantly in the near future. Besides, such ratings are not seen as reliable in view
6of the track record of some of the agencies.  Further, wherever ratings are available,
these are more issue ratings than issuer ratings, and culture of rating issuers has not
yet developed.  Finally, there is the important issue as to the cost that this rating
would impose upon the system.
In view of the above constraints, such an approach essentially does not enhance risk
sensitivity significantly in developing economies and hence is not favoured over the
existing approach.  Further, such an approach could put banks in jurisdictions where
an external rating culture was not widespread at a relative disadvantage to banks in
other jurisdictions and simply lead to an increase in capital requirements.
On the other hand, the internal rating based (IRB) approach is a more risk
sensitive option and is also theoretically sound as banks are in the best position to
evaluate their borrowers.  In fact, the installation of this approach will lead to better
risk management practices in banks and the output of these systems can be used for
purposes other than pure capital allocation. However, only banks that have the
necessary wherewithal in terms of data, MIS and skills can apply this approach in the
timeframe contemplated i.e. by 2006.
Given that many countries have only recently implemented the 1988 Accord and
given the different stages of sophistication at which the emerging economy banking
systems are at present, it may be necessary to phase in the New Accord in country
specific time schedules.  The Basel Committee has taken note of the concerns
expressed by India and other non-G10 supervisors and recognized that non-member
countries would need more time beyond 2006 to implement the new framework and
that they should not be considered as non-compliant till they are ready to move to the
New Accord.  The Committee is also working with a group of national supervisors,
including India, to develop an option within the standardized approach that will not
be based on external ratings but will be an extension of the current risk-weighting
system.
This does not mean that our banks should take it easy as far as implementing the
Accord is concerned.  On the contrary, it should be the endeavour of our banks, which
have international presence and also those, which are technologically capable to
install IRB systems as early as possible.
You will be interested to know that the Reserve Bank has already taken steps to
implement two main components of the second pillar of Basel II, viz., Risk Based
Supervision (RBS) and Prompt Corrective Action (PCA).  PCA framework has
already been put into operation by the Reserve Bank and banks have been advised to
initiate necessary steps to prevent them from attracting the provisions of this
framework.  Risk-based supervision will come into force from the first quarter of next
year.
7Conclusion
RBI has been putting in place various regulatory requirements to bring up the banking
system on par with international requirements.  The measures have been introduced
gradually considering the over all ability of the banks to adopt them and after due
prior consultation.  This process is irreversible and all banks and financial institutions
have to necessarily find the wherewithal to comply with them sooner rather than later.
Simultaneously, RBI has also been consistently moving away from “micro
regulation”.  The combination of the above has resulted in considerable pressure on
the banks to reorient them and to function in a market driven environment.  This
would evidently need a very pro-active management which is alive to the competition
and the emerging scenario of the “low cost high efficiency “needs of operation in
order to survive in the short to medium term.  Needless to say, unless the governance
process at the corporate and Board level is fully attuned to this requirement and is
supplemented by advice and strategies from professionals, risks of slippage would
emerge gradually.
You would see that the developments in the banking system mentioned by me, though
seemingly independent, have a common connecting thread. Strong capitalization,
sound performance, corporate governance, meeting challenges of competition,
consolidation and providing market information are all inter woven.  Non
performance or under performance in any one of these areas would attract immediate
notice of the stake holders and action from the regulators.  In this situation, efficient
and alert leadership needs as also quality governance and management could no
longer be wished away.
I conclude by once again complimenting the organisers of BECON for doing an
excellent job, and the authors of the papers for having raised some very important
issues.  I wish them success in their professional careers and expect them to continue
to improve the quality of their research and analysis so that they can make a
difference for their organisations.
December 28, 2002.
Address by Shri G P Muniappan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bank Economists’
Conference, Bangalore.
8