March to the New Millenium by Indian banks It gives me great pleasure to be in the midst of this august gathering assembled here forfelicitating the great personalities who have been conferred with the Bank of IndiaExcellence Awards for 1999. I consider it a great privilege to present the Awards forExcellence to the doyens in their respective fields. I extend my heartiest congratulationsBank of India is one of the oldest Indian Commercial Banks having commenced itsbusiness in the then Bombay Presidency on this day in the year 1906 and would beperforming its centenary year celebrations in seven years hence.  I am sure it wouldcontinue to strive to achieve excellent performance in all core areas of business befittinga century old bank. Being an early bird of the Indian banking industry, it has been apioneer in many areas, including in the matter of opening overseas branches, with 19branches spread over 10 countries and in almost all the important financial marketsaround the globe. It is but natural for a bank of this heritage and moorings to be in theforefront in bestowing recognition to those who excel in the various fields of the IndianThe awards function instituted as part of Golden Jubilee celebrations of IndianIndependence, I learnt, is taking place for the second year in succession. I also note theconsistency in the selection of most appropriate personalities selected by eminent panel,with one of the inaugural year awards conferred on His Excellency the Governor ofAndhra Pradesh and former Governor of Reserve Bank of India, Dr.C.Rangarajan, forExcellence in the field of Finance. It is in the  fitness of things that awards for excellencein finance is being conferred on Shri Y.H. Malegam, my distinguished colleague on theCentral Board of Directors of Reserve Bank of India and a Member of the Board forFinancial Supervision. I can proudly state in the light of my close association with Malegam and the valuable contributions made by him through his association withvarious Committees in the financial sector that the award of exellence is in fact honouredThe Indian Institutes of Technology have been providing brilliant technocrats who havebrought glory to India by excelling in various fields of business not only in India but alsoaround the world and continue to be the mainstay of trained manpower in many of theindustrialised nations. Both  Vijay Thadani and   Pawar who are alumniIIT NIIT , which is inthe forefront in providing IT related training to a large number of Indian students, besidesmaking sizeable inroads into the software development and exports. They thus richlyOf late, a lot is talked about business and product related literature in the bankingindustry. I understand that Poet Shri Arun Kolatkar, who is conferred the Award forLiterature excels in more than one language and represents a synthesis of varied cultures.Shri Sham Lal is the well known media personality, particularly to those addicted to oneof the country’s leading dailies, Times of India. As an erudite writer, he has been famousfor many of the forthright editorials during his tenure with that Newspaper. He is anexcellent communicator and richly deserves the Award for excellence in the field ofFor a banker to unwind after a hard day amidst the financial cross currents of the Market, Music and Arts are the soothing balm for diversion and relaxation. I am happy tonote that Bank of India has not overlooked this important aspect and instituted an awardfor this field. I congratulate the Great Painter and Film Maker, Shri Akbar Padamsee on*1his being conferred the Award for excellence in the field of Music and Arts.MumbaiMedia.I convey my hearty congratulations to him.deserve the awards for excellence in the field of Management., Delhi have gone around with unstinted zeal to promote and build of Rajendra Shri Shriby being conferred on him.Shrisociety.to the awardees.I am rather tempted to use this forum for saying a few things on some of the importantissues on which I am concerned as a Central Banker. I also firmly believe that Indianbanks have to address these aspects at the earliest if they desire to excel in performanceand march towards the new Millenium as sound financial entities. With your forbearanceIndia is one of the few countries which could remain least affected by the contagioneffect of East Asian financial crisis, but could learn a lot from the follies of others. In thisconnection I am inspired by the recent address of Governor, Reserve Bank of India,Dr.Bimal Jalan on the occasion of the 49th Anniversary Lecture at Central Bank of SriLanka at Colombo on the theme entitled International  Financial Architecture:“The East-Asian crisis has also demonstrated the vital importance of financialinstitutions in sustaining the momentum  of growth and development.  It is nolonger possible for developing countries to delay the introduction of strongprudential and supervisory norms, and introduce structural reforms in order tomake the financial system more competitive, more transparent and moreAfter the Asian crisis, one of the important steps initiated by BIS was to set up theWillard Group which went into the ways of evolving a strong and transparent financialarchitecture. Its recommendations centred essentially around creation of well designedfinancial infrastructure backed by an efficient payments and settlement system. It has alsobeen recognised that key elements of such a structure would need a proper legal andjudicial framework, good corporate governance, comprehensive uniform accountingstandards and an effective system of internal control and independent audits.  Thestructure also pre-supposes a good market discipline which would in turn depend on goodcredit culture, in other words low level of NPAs, well developed equity and debt marketswith variety of instruments of risk diversification. The Group also stressed that a strongregulatory and supervisory framework is an essential prerequisite to guard such a strongand transparent financial architecture.Further BIS has recently circulated a consultative paper on new capital adequacy framework suggesting risk weighting of assets which crosses in some cases even beyond 100per cent of assets. The revised capital adequacy norms are expected to be in place overnext 2 to 3 years which would cast the responsibility on regulators to prescribe newnorms for compliance. Banks with overseas operations would be under pressure to adaptthemselves to the new norms at a much faster pace than those with domestic operations.RBI has adopted  the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision suggested byBasel Committee and most of the recommendations have been implemented. The fewareas remaining to be fully implemented relate to cooperation between differentregulatory agencies, introduction of risk management systems and consolidatedNarasimham Committee (II) on Banking Sector Reforms has supplemented the BIS coreprinciples suggesting adoption of prudential norms on par with the internationalstandards. RBI is working out further improvements to the prudential norms particularlyrelating to asset classification and provisioning standards. Some of the futuristic measureswould entail prescription of higher provisioning for sub standard assets, over the presentlevel of 10% in a phased manner, and bringing down the period for recognizing  doubtfulKeeping in line with the emerging regulatory and supervisory standards at internationallevel, RBI has initialised some of the macro level monitoring techniques to assess the truehealth of the supervised institutions. The formats of balance sheets have been prescribed2assets from the present norm of 18 months to 12 months.supervision for banks and their related entities.accountable.”Developing Countries’ Perspectives. To quote, the Governor declaredand permission, I would like to briefly dwell on some of these concerns.by RBI with disclosure standards on vital performance and growth indicators, provisions,net NPAs, staff productivity, etc  appended as Notes to accounts. To bring in further, RBI has also advised the banks to disclosedata on movement of NPAs and provisions. These proposed additional disclosure normsOther countries have been gradually moving towards risk based supervision for which theimportant precondition is existence  of adequate internal controls. Besides the variousguidelines issued for strengthening concurrent audit of key business areas and internalaudit set-up in banks, RBI is examining the feasibility of introduction of half yearly auditof accounts by external auditors towards improving the quality of auditing standardsfurther.RBI has instituted a mechanism for critical analysis of the balance sheet by the banksthemselves and place such analysis before their boards to provide an inner feel of thehealth of the bank. The analysis which is made available to RBI forms a supplement toWhile RBI had prescribed the  system in respect of overseas branches of Indianbanks for over almost a decade, it has since introduced  reporting systemcommencing from this year in respect of domestic operations keeping in view theimmediate need for such a system in a free interest rate regime prevalent in India. It mayalso be mentioned that the banks of late are moving from traditional credit relatedbusiness to investment banking. Substantial expansion of non SLR investment portfolioof banks particularly in unquoted category in the last two years has brought in the needfor adoption of better risk management and risk evaluation. In conformity with the BIScore principles and to keep pace with evolving international standards requiring banks tocover their risks, in addition to traditional credit risk, against all types of other marketrisks like, liquidity, interest rate, and forex as well as legal and  reputational  risks, RBIhas The banks in India which grew by leaps and bounds by increasing their branch networkreorganisation of such net work by enforcingon stricter reporting system and head office controls over the branches. Control over sucha large network of branches would require extensive use of Information Technology. Itmay be mentioned that to bring in better internal controls and monitoring standards forsensitive transactions, the Central Vigilance Commission has directed that at least 70% a bank’s business should be computerised by January 1, 2001. Such infrastructureupgradation along with early adoption of asset liability management system and riskmanagement guidelines would facilitate Indian banking to migrate to better operationalstandards on par with global ones, and enhance their MIS capabilities for It has come to be widely accepted both in India and internationally that the banks have toreorient their policies, practices, procedures, products and clientele  in tune with thechanging global environment and at the same time conforming to their corecompetencies. Globally the bank mergers are taking place not by acquisition of  weakones by stronger institutions but among equally strong institutions. You may findcontradictory objectives behind such consolidation, in some cases to expand the reachand coverage through retail banking and equally in some cases in pursuit of  investmentand wholesale banking, treasury services and such other activities which may notnecessarily fit into the accepted tenets of banking business in the traditional sense inwhich it is understood. The objective of such mergers were more for synergizing strengthof the respective institution in the new merged entity and at the same time leaving outthose areas which are not considered as relevant for maximizing profits and expansion of3assets.earnings.optimisation ofofhave to seriously think on consolidation and finalised Risk Management guidelines which would be issued to banks shortly.ALMALMthe already stabilized system of off site monitoring of banks.would bring the disclosure standards almost on par with the international best practices.transparency in the banks’ published accountsIn order to take advantage of these trends in the global arena, Indian banking system hasto seriously think towards such consolidation in tune with the recommendations ofNarasimham Committee. This will also pave the way for realisation of the concept ofThe banks even the strong ones should learn the art of shedding some of the non profitmaking subsidiaries which in many cases have proved to be a drag on the profits andoperational efficiency of the parent banks, in some cases making even the stronger onesIn the same context, restructuring of some of the weak public sector banks is alreadybeing looked into by the  Committee, the expert group constituted by RBI for thispurpose. The Committee would shortly come out with specific measures to put theseThere are 24 old private sector banks. Though many of them report adequate CRAR inthe context of comparatively low level of riskweighted assets, as many as 11 banks havecapital funds less than the entry norm of Rs.100 crores prescribed for new banks. Thesebanks have poor IT network and processing capabilities. They are also short of capitalresources to go for upgradation of their operating levels. This had inhibited their growthin recent times particularly in the context of changing business environments and needfor adoption of new products and strategies calling for massive deployment ininfrastructure and IT skills. Some of the newly established private banks with their initialcapital resources invested in such infrastructure have overtaken the old establishedprivate banks both in business volumes and quality of operations and in fact are as highlySome of the old private banks are already showing signs of fatigue because of theirtraditional style of functioning and are not equipped to face competition. The fear oflosing control over the management has made the promoters in some of these banks notto go in for public issues in adequate quantum, which is considered as very essential fortheir future survival. Such banks are advised to see the writing on the wall, take stock oftheir strengths and deficiencies and seriously work towards mergers in order to becomeGlobally many of the central banks are trying to evolve measures for restructuring thenon-performing assets of their banking system, which  are  showing  a rising trend.  Weat RBI are equally concerned at the increasing trend of incremental NPAs of the bankingsystem and more particularly in respect of public sector banks. Though there has been amarginal decline in the percentage of gross and net  as at the end of March 1999over the previous year, the increase by way of incremental  over the last few yearscalls for immediate corrective steps on the part of banks for improving the recoveryRBI has come out with detailed indicative guidelines for compromise settlement ofchronic NPAs in respect of small sector and the banks have been advised to have suchproposals expeditiously processed and settled through Settlement Advisory Committeesformed at regional as well as head office level.   I would like to exhort my banker friendsIt is my earnest desire that the banks should make extensive use of the mechanism ofDebt Recovery Tribunals particularly in pursuit of large wilful defaulters. I am aware ofthe legal impediments in effective enforcement of  recovery procedures and  RBI isThe banks have to resort to serious cost cutting measures and avoid all non productiveexpenditure so that they continue to remain as profit making entities. Besides controlling4separately pursuing for the legislative enhancements and improvements.to adopt such transparent procedures in respect of other borrowers as well.performance.NPAsNPAsfuture viable entities.competitive as foreign banks.banks on proper rails.Vermato flounder. I commend serious thinking on these lines by Indian banks.Universal Banking.the interest expenditure, the non interest expenditure should be firmly controlled alongWhile concluding my observations, I would like to reiterate that for a successful marchtowards the New Millenium, which is going to be dominated by technology, the banks inIndia will have to improve their quality of assets by vigorous pursuit of better creditappraisal skills and treasury management, recovery procedures, adopt new technologiesand diversify their product range. This calls for cost cutting measures, motivation andupgrading skills of staff, concentration on core business competencies, augmentation ofown funds through approach to market as well as by retained earnings through improvedprofits, consolidation of existing business and branch network, and tightening of internalI would like to thank the organisers of the Awards function for giving me an opportunityto share my thoughts with some of the most distinguished of the financial sector whoShri of Awards function of Bank of India Awards for Excellence on September 7, 19995S.P.Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India on the occasion * Address by have graced this occasion.control and transparency in their operations.with other overheads.
