Corporate Governance *I am happy to be here today. I am happy to be here in this historic city of Hyderabad, which isknown as the training capital of India and equally happy to be in this prestigious campus ofAdministrative Staff College of India, nationally acclaimed as a temple of learning and temple oftraining. I thank my good and esteemed friend Dr. E.A.S Sarma- a well-known administrator,intellectual, economist and academician for giving me this wonderful opportunity of addressingthis enlightened gathering on ‘Corporate Governance’- a topic of tremendous relevance, focusand significance in the present day context.Speaking on the Corporate Governance I am reminded of the Union Finance Minister’sobservation on the subject a few months back. The Honourable Union Finance Minister, ShrithYashwant Sinha, while inaugurating the 17 Annual Session of FICCI Ladies Organization(FLO), stressed the need to formulate and adhere to a set of strong corporate governancepractices. He was addressing the august audience of leading businesswomen of FICCI on "TheEmerging Need for Corporate Governance".He said and I quote : "Today we need a pragmatic approach rather than a narrow doctrinaireapproach to serve our needs. It is essential that we have high ethical standards of corporategovernance, followed voluntarily, having community sanctions which will have much moreeffectiveness. Only then our endeavor at economic reforms and liberalization will fructify"-unquote.Finance Minister exhorted the business leaders to set up examples in corporate governance ofhigh ethical standards, which will create better value for all the stakeholders and will lead togrowth, which in effect will help the country to fight poverty and debilitating diseases. Thisalone, he felt, will enable the Government to justify the efforts at liberalization and bringing ineconomic reforms.A social institution, including a corporate entity, derives its legitimacy from its ability and desireto fulfill social needs. It is therefore, accountable to the society. No institution, however high andmighty it is, can ignore its responsibility towards the society from which it derives its strengthand sustenance.The recurring financial crises and the scams that rocked the nation in the recent past call for asharper focus on corporate governance. The only way we can protect our interest and also thoseof the public at large is to build “firewalls” by putting in place the practices of good corporategovernance.WHAT IS CORPORATE GOVERNANCE ?Corporate Governance has succeeded in attracting a good deal of public interest because of itsimportance for the economic health of corporations and the welfare of society, in general.However, the concept of corporate governance is defined in several ways because it potentiallycovers the entire gamut of activities having direct or indirect influence on the financial health ofthe corporate entities. As a result, different people have come up with different definitions,which basically reflect their special interests in the field. So I feel, the best way to define theconcept is perhaps to list a few of the different definitions rather than mentioning just one or two.Before attempting to do this, it would be useful to recall the earliest definition of CorporateGovernance by the Economist and Noble laureate Milton Friedman. According to him, Corporate1Governance is to conduct the business in accordance with owner or shareholders’ desires, whichgenerally will be to make as much money as possible, while conforming to the basic rules of thesociety embodied in law and local customs. This definition is based on the economic concept ofmarket value maximization that underpins shareholder capitalism. Apparently, in the present daycontext, Friedman’s definition is narrower in scope. Over a period of time the definition ofCorporate Governance has been widened. It now encompasses the interests of not only theshareholders but also many stakeholders.Let us take a look at the other definitions  in the context of the present day situation.SOME OTHER DEFINITIONS :1.  According to some experts “Corporate Governance means doing everything better, toimprove relations between companies and their shareholders; to improve the quality ofoutside Directors; to encourage people to think long-term; to ensure that informationneeds of all stakeholders are met and to ensure that executive management is monitoredproperly in the interest of shareholders.”2. Experts of the OECD have defined Corporate governance as the system by whichbusiness corporations are directed and controlled. According to them the corporategovernance structure specifies the distribution of rights and responsibilities amongdifferent participants in the corporation, such as, the Board, managers, shareholders andother stakeholders, and spells out the rules and procedures for making decisions oncorporate affairs. By doing this, it provides the structure through which the companyobjectives are set, and also provides the means of attaining those objectives andmonitoring performance. OECD's definition, I feel,  is consistent with the one presentedby Cadbury Committee.3. An article published in the June 21, 1999 issue of the Financial Times quoted J.Wolfensohn, President, World Bank as saying that "Corporate Governance is aboutpromoting corporate fairness, transparency and accountability"And4. According to some economists, Corporate Governance is a field in economics thatinvestigates how corporations can be made more efficient by the use of institutionalstructures such as contracts, organizational designs and legislation. This is often limitedto the question of shareholder value i.e. how the corporate owners can motivate and/orsecure that the corporate managers will deliver a competitive rate of return.These are just a few definitions of Corporate Governance. However it may be of interest to knowthe genesis of the subject (Corporate Governance) and in this context I would like to brieflyshare with you the historical perspective.HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVEThe seeds of modern Corporate Governance were probably sown by the Watergate scandal in theUnited States. As a result of subsequent investigations, US regulatory and legislative bodies wereable to highlight control failures that had allowed several major corporations to make illegalpolitical contributions and to bribe government officials. This led to the development of theForeign and Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 in USA that contained specific provisions regardingthe establishment, maintenance and review of systems of internal control.2This was followed in 1979 by the Securities and Exchange Commission of USA’s proposals formandatory reporting on internal financial controls. In 1985, following a series of high profilebusiness failures in the USA, the most notable one of which being the Savings and Loancollapse, the Treadway Commission was formed. Its primary role was to identify the main causesof misrepresentation in financial reports and to recommend ways of reducing incidence thereof.The Treadway report published in 1987 highlighted the need for a proper control environment,independent audit committees and an objective Internal Audit function. It called for publishedreports on the effectiveness of internal control. It also requested the sponsoring organisations todevelop an integrated set of internal control criteria to enable companies to improve theircontrols.Accordingly COSO (Committee of Sponsoring Organisations) was born. The report produced byit in 1992 stipulated a control framework which has been endorsed and refined in the foursubsequent UK reports: Cadbury, Rutteman, Hampel and Turnbull. While developments in theUnited States stimulated debate in the UK, a spate of scandals and collapses in that country in thelate 1980s and early 1990's led shareholders and banks to worry about their investments. Thesealso led the Government in UK to recognise that the then existing legislation and self-regulationwere not working.Companies such as Polly Peck, British & Commonwealth, BCCI, and Robert Maxwell’s MirrorGroup News International in UK were all victims of the boom-to-bust decade of the 1980s.Several companies, which saw explosive growth in earnings, ended the decade in a memorablydisastrous manner. Such spectacular corporate failures arose primarily out of poorly managedbusiness practices.It was in an attempt to prevent the recurrence of such business failures that the CadburyCommittee, under the chairmanship of Sir Adrian Cadbury, was set up by the London StockExchange in May 1991. The committee, consisting of representatives drawn from the top levelsof British industry, was given the task of drafting a code of practices to assist corporations inU.K. in defining and applying internal controls to limit their exposure to financial loss, fromwhatever cause.CADBURY COMMITTEEThe stated objective of the Cadbury Committee was "to help raise the standards of corporategovernance and the level of confidence in financial reporting and auditing by setting out clearlywhat it sees as the respective responsibilities of those involved and what it believes is expectedof them".The Committee investigated accountability of the Board of Directors to shareholders and to thesociety. It submitted its report and associated “Code of Best Practices” in Dec 1992 wherein itspelt out the  methods of governance needed to achieve a balance between the essential powersof the Board of Directors and their proper accountability.The resulting report, and associated "Code of Best Practices," published in December 1992, wasgenerally well received. Whilst the recommendations themselves were not mandatory, thecompanies listed on the London Stock Exchange were required to clearly state in their accountswhether or not the code had been followed. The companies who did not comply were required toexplain the reasons for that.The Cadbury Code of Best Practices had 19 recommendations. Being a pioneering report onCorporate Governance, it would be in order to make a brief reference to them. The3recommendations are in the nature of guidelines relating to the Board of Directors, Non-executive Directors, Executive Directors and those on Reporting & Control.Relating to the Board of Directors these are:? The Board should meet regularly, retain full and effective control over the company andmonitor the executive management.? There should be a clearly accepted division of responsibilities at the head of a company,which will ensure balance of power and authority, such that no individual has unfetteredpowers of decision. In companies where the Chairman is also the Chief Executive, it isessential that there should be a strong and independent element on the Board, with arecognized senior member.? The Board should include non-executive Directors of sufficient caliber and number for theirviews to carry significant weight in the Board’s decisions.? The Board should have a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved to it for decisionsto ensure that the direction and control of the company is firmly in its hands.? There should be an agreed procedure for Directors in the furtherance of their duties to takeindependent professional advice if necessary, at the company’s expense.? All Directors should have access to the advice and services of the Company Secretary, who isresponsible to the Board for ensuring that Board procedures are followed and that applicablerules and regulations are complied with. Any question of the removal of Company Secretaryshould be a matter for the Board as a whole.Relating to the Non-executive Directors the recommendations are :? Non-executive Directors should bring an independent judgement to bear on issues ofstrategy, performance, resources, including key appointments, and standards of conduct.? The majority should be independent of the management and free from any business or otherrelationship, which could materially interfere with the exercise of their independentjudgement, apart from their fees and shareholding. Their fees should reflect the time, whichthey commit to the company.? Non-executive Directors should be appointed for specified terms and reappointment shouldnot be automatic.? Non-executive Directors should be selected through a formal process and both, this processand their appointment, should be a matter for the Board as a whole.For the Executive Directors the recommendations in the Cadbury Code of Best Practices are:? Directors’ service contracts should not exceed three years without shareholders’ approval.? There should be full and clear disclosure of their total emoluments and those of the Chairmanand the highest-paid UK Directors, including pension contributions and stock options.Separate figures should be given for salary and performance-related elements and the basison which performance is measured should be explained.? Executive Directors’ pay should be subject to the recommendations of a RemunerationCommittee made up wholly or mainly of Non-Executive Directors.And on Reporting and Controls the Cadbury Code of Best Practices stipulate that :? It is the Board’s duty to present a balanced and understandable assessment of the company’sposition.4? The Board should ensure that an objective and professional relationship is maintained withthe Auditors.? The Board should establish an Audit Committee of at least 3 Non-Executive Directors withwritten terms of reference, which deal clearly with its authority and duties.? The Directors should explain their responsibility for preparing the accounts next to astatement by the Auditors about their reporting responsibilities.? The Directors should report on the effectiveness of the company’s system of internal control.? The Directors should report that the business is a going concern, with supporting assumptionsor qualifications as necessary.Cadbury Committee and AfterIt would be interesting to note how the corporate world reacted to the Cadbury Report. Thereport infact shocked many by its boldness, particularly by the Code of Practices recommendedby it. The most controversial and revolutionary requirement and the one that had the potential ofsignificantly impacting the internal auditing, was the requirement that ' the Directors shouldreport on the effectiveness of a company's system of internal control.' It was the extension ofcontrol beyond the financial matters that caused the controversy.Paul Ruthman Committee constituted later to deal with this controversy watered down theproposal on the grounds of practicality. It restricted the reporting requirement to internalfinancial controls only as against the ‘the effectiveness of the company’s system of internalcontrol’ as stipulated by the Code of Practices contained in the Cadbury Report.It took another 5 years to get the original Cadbury recommendations on internal control reportingre-instated. Public confidence in U.K. continued to be shaken by further scandals and RonHampel was given the task of chairing the 'Committee on Corporate Governance' with a brief tokeep up the momentum by assessing the impact of Cadbury and developing further guidance.The Final Report submitted by the Committee chaired by Ron Hampel had some important andprogressive elements, notably the extension of Directors’ responsibilities to 'all relevant controlobjectives including business risk assessment and minimising the risk of fraud…'The Combined Code was subsequently derived from Ron Hampel Committee’s Final Report andfrom the Cadbury Report and the Greenbury Report. (Greenbury Report, which was submitted in1995, addressed the issue of Directors’ remuneration). The Combined Code is appended to thelisting rules of the London Stock Exchange. As such, compliance is mandatory for all listedcompanies in the U.K.The stipulations contained in the Combined Code require, among other things, that the Boardsshould maintain a sound system of internal control to safeguard shareholders' investment and thecompany's assets and that the Directors should, at least annually, conduct a review of theeffectiveness of the Group's system of internal control and should report to shareholders that theyhave done so and that the review should cover all controls, including financial, operational andcompliance controls and risk management.Subsequent developments with regard to Corporate Governance in U.K. led to the publication ofTurnbull Guidance in September 1999, which required the Board of Directors to confirm thatthere was an on-going process for identifying, evaluating and managing the key business risks.Shareholders, after all, are entitled to ask if all the significant risks had been reviewed (andpresumably appropriate actions taken to mitigate them) and why was a wealth-destroying eventnot anticipated and acted upon?5In this context, it was observed that the one common denominator behind the past failures in thecorporate world was the lack of effective Risk Management. As a result, Risk Managementsubsequently grew in importance and is now seen as highly crucial to the achievement ofbusiness objectives by the corporates.It was clear, therefore, that Boards of Directors were not only responsible but also neededguidance not just reviewing the effectiveness of internal controls but also for providing assurancethat all the significant risks had been reviewed. Furthermore, assurance was also required that therisks had been managed and an embedded risk management process was in place. In manycompanies this challenge was being passed on to the Internal Audit function.The corporate world in India could not remain indifferent to the developments that were takingplace in the U.K. Infact the developments in U.K had tremendous influence on our country too.They triggered the thinking process in our country, which finally led us to laying down our ownground rules on Corporate Governance.INDIAN EXPERIENCELet us see the developments in our own country in this regard.As a result of the interest generated in the Corporate sector by the Cadbury Committee's report,the issue of Corporate Governance was studied in depth and dealt with by the Confederation ofIndian Industries (CII), the Associated Chamber of Commerce and the Securities and ExchangeBoard of India (SEBI). Though some of the studies did touch upon shareholders' right to `vote byballot' and a few other issues of general nature, none can claim to be wider than the Cadburyreport in scope. It will be interesting to look upon the Cadbury Model in the Indian Context.The stress in the Cadbury report is on the crucial role of the Board and the need for it to observea Code of Best Practices. Its important recommendations include the setting up of an AuditCommittee with independent members. The Cadbury model is one of self-regulation. It wasrecognised that in the event British companies failed to comply with the voluntary code,legislation and external regulation would follow.In India, the emphasis during the past few years has been limited to only some of therecommendations of the Cadbury Committee -- such as the role and composition of the AuditCommittees and the importance of making all the necessary disclosures with annual statementsof accounts, which are considered important for investors’ protection.Some of the important initiatives taken in our country to frame the ground rules on CorporateGovernance deserve a brief mention.Indian StudiesThe CII was the first to come out with its version of an Audit Committee. The SEBI, as thecustodian of investor interests, did not lag behind. On May 7, 1999, it constituted an 18-membercommittee, chaired by the young and forward-looking industrialist, Mr. Kumar Mangalam Birla(a chartered accountant himself), on Corporate Governance, mainly with a view to protecting theinvestors’ interests. The Committee made 25 recommendations, 19 of them `mandatory' in thesense that these were enforceable. The listed companies as you may be aware, were obliged tocomply with these on account of the contractual obligation arising out of the listing agreementwith Stock Exchanges.The mandatory recommendations of the Kumar Mangalam committee include the constitution ofAudit Committee and Remuneration Committee in all listed companies, appointment of one or6more independent Directors in them, recognition of the leadership role of the Chairman of acompany, enforcement of Accounting Standards, the obligation to make more disclosures inannual financial reports, effective use of the power and influence of institutional shareholders,and so on. The Committee also recommended a few provisions, which are non- mandatory. Letus see these recommendations in brief:To begin with let me share with you some of the mandatory recommendations:? The Board of a company should have an optimum combination of executive and non-executive Directors with not less than 50% of the Board comprising the non-executiveDirectors.? The Board of a company should set up a qualified and an independent Audit Committee.The Audit Committee should have minimum three members, all being non-executiveDirectors, with the majority being independent, and with at least one Director havingfinancial and accounting knowledge. The Chairman of the Audit Committee should be anindependent Director.I wish to add, that the board of directors is a combination of executive directorsand non-executive directors. The non-executive directors comprise of promoterdirectors and independent directors. As you may be aware, independent directorsare those, who, apart from receiving director’s remuneration, do not have anymaterial pecuniary relationship or transactions with the company, its promoters,its management or its subsidiaries that in the judgement of the Board may affecttheir independence of judgement.The Chairman of the Audit Committee should be present at Annual General Meetingto answer shareholder-queries.? The Company Secretary should act as the secretary to the Audit Committee.? The Audit Committee should meet at least thrice a year. The quorum should be eithertwo members or one-third of the members of the Audit Committee.? The Audit Committee should have powers to investigate any activity within its termsof reference, to seek information from any employee; to obtain outside legal orprofessional advice, and to secure attendance of outsiders if necessary.?  The Audit committee should discharge various roles such as, reviewing any changein accounting policies and practices; compliance with Accounting Standards;compliance with Stock Exchange and legal requirements concerning financialstatements; the adequacy of internal control systems; the company’s financial and riskmanagement policies etc.? The Board of Directors should decide the remuneration of the non-executiveDirectors.? Full disclosure should be made to the shareholders regarding the remunerationpackage of all the Directors.? The Board meetings should be held at least four times a year.? A Director should not be a member in more than ten committees or act as thechairman of more than five committees across all companies in which he is aDirector. This is done to ensure that the members of the Board give due importanceand commitment of the meetings of the Board and its committees.7? The management must make disclosures to the Board relating to all material,financial and commercial transactions, where they have personal interest.? In case of the appointment of a new Director or re-appointment of a Director, theshareholders must be provided with a brief resume of the Director, his expertise andthe names of companies in which the person also holds Directorship and themembership of committees of the Board.? A Board committee should be formed to look into the redressal of shareholders’complaints like transfer of shares, non-receipt of balance sheet, dividend etc.? There should be a separate section on Corporate Governance in the annual reports ofthe companies with a detailed compliance report.Apart from these, the Kumar Mangalam Committee also made some recommendations that arenon-mandatory in nature as already mentioned by me above. Some of the non-mandatoryrecommendations are that:? The Board should set up a Remuneration Committee to determine the company’s policyon specific remuneration packages for executive Directors.? Half-yearly declaration of financial performance including summary of the significantevents in the last six months should be sent to each shareholder.? Non-executive chairman should be entitled to maintain a chairman’s office at thecompany’s expense. This will enable him to discharge the responsibilities effectively.It will be interesting to note that Kumar Mangalam Committee while drafting itsrecommendations was faced with the dilemma of statutory v/s voluntary compliance. You mayalso be aware that the desirable code of Corporate Governance, which was drafted by CII andwas voluntary in nature, did not produce the expected improvement in Corporate Governance. Itis in this context that the Kumar Mangalam Committee felt that under the Indian conditions astatutory rather than a voluntary code would be far more purposive and meaningful. This led theCommittee to decide between mandatory and non-mandatory provisions. The Committee felt thatsome of the recommendations are absolutely essential for the framework of CorporateGovernance and virtually form its code, while others could be considered as desirable. Besides,some of the recommendations needed change of statute, such as the Companies Act for theirenforcement. Faced with this difficulty the Committee settled for two classes ofrecommendations.SEBI, as I am sure you may be aware of, has given effect to the Kumar Mangalam Committee'srecommendations by a direction to all the Stock Exchanges to amend their listing agreement withvarious companies in accordance with the `mandatory' part of the recommendations.Corporate Governance for Banking Organisations: Basel Committee Publication.So far I have dwelt at length on the concept of corporate governance in general and therecommendations made by committees in India and abroad to strengthen the same.Banks, as we know, are a critical component of any economy. They provide financing forcommercial enterprises, basic financial services to a broad segment of the population and accessto payments systems. In addition, some banks are expected to make credit and liquidity availablein difficult market conditions. The importance of banks to national economies is underscored bythe fact that banking is virtually universally a regulated industry and that banks have access to8government safety nets. It is of crucial importance therefore that banks have strong corporategovernance.Let us have a look at the Basel Committee Publication on corporate governance for bankingorganisations.Basel Committee published a paper on Corporate Governance for banking organisations in Sep99. Let me share with you some of the issues and concerns shared in that Paper. The Committeefeels it is the responsibility of the banking supervisors to ensure that there is effective corporategovernance in the banking industry. Supervisory experience underscores the need of havingappropriate accountability and checks and balances within each bank to ensure sound corporategovernance, which in turn would lead to effective and more meaningful supervision. Soundcorporate governance could also contribute to a collaborative working relationship between bankmanagements and bank supervisors.Basel Committee underscores the need for banks to set strategies for their operations. Thecommittee also insists banks to establish accountability for executing these strategies. Unlessthere is transparency of information related to decisions and actions it would be difficult forstakeholders to make management accountable..From the perspective of banking industry, corporate governance also includes in its ambit themanner in which their boards of directors govern the business and affairs of individualinstitutions and their functional relationship with senior management. This is determined by howbanks :? set corporate objectives (including generating economic returns to owners);? run the day-to-day operations of the business and;? consider the interests of recognised stakeholders i.e. employees, customers, suppliers,supervisors, governments and the community and? align corporate activities and behaviours with the expectation that banks will operate in a safeand sound manner, and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations; and ?protect theinterests of depositors.You may be aware that the Committee has issued several papers on specific topics, where theimportance of corporate governance is emphasised. These include Principles for the managementof interest rate risk (September 1997), Framework for internal control systems in bankingorganisations (September 1998), Enhancing bank transparency (September 1998), and Principlesfor the management of credit risk (issued as a consultative document in July 1999). These papershave highlighted the fact that sound corporate governance should have, as its basis, the followingstrategies and techniques:? ?the corporate values, codes of conduct and other standards of appropriate behaviour and thesystem used to ensure compliance with them;? a well-articulated corporate strategy against which the success of the overall enterprise andthe contribution of individuals can be measured;? ?the clear assignment of responsibilities and decision-making authorities, incorporating anhierarchy of required approvals from individuals to the board of directors;9?????? establishment of a mechanism for the interaction and cooperation among the board ofdirectors, senior management and the auditors;? strong internal control systems, including internal and external audit functions, riskmanagement functions independent of business lines, and other checks and balances;? special monitoring of risk exposures where conflicts of interest are likely to be particularlygreat, including business relationships with borrowers affiliated with the bank, largeshareholders, senior management, or key decision-makers within the firm (e.g. traders);? ?the financial and managerial incentives to act in an appropriate manner offered to seniormanagement, business line management and employees in the form of compensation,promotion and other recognition; and? appropriate information flows internally and to the public.For ensuring good corporate governance, the importance of overseeing the various aspects of thecorporate functioning needs to be properly understood, appreciated and implemented.There are four important forms of oversight that should be included in the organisationalstructure of any bank in order to ensure the appropriate checks and balances: (1) oversight by theboard of directors or supervisory board; (2) oversight by individuals not involved in the day-to-day running of the various business areas; (3) direct line supervision of different business areas;and (4) independent risk management and audit functions. In addition to these, it is importantthat the key personnel are fit and proper for their jobs.SOUND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE PRACTICESBanking organisations do sometimes face problems with regard to corporate governance.Supervisory experience suggests that certain practices when adopted by these organisations arequite helpful. These practices should be viewed as critical elements of any corporate governanceprocess.The practices I am referring to are:? Establishing strategic objectives and a set of corporate values that are communicatedthroughout the banking organisation.? Setting and enforcing clear lines of responsibility and accountability throughout theorganisation.? Ensuring that board members are qualified for their positions, have a clear understandingof their role in corporate governance and are not subject to undue influence frommanagement or outside concerns.? Ensuring that there is appropriate oversight by senior management.? Effectively utilizing the work conducted by internal and external auditors, in recognitionof the important control functions they provide.? Ensuring that compensation approaches are consistent with the bank’s ethical values,objectives, strategy and control environment.? Conducting corporate governance in a transparent manner.? Ensuring an environment supportive of sound corporate governance.10????I would like to discuss these practices in some detail, as dealt with by Basel Committee.Regarding establishing strategic objectives and a set of corporate values that are communicatedthroughout the banking organisation, Basel Committee feels that it is difficult to conduct theactivities of an organisation when there are no strategic objectives or guiding corporate values.Therefore, the board should establish the strategies that will direct the ongoing activities of thebank. It should also take the lead in establishing the “ tone at the top” and approving corporatevalues for itself, senior management and other employees. The values should recognise thecritical importance of having timely and frank discussions on problems. In particular, it isimportant that the values prohibit corruption and bribery in corporate activities, both in internaldealings and external transactions.The board of directors should ensure that senior management implements policies that prohibit(or strictly limit) activities and relationships that diminish the quality of corporate governance,such as :? conflicts of interest;? lending to officers and employees and other forms of self-dealing (e.g., internal lendingshould be limited to lending consistent with market terms and to certain? types of loans, and reports of insider lending should be provided to the board, and be subjectto review by internal and external auditors); and? providing preferential treatment to related parties and other favoured entities (e.g., lending onhighly favourable terms, covering trading losses, waiving commissions).Processes should be established that allow the board to monitor compliance with these policiesand ensure that deviations are reported to an appropriate level of management.On the practice of Setting and enforcing clear lines of responsibility and accountabilitythroughout the organisation , Basel Committee  says that effective boards of directors clearlydefine the authorities and key responsibilities for themselves, as well as senior management.Such boards also recognise that unspecified lines of accountability or confusing, multiple lines ofresponsibility might exacerbate a problem through slow or diluted responses. Seniormanagement is responsible for creating an accountability hierarchy for the staff, but must becognizant of the fact that they are ultimately responsible to the board for the performance of thebank.Regarding the practice of ensuring that board members are qualified for their positions, have aclear understanding of their role in corporate governance and are not subject to undue influencefrom management or outside concerns, Basel Committee stipulates that the board of directors isultimately responsible for the operations and financial soundness of the bank. The board ofdirectors must receive on timely basis sufficient information to judge the performance ofmanagement. An effective number of board members should be capable of exercising judgement,independent of the views of management, large shareholders or the government. Inclusion  onthe board, qualified directors that are not members of the bank’s management, or having asupervisory board or board of auditors, separate from the  management board, can enhanceindependence and objectivity. Moreover, such members can bring new perspectives from otherbusinesses that may improve the strategic direction given to management, such as insight intolocal conditions. Qualified external directors can also become significant sources of managementexpertise in times of corporate stress. The board of directors should periodically assess its own11performance, determine where weaknesses exist and, where possible, take appropriate correctiveactions.According to the Committee the Boards of directors add strength to the corporate governance ofa bank when they :? understand their oversight role and their “duty of loyalty” to the bank and its shareholders;? serve as a “checks and balances” function vis-à-vis the day-to-day management of the bank;? ?feel empowered to question the management and are comfortable insisting uponstraightforward explanations from management;? recommend sound practices gleaned from other situations;? provide dispassionate advice;? are not overextended;? avoid conflicts of interest in their activities with, and commitments to, otherorganisations;???meet regularly with senior management and internal audit to establish andapprove policies, establish communication lines and monitor progress toward corporateobjectives;? absent themselves from decisions when they are incapable of providing objective advice;? do not participate in day-to-day management of the bank.? It is found that in a number of countries, bank boards have found it beneficial to establishcertain specialised committees. Let us look at a few of them:? Risk management committee:  It provides oversight of the senior management’s activities inmanaging credit, market, liquidity, operational, legal and other risks of the bank. (This roleshould include receiving from senior management periodic information on risk exposuresand risk management activities).? Audit committee – It provides oversight of the bank’s internal and external auditors,approving their appointment and dismissal, reviewing and approving audit scope andfrequency, receiving their reports and ensuring that management is taking appropriatecorrective actions in a timely manner to address control weaknesses, non-compliance withpolicies, laws and regulations, and other problems identified by auditors. The independenceof this committee can be enhanced when it is comprised of external board members that havebanking or financial expertise.? Compensation committee –It provides oversight of remuneration of senior management andother key personnel and ensuring that compensation is consistent with the bank’s culture,objectives, strategy and control environment.? Nominations committee – It provides important assessment of board effectiveness anddirecting the process of renewing and replacing board members.Regarding the practice of ensuring that there is appropriate oversight by senior management,Basel Committee says that the senior management is a key component of corporate governance.Just as the board of directors provides checks and balances to senior managers, senior managersshould assume the oversight role with respect to line managers in specific business areas andactivities. Even in very small banks, key management decisions should be made by more thanone person (“ four eyes principle” ).12?????????According to the Committee, it is desirable to avoid assigning oversight functions to seniormanagers who are:? overly involved in business line decision-making;? assigned an area to manage without the necessary prerequisite skills or knowledge;? unwilling to discipline successful or key employees, when they go wrong, for fear of losingthem;The Paper says that the senior management consists of a core group of officers responsible forthe bank.This group should include such individuals as the chief financial officer, division heads and thechief auditor. These individuals must have the necessary skills to manage the business undertheir supervision as well as have appropriate control over the key individuals in these areas.On the practice of effectively utilising the work conducted by internal and external auditors, inrecognition of the important control function they provide, Basel Committee recognises thesignificance of auditors and says that the role of auditors is vital to the corporate governanceprocess. The Paper says that the effectiveness of the board and senior management can beenhanced by:(1) recognising the importance of the audit process and communicating this importancethroughout the bank;(2) ) taking measures that enhance the independence and stature of auditors;(3)  utilising, in a timely and effective manner, the findings of auditors;(4)  ensuring the independence of the head auditor through his reporting to the board or theboard’s audit committee;(5) engaging external auditors to judge the effectiveness of internal controls; and(6) requiring timely correction by management ,of problems identified by auditors.Basel Committee casts greater responsibility on the board to recognise and acknowledge that theinternal and external auditors are their critically important agents. In particular, the board shouldutilise the work of the auditors as an independent check on the information received frommanagement on the operations and performance of the bank.Regarding ensuring that compensation approaches are consistent with the bank’s ethical values,objectives, strategy and control environment, I would like to say that it has been stronglyrecommended by the Basel Committee because failure to link incentive compensations to thebusiness strategy can cause or encourage managers to book business based upon volume and/orshort-term profitability to the bank with little regard to short or long-term risk consequences.This can be seen particularly with loan officers, but can also adversely affect the performance ofother support staff.The board of directors should approve the compensation of members of senior management andother key personnel and ensure that such compensation is consistent with the bank’s culture,objectives, strategy and control environment. This will help to ensure that senior managers andother key personnel will be motivated to act in the best interests of the bank.In order to avoid incentives being created for excessive risk-taking, the salary scales should beset, within the scope of general business policy, in such a way that they do not overly depend onshort-term performance, such as short-term trading gains.13On the issue of conducting corporate governance in a transparent manner, Basel Committee’spaper on Enhancing bank transparency states that  it is difficult to hold the board of directors andsenior management properly accountable for their actions and performance when there is  lack oftransparency. This happens in situations where the stakeholders, market participants and generalpublic do not receive sufficient information on the structure and objectives of the bank withwhich to judge the effectiveness of the board and senior management in governing the bank.Transparency can reinforce sound corporate governance. Therefore, public disclosure is desirablein the following areas :? Board structure  with regard to size, membership, qualifications and committees;? Senior management structure - regarding responsibilities, reporting lines, qualifications andexperience;? Basic organisational structure-  in respect of line of business structure, legal entity structure;? Information about the incentive structure of the bank -  in relation to remuneration policies,executive compensation, bonuses, stock options; and? Nature and extent of transactions with affiliates and related parties.? Last but not the least, is the practice of ensuring an environment supportive of soundcorporate governance. The Committee recognises that primary responsibility for goodcorporate governance rests with the boards of directors and senior management of banks;however, there are many other ways that corporate governance can be promoted:? Governments can do so by enacting appropriate laws and enforcing them;? Securities Regulators, Stock Exchanges – through disclosure and listing? requirements;? Auditors – through audit standards on communications to boards of directors,? senior management and supervisors; and? banking industry associations – through initiatives related to voluntary industry? principles and agreement on and publication of sound practices.For instance, corporate governance can be improved by addressing a number of legal issues, suchas the protection of shareholder rights; the enforceability of contracts, including those withservice providers; clarifying governance roles; ensuring that corporations function in anenvironment that is free from corruption and bribery; and laws/regulations (and other measures)aligning the interests of managers, employees and shareholders. All of these can help promotehealthy business and legal environments that support sound corporate governance and relatedsupervisory initiatives.Supervisory initiatives are indeed very crucial to the issue of promoting good corporategovernance. Basel Committee states in this regard, and I fully agree with it that the supervisorsshould be aware of the importance of corporate governance and its impact on corporateperformance. They should expect banks to implement organizational structures that include theappropriate checks and balances. Regulatory safeguards must emphasise accountability andtransparency. Supervisors should determine that the boards and senior management of individualinstitutions have in place processes that ensure they are fulfilling all of their duties andresponsibilities.14???????The  bank’s board of directors and senior management are ultimately responsible for theperformance of the bank. As such, supervisors typically check to ensure that a bank is beingproperly governed and bring to management’s attention any problems that they detect throughtheir supervisory efforts. When the bank takes risks that it cannot measure or control, supervisorsmust hold the board of directors accountable and require that corrective measures be taken in atimely manner. Supervisors should be attentive to any warning signs of deterioration in themanagement of the bank’s activities. They should consider issuing guidance to banks on soundcorporate governance and the pro-active practices that need to be in place.Sound corporate governance considers the interests of all stakeholders, including depositors,whose interests may not always be recognised. Therefore, it is necessary for supervisors todetermine that individual banks are conducting their business in such a way as not to harmdepositors.FUTURE POSSIBILITIESIn this context, it would also be interesting to examine the future possibilities of strengtheningCorporate Governance in India in the light of the views of experts in the field and my ownexperience.Inspite of the multilateral checks and controls, there is still enough scope for improvement.Undue importance, according to some experts, need not be attached to the `independence' of theDirectors in the Audit Committee. The extent of a Director’s objectivity and ability to asserthimself will obviously depend on various factors such as-- his antecedents, his relationship withthe promoters of the company, the terms of his appointment, and so on.Kumar Mangalam Committee confined itself to submitting recommendations for good CorporateGovernance and left it to SEBI to decide on the penalty provisions for non-compliance. In theabsence of suitable penalty provisions, as you would agree, it would be difficult to establish goodCorporate Governance. Some of the penalty provisions are not sufficient enough to discipline theCorporates. For example, the penalty for non-compliance of the stipulated minimum of 50% inrespect of the number of directors in the Board that should be non-executive directors is delistingof shares of the company. This, I feel, would hardly serve the purpose.  Infact, this would bedetrimental to the interest of the investors and to the effective functioning of the capital market.Similarly, an Audit Committee, which is subservient to the Board, may serve no purpose at all;and one which is in perpetual conflict with the Board, may result in stalemates to the detrimentof the company. If a company is to function smoothly, it should be made clear that the findingsand recommendations of the Audit Committee need not necessarily have to be accepted by theBoard which is accountable to the shareholders for its performance and which, under Section 291of the Companies Act, is entitled to “exercise all such powers, and do all such things as thecompany is authorised to exercise and do''.However, some functional specialists are of the considered view that whenever there is adifference of opinion and the Audit Committee's advice is ignored or over-ruled, the Boardshould be required to place the facts before the General Body of shareholders at their nextmeeting.Apart from these issues, there is another area, which needs to be attended to for bringing aboutfurther improvements in Corporate Governance in India. One such area is the AccountingStandards. There are some gaps in Accounting Standards, which need to be closed or narroweddown for better transparency.15Bridging the Gap in Accounting StandardsOne of the first and foremost demands of good corporate governance is to let investors knowhow their money has been used to further the interests of the company they have invested in.The question that assumes importance here is how effectively the resources of the company areutilized for strengthening the organization. The only available source of information regardingthe affairs of a company appears to be its Balance Sheet. Yet, for obvious reasons, the BalanceSheet remains the most abused statement of several companies.The common methods by which companies hide their wrongful practices, which are all too wellknown, are to use legal and accounting jargon, non-disclosure and selective adoption of onlythose policies that are mandatory in nature. It is only a handful of qualified persons, primarily theaccountants and the other knowledgeable people, who can get to the picture behind the scenesand unmask the actual from the portrayed picture. It is in this context that the adoption of US-GAAP, which provides for rigorous Accounting Standards and disclosures, assumes relevance.There are many areas such as consolidation of accounts, treatment of fixed assets, depreciation,R&D costs etc where Indian Accounting Standards (IAS) are at variance with US-GAAP.However, it is heartening to note that things appear to be changing for the better on the Indianturf; thanks to the impetus towards a more transparent accounting system shown by marketleaders. Recently, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), as you may be aware,issued the Accounting Standard 21 (AS-21) for consolidation of accounts whereby accounts ofcompanies will be presented along with those of their subsidiaries. This would meet the longpending demand of investors on greater transparency and disclosure.While talking about the future possibilities another issue, which comes to my mind, is thetransparency in the Private Sector.Transparency in Private SectorThe need for transparency, so far, appears to have been felt in the context of Public Sector alone.Consequently, we have on the anvil the Right to Information Act and a modification of theOfficial Secrets Act. While, there is no doubt the government has to be completely transparent inits dealings, since it is dealing with public money, privately managed companies also have awide shareholder base. They are also dealing with large volumes of public money. The need fortransparency in private sector is, therefore, in no way less important than in the Public Sector.However, private companies use “competitive advantage/company interests” as a pretext to hideessential information. Awarding of contracts, recruitments, transfer pricing (for instance throughunder/over invoicing of goods in intra company transfers) are the areas, which require greatertransparency. Environmental conservation, redressal of customer complaints and use of companyresources for personal purposes are some of the other crucial areas, which call for greaterdisclosure. Relevant details about these must be available for public scrutiny. Fear of publicscrutiny, as you will agree, will ensure corporate governance on sound principles both in thePublic as well as Private Sectors.Apart from these important areas, another thing that comes to my mind is –Ethics and values in corporate governanceNo discussion on public affairs will be complete without a reference to Ethics and Values. Thequality of corporate governance is also determined by the manner in which top management,particularly the Board of Directors, allocates the financial resources of the company as between16themselves and other interest groups such as employees, customers, government etc. The basicqualities invariably expected in this regard are trust, honesty, integrity, transparency andcompliance with the laws of the land. There is an increasing body of public opinion that wouldexpect a business enterprise not only to be a mere economic unit but also to be a good corporatecitizen. For this, its corporate governance must be based on a genuine respect for Business Ethicsand Values.RECENT DEVELOPMENTSThe Department of Company Affairs, in May 2000, invited a group of leading industrialists,professionals and academics to study and recommend measures to enhance corporate excellencein India. The Study Group in turn set up a Task Force, which examined the subject of CorporateExcellence through sound corporate governance and submitted its report in Nov 2000. The taskforce in its recommendations identified two classifications namely essential and desirable withformer to be introduced immediately by legislation and latter to be left to the discretion ofcompanies and their shareholders. Some of the recommendations of the task force include:? Greater role and influence for non-executive independent directors? Stringent punishment for executive directors for failing to comply with listing and otherrequirements? Limitation on the nature and number of directorship of Managing and Whole-Timedirectors? Proper disclosure to the shareholders and investing community? Interested shareholders to abstain from voting on specified matters.? More meaningful and transparent accounting and reporting? Tougher listing and compliance regimen through a Centralized National ListingAuthority? Highest and toughest standards of Corporate Governance for Listed Companies.? A code of public behaviour for Public Sector Units? Setting Up of a Centre for Corporate Excellence.Recently, the Government has announced the proposal for setting up the Centre for CorporateExcellence under the aegis of the Department of Company Affairs as an independent andautonomous body as recommended by the Study Group. The Centre would undertake research onCorporate Governance; provide a scheme by which companies could rate themselves in terms oftheir corporate governance performance; promote corporate governance through certifyingcompanies who practice acceptable standards of corporate governance and by instituting annualawards for outstanding performance in this area. Government’s initiative in promoting corporateexcellence in the country by setting up such a center is indeed a very important step in the rightdirection. It is likely to spread greater awareness among the corporate sector regarding mattersrelating to good corporate governance motivating them to seek accreditation from this body.Cumulative effect of the companies achieving levels of corporate excellence would undoubtedlybe visible in the form of much enhanced competitive strength of our country in the global marketfor goods and services.17CONCLUSIONI would like to conclude by quoting Sir Adrian Cadbury from the preface to the World BankPublication, Corporate Governance: A Framework for Implementation; and I quote - “Corporategovernance is ... holding the balance between economic and social goals and between individualand community goals. The governance framework is there to encourage the efficient use ofresources and equally to require accountability for the stewardship of those resources. The aim isto align as nearly as possible the interests of individuals, corporations and society. The incentiveto corporations is to achieve their corporate aims and to attract investment. The incentive forstates is to strengthen their economics and discourage fraud and mismanagement.” - Unquote.Regulators have the most crucial role in improving Corporate Governance. They are infactexternal pressure points. Although compliance with regulatory requirements is an ideal situation,it is not enough for ensuring good corporate governance. What is more important is the internalpressures such as peer pressure and market pressure to reach standards higher than the minimaprescribed by regulatory agencies.The road to efficiency lies in minimizing regulatory prescriptions and maximizing voluntarycodes to ensure excellence in corporate governance.I had in my opening remark, indicated that there is no aspect of human life, which is not touchedupon by corporate entities today. Their orderly conduct is an essential prerequisite for a healthyeconomy. Moreover efficient Corporate Governance will contribute to increased flow of capitalfrom abroad.With best of efforts so far taken to strengthen corporate governance we find, alongside corporategrowth, increasing incidences of vanishing companies, mismanagement, widespread shareholderdissatisfaction, and unethical business practices with frightening regularity. The last decade alsowitnessed the unearthing of several scams considerably damaging the reputation of Indiancorporates. No one would like to deal with tainted companies, definitely not foreign investorsand collaborators.With the opening up of the economy and to be in tune with the WTO requirements, if Indiancorporates have to survive and succeed amidst increasing competition from transnational andforeign corporates, it can be only through achieving ‘Excellence’ in their working. The‘Excellence’ I refer here are excellence in terms of administration, excellence in terms ofinvestor return, excellence in terms of end product or service, excellence in terms of socialresponsibilities, excellence in terms of returns to the promoters and excellence in terms ofrewards to the people who run the corporates including employees. Corporate excellence isimpossible without sound corporate governance.I believe all of us can and must play our role, in whichever role we are placed, to the best of ourability to help promote corporate governance. The frameworks provided by Cadbury, KumarMangalam and the Basel Committee are quite wide and extensive. Every role holder in thecorporate world would be able to find his or her own specific role responsibility in this regard.So let us all devote a serious thought to it and make our own assessment of the extent to whichwe have so far been helping the cause of corporate governance in our respective sphere ofinfluence. I am confident this will certainly show us the right direction and accordingly we candraw a road map for ourselves. Only with such collective effort can we succeed in putting inplace in our country a fool proof system of corporate governance for the benefit of all of usindividually as well as collectively.Before I conclude, I wish to quote the words of Benjamin Franklin18“ A little neglect may breed great mischief….. for the want of a nail, the shoe was lost; for thewant of a shoe, the horse was lost and for want of a horse, the rider was lost and for want of arider the war was lost”Little drops of water make the mighty ocean. Little acts of neglect might cause major scams. Ittakes only a small hole to drown a big ship. I wish to enjoin you to be careful in avoiding littleneglects in order to secure the interest of all stakeholders. To me, therein lies the secret of goodcorporate governance and the key to Corporate Excellence.Thank you ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for your patient hearing.* Inaugural address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Dy. Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Administrative StaffCollege of India, Hyderabad at a programme on ‘Governance in Banks and Financial Institutions’on 22.11. 200119
