Rural Credit : Status and AgendaDistinguished participants and guests,It is privilege to be associated with the International Seminar in Honour of Professor CH.Hanumantha Rao.  His valuable contributions as a member of the Board of Directors ofRBI, my professional association with him for about three decades being a fellowOsmanian, and above all, my personal regard for him, make the participation in theinaugural session today a source of pride and pleasure for me.There is a wide-range of subjects being considered by a galaxy of eminent scholars andpolicy-makers, but I will confine my comments in the inaugural address to rural credit.The subject has always been at the core of RBI’s activities.  Telugus’ seem to havebeen playing a special role in the design and implementation of rural credit policies inIndia.  The monumental work of All-India Rural Credit Survey of 1951-52 was thecontribution of a Committee in which half the membership was Telugus.  RuralElectrification Corporation and NABARD have been led by Telugus and had Telugus asChairmen, for a large part.  I cannot recall any economist who could equal ProfessorCH. Hanumantha Rao in research, publication and policy involvement in the field ofrural credit.  In the context of economic reforms, Professor Rao has published twopapers which constitute a treasure trove for all those interested in rural credit.  The firsttitled `Policy Issues Relating to Irrigation  and Rural Credit in India’ (1993) makes acomprehensive analysis of problems, prospects and tasks.  The second, titled  “ReformAgenda for Agriculture” (2003) proposes specific credit reforms in the light of experiencegained and makes a strong pitch for “a major change in the mindset.”  But being1Telugus, we are individualistic and tend to differ – sometimes politely.  Let me illustrate:Shri M. Narasimham Garu, the Bhishma-Pitamaha of the Financial Sector Reforms inIndia (1991) recommended redefining of and reduction in priority-sector lending,describing some of it as “behest lending”.  Professor Rao promptly disagreed (1993)with him on redefining priority sector lending though there was agreement between thetwo on phasing out of concessional rates of interest.  Before proceeding further, it isappropriate to co-opt Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia as a Telugu or an Andhraite since helived in Hyderabad and had his schooling – perhaps the secret of the solid foundationfor scholarship.There are several concerns in relation to rural credit which are generally expressed interms of inadequacy, constraints on timely availability, high cost, neglect of small andmarginal farmers, low credit-deposit ratios in several States and continued presence ofinformal markets.  It is held that while the commercial banks are more focused inimproving efficiency and profitability, they have tended to give comparatively lesspriority to rural credit.  Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) and Co-operatives appear to faceserious problems of governance as well as operational efficiency.  It is argued that mostpart of the Co-operative Credit structure is multi-layered, under capitalized, over-staffedand under-skilled, often with mounting non-performing assets while in a few casesresulting in erosion of public deposits as well.  Many of the RRBs also appear to sharemost of these problems, though there are some vibrant and viable institutions in thiscategory.  These problems relating to rural credit have been well documented andseveral policy-approaches were made to remedy the situation.  However, there is some2element of dissatisfaction that overall situation in regard to rural credit is not improvingto the desired level inspite of such a series of actions.  It is a matter of concern thatcognizable success is eluding the policy-makers, at a time when increasingcommercialization warrants a big thrust in institutional credit to agriculture.  There isthus a discernible widespread intellectual recognition that while immediate measuresare undertaken to increase the flow of credit to agriculture, there is a need to review thepolicy of rural credit in a comprehensive and thorough manner.The current strategy  adopted by RBI to increase the flow of credit may be summarizedas follows.  First, the coverage of rural credit is extended to include facilities such asstorage as well as credit through NBFCs. Second, procedural and transactionalbottlenecks are sought to be removed, including elimination of Service Area Approach,reducing margins, redefining overdues to coincide with crop-cycles, new debtrestructuring policies, one-time settlement and relief measures for farmers indebted tonon-institutional lenders.  Third, Kisan Card Scheme is being improved and widened inits coverage while some banks are popularizing General Credit Cards (GCCs) which isin the nature of clean overdraft for multipurpose use, including consumption.  Fourth,public and private sector banks are being encouraged to enhance credit-delivery whilestrengthening disincentives for shortfall in priority sector lending.  Fifth, the banks areurged to price the credit to farmers based on actual assessment of individual risk ratherthan on a flat rate depending on category of borrower or end-use while ensuring thatinterest-rates charged are justifiable as well as reasonable.  In brief, the thrust is onenhancing credit-delivery in a regime of reasonable credit-prices within the existing legal3and institutional constraints and to this limited extent there has been “ a major change inthe mindset”,  that Professor Rao desired.In this background, the agenda for future consists of five parts.  First, there is a need forlegal and institutional changes relating to governance, regulation and functioning of ruralcooperative structure and Regional Rural Banks who have to be critical instruments forrural credit in future.  In this regard, it is useful to note the nature of competition andaccountability to shareholders governing the functioning of commercial banks whichwould make their foray into rural credit predominantly  subject to commercialconsiderations.  The changes warranted in cooperatives as well as RRBs  involvedeep   commitment  of   state-governments and  have  significantbearing on political economy. Thus, the current thrust to improve credit–delivery  maysoon face limits unless the legal and institutional changes are  agreed upon and actedupon in good faith in a timely fashion.  It is the fervent hope of RBI that a consensus willdevelop soon on these fundamental changes that are essential for achieving the broadpolicy objectives.Second, there are overhang problems of non-performing loans and erosion of depositsin both cooperatives and RRBs. There is some assessment of magnitudes of lossesand capital needs in RRBs while in the case of cooperatives the data  are not yet firm.It may not be  appropriate to continue to permit institutions that are not solvent  to seekand accept public deposits and hence RBI favours early restructuring andrecapitalisation. There is an inevitable fiscal impact of any scheme of recapitalisation4which has to be transparent and has to bear all the costs of overhang issues as well ascapital adequacy to assure continued solvency and safety of public deposits in future.Such a one-time fiscal support is  justifiable, urgent and essential for several reasons,including that “There Is No Alternative” and delayed response could end up being moreexpensive.  The current  acceleration in credit-delivery can be sustained in the mediumterm, if such fiscal support from States and Centre is firmly put in place soon to revive orreorganize rural cooperative structure and RRBs.Third, there is a need to foster credit culture to make enhanced rural credit a lastingphenomenon. A benign credit-culture is one which  encourages appropriate credit price,credit-delivery under transparent conditions of lenders’  as well as borrowers’ liabilitiesand incentives for repayment rather than default.  Measures that counter such a benigncredit culture are often well-intended, but as the experience so far has shown they tendto be seriously counter productive.  There is a need for a consensus in this regard, sothat, rural credit system in India is  compatible  with our goals of higher growth andbetter equity.  In this regard, it is necessary to recognise that expansion of credit insome of the States which have low credit-deposit ratio depends on conducive creditculture capturing factors relating to governance and commercial viability.Fourth,  on the critical issue of risk-mitigation,  it is held that experiments with crop orcredit-insurance in India have not been very satisfactory so far.  In fact, many farmersargue that where compulsory insurance is resorted to, it increases the burden ofborrowing from institutional sources and once the transaction costs are added, the5overall costs exceed the Prime Lending Rates significantly.   There are  several risksthat a farmer faces, and of these future price and monsoon conditions are most severeand almost entirely beyond the control of the farmer.  While Minimum Support Price is amechanism that has served us well, its cost-effectiveness  is subject to debate and inany case the coverage is limited to cereals like rice and wheat and in some areascotton.  The  farmer faces the risks of monsoon conditions and usually the adverseclimatic conditions  are widespread in a geographical area, with the result severe limitsare set on private-insurance.  Prof. CH. Hanumantha Rao flagged the issue of strategyto reduce risks as one of the four major areas of long-term planning (in 1993) but theycovered only water conservation, venture capital and insurance promotion, whereviable.  Perhaps, it is necessary to recognize that if some elements of insurance areabinitio not viable, extending credit becomes more risky and hence constrained.Finally, in the light of the above, there is merit in considering a comprehensive publicpolicy on risk-management in Agriculture, as not only a means of relief for distressedfarmers but as an ingredient for more efficient commercialized agriculture.  Thecomponents of such a policy have to be worked out in detail, but illustratively, thepublic-policy could consider some of the elements described here.  First,  establishing awell articulated, objective and independent assessment of impact of adverse monsoonconditions and appropriate relief to farmers on an assured basis.  Second, facilitatingfarmers to assure themselves  of a price for all their products before harvesting, or evensowing the seed, through a well regulated network of Forward,  Futures and Optionsmarkets.  Third, establishing and implementing liability of  suppliers for any shortfall in6quality or assured supply in vital inputs such as seeds, pesticides, power and water.Fourth, gradually eliminating and replacing price-subsidies with outlays on riskmitigation for farmers in the broadest sense and Fifth, positioning flexibility in extendingrural credit within a broad framework of such a comprehensive public policy on risk-management in Agriculture.Let me conclude by thanking Dr. S.K. Rao and Dr. MahendraDev for inviting me to jointhis intellectual feast.   I have great pleasure in inaugurating the seminar and lookforward to hearing the luminaries like Dr. Arjun Sengupta, Dr. Yogender Alagh and Dr.R. Radhakrishna.Thank you.Dr. Y. Venugopal ReddyGovernorReserve Bank of IndiaAdministrative Staff College of IndiaNovember 16, 20047
