Fiscal Reforms at State-I must compliment the organisers of this conclave for choosing a subject ofvital importance to our economy and society and, making excellent arrangements fora comprehensive but focussed discussion. This is a good opportunity to presentReserve Bank of India’s (RBI) perspectives on fiscal reforms at State level.  Thepresentation is divided into five parts, viz. role of RBI in the State finances; review offiscal reform effort; changing role of State Governments; impact of financial sectorreform on State finance; and prospects for and issues in fiscal improvement.RBI has been the only authentic source of regular information and analysis ofState finances on a consolidated and annual basis. These  reports are published byRBI and are widely circulated.Since 1997, RBI had convened seven conferences of State Finance Secretaries,which was also attended by senior officials of central government and PlanningCommission.  The Conferences have provided a forum for several initiatives by StateFinance Secretaries for which RBI provided professional inputs.  A report on Level Guarantees was generated which enabled several States to bring aboutlegislation imposing a ceiling on State level guarantees while some other States areconsidering such a legislation.  A Core Group on Disclosure Norms for State Budgetshelped improve the design and coverage of budget related documents in severalStates.  Many States recently adopted economic and functional classification ofbudgets with the assistance of RBI.  A study on Public Account was sponsored byRBI at the request of State Finance Secretaries which was discussed in the latestConference.  State Governments interactions with credit rating agencies and withTransparency  were also facilitated by RBI.  In fact, severalinitiatives with State Governments were made possible with the  RBI’s role as banker,debt-manager and adviser.Thus, as banker, RBI has been assisting States in improved cash managementto maximise returns on deployment of temporary surpluses. The Ways and MeansArrangement was reviewed and a new system was introduced in 1998 in consultationwith States. Arrangements have been made for electronic exchange of informationbetween Central Accounts Section, Nagpur and individual States on dailyAs debt-manager, RBI had devised a scheme for Consolidated Sinking Fund.Seven States have since set up such a Fund while several others have expressedinterest.  Flexibility has been provided to State Governments, since 1998-99 todirectly access the market for borrowings between 5 to 35 per cent of their grossborrowing programme.  Seven States have already raised funds through this route andAs adviser on a variety of issues, RBI has been active in matters impinging onfiscal matters relevant to States.  Thus, RBI participated in formulating a scheme formanagement of the Calamity Relief Fund .  Help on technical issues was rendered onthe proposed Legislation on Fiscal Responsibility by .  RBI’s analysis of Statefinances has been used extensively by the Eleventh Finance Commission, which hasStateCentrethese States appear to have obtained finer terms than otherwise.transactions.Advisory Group on Fiscal Role of RBI in State FinancesMr. Chairman and friends,Review and Prospects *level :acknowledged the RBI’s contribution.  In fact, RBI is represented in the AdvisoryPanel on Fiscal- Monetary Policies set up by the National Commission to Review theA reading of St ate budgets and speeches of Finance Ministers for the year2000-01 helps in understanding the broad directions of the reform effort, though themeasures announced do vary from State to State.The budgets of the States for 2000-01 contain proposals relatin g to new taxand non-tax measures aimed at strengthening the revenue base, and expendituremanagement measures to arrest the growth in current expenditures. The finances ofStates during 2000-01 are budgeted to record an improvement over the deteriorationexperienced during 1999-2000.  The Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD) of the 26 States as aratio to GDP is budgeted at 4.1 per cent in 2000-01, as compared to 3.9 per centbudgeted in 1999-2000 and the revised estimates of 4.9 per cent. The States’ owntaxes are budgeted to record a buoyant rise of 18.9 per cent, with sales tax receiptsexpected to record a 19.6 per cent increase.  Consequently, the States’ own resourcesare expected to finance 54.1 per cent of the revenue expenditure, as compared with49.8 per cent in 1999-2000.Complementing the efforts of States’ to augment their own resources, theCentre in the form of devolution of taxes is anticipated to be ofa higher  order.  The shareable  taxes  are  estimated to show a rise of 4.3 per cent asThe expenditure control measures initiated by the State Governments arereflected in the deceleration in both revenue and capital expenditures.  However, theimbalance in the composition of expenditures would continue, with non-developmental components recording a growth of 13.9 per cent in 2000-01 on top ofthe growth of 27. 4 per cent in 1999-2000.  The rise in the non-developmentalcomponent is predominantly due to committed expenditures viz., interest payments,The important policy initiatives towards reform as culled out from the BudgetSpeeches of the State Government Budgets for 2000-01 may be classified broadly intoFiscal consolidation measures proposed in the State budgets explore ways ofmoderation of expenditure and revenue augmentation.  Some States have proposed thesetting up of Expenditure Reforms Committees.  A few States have identifiedperformance indicators to assess the quality of expenditure restructuring.  States havealso initiated measures for reduction in non-merit subsidies, better targeting ofsubsidies and reduction of non-productive expenditures as part of expendituremanagement.  Fiscal restructuring measures through downsizing the Government,have also been proposed.  With regard to revenue augmentation, the budget proposalsinclude enhancement and restructuring of sales tax, land revenue rates, vehicle tax,betting tax, introduction of professional tax, etc.  The State Governments havethrough a landmark agreement, decided to implement a harmonized floor rate of salesThe institut ional reforms proposed in the State budgets also support the fiscalconsolidation process.  Many States have announced ways of reducing the cost ofadministration by proposing a freeze on fresh recruitment as well as reviewingmanpower requirements.  Some States have adopted decentralisation as the mainsectoral reforms.2tax, as a prelude to the introduction of a uniform Value Added Tax (VAT).fiscal consolidation, institutional, and administrative services, and pensions.compared with the growth of 12.8 per cent in the previous year.resource flow from the Review of Efforts towards Fiscal ReformWorking of the Constitution.policy plank through which expenditure moderation is sought while a few areattempting contract-employment.  In order to strengthen the administrativemachinery, States have also proposed the computerization of theirThe financial health and management of State level public sector undertakingshave been a cause for concern in the last few years.  To address this issue, proposalsfor financial and managerial restructuring include setting up of Board and acomprehensive review of the functioning of the State Public Sector Undertakings,which includes closing down of non-viable undertakings, after providing suitablesafety nets to the employees and offering voluntary retirement schemes (VRS).  SomeSectoral reforms are varied and include commissioning Software TechnologyParks or setting up Hi-Tech City, or Export Promotion Industrial Parks.  In theagricultural sector, initiatives include strengthening horticulture, floriculture, animalhusbandry, farm mechanization, expanding irrigation and wasteland development.Industry status is proposed for agriculture.  Environmental protection is anotherimportant agenda for action proposed by the State Budgets consisting of “Green GoaFund” and a ‘plastic containment fund’ through a cess on industries using plasticPower sector reforms receive a major thrust in the reform agenda of the StateBudgets.  Some States have outlined initiatives aimed at restructuring of the powersector through measures relating to private sector entry into power generation;reorganization of power monoliths into separate corporations for generation,transmission and distribution; privatization of assets; and most importantly, statutoryTo sum up, there is a widespread realisation about the need for fiscalstabilisation and reform.  Each State has devised its own measures but most of thesehave a common thread of reform of public enterprises, reduction in subsidies,expenditure containment and revenue augmentation.  There are, however, severelimitations in regard to the adjustment effort in view of the large magnitudes ofThe changing role of State Governments on account of the reform may beanalysed in terms of the vertical balance between Centre and States, horizontal inter-As the reforms progress, it appears that the relative balance between Centreand States tends to tilt in First, the most important areas for the Central Government’s responsibilitiesare in international trade, financial sector, telecommunications, aviation, andespecially banking and corporate law/practices.  In most of these areas, factors such asmultilateral agreements (say, WTO), globalisation, and recommended best practicesof the world, tend to circumscribe, over a period, the discretionary power available innormal times to Central Government.Second, the capacity of the Centre to reach tax levels as well as tax regimes,very different from international practices (customs, excise, corporate or income tax)also tends to get constrained, over a period, since the free and rapid flow ofcommodities, skills and finances among the countries would require us to be not toomuch out of alignment.records/departments.3favour of States for a number of reasons.State imbalances and balance within State Governments.Changing Role of State Governmentscommitted expenditures viz. salaries, pensions and interest charges.steps for establishment of regulatory/tariff authorities.packing material and plastic mineral water bottles.of the States propose to set up Infrastructure Development/Investment Funds.Third, major thrust-areas needing expansion of Government are in physicalinfrastructure such as road, waterworks, power, antisocial infrastructure, such as,schools and hospitals. Whether it is direct or indirect intervention, the regime thatgoverns funding and provision in these areas is to be determined by StateGovernments. Thus, relative to the Centre, States are currently in the expansionarymodule in the State-market optimal mix. State Governments currently have morefreedom to access resources for financing economic growth from the market bothfrom domestic and in some ways, global sources. Hence, the proportion of net officialflows from Centre to State as a proportion of total capital flows to States tend to getreduced.Fourth, States could also seek advice on growth strategies not only fromPlanning Commission as in the past, but also from institutions like AsianThe balance, especially, economic balance among States is also likely to beaffected to the extent the overall Governments’ role in allocation of resources tilts infavour of markets.  Thus, first States will be competing more intensely than before, inmarket place for resources in future and, States may find it somewhat difficult toSecond, with growth in communications, especially on economic and financialissues, people will tend to benchmark economic performance of States.  There may bea slow beginning but the momentum could pick up, as evidenced by varyingcapacities (both in terms of amounts and interest rates) to raise financial resources forThird, there are a variet y of options for managing change, which are adoptedby different States.  For example, a single Electricity Board for each State was anearlier model for all States, while now each State is looking at its own model ofcombination of institutional arrangements as well as transition path.  There are plentyof opportunities to learn from each other’s experiences and make modifications.Thus, inter-State interaction tends to be more intensive, by themselves or throughinstitutional consultants, who may be interacting with several States.Fourth, there is in this decentralised scenario, a potential for increasing thedivergence in levels of income among States or even intra-State.  To this extent, theremay be pressure from less developed States on the Centre to play a more active role incountering market’s possible neglect of less developed States.Fifth, there could be competition among States to benchmark, perform andThe balance between t he Ministries representing the combination of politicalexecutive and Government bureaucracies vis-à-vis exercise of ownership functions aswell as regulatory functions may also change somewhat adverse to Ministries.  Theprocess of privatisation, diversified ownership and autonomy of public enterprisesmay erode the discretionary element of the Ministries.  Once separate regulatorybodies on statutory basis are established and strengthened, they are meant to be semi-autonomous.  Often, their membership need not coincide with political cycles andthus may impart greater stability to regulatory regime.  Increasing role of semi-autonomous regulatory bodies tilt the balance away from the Ministries and in favourFurthermore, experience at State level in some areas has shown that thepreferred route to enlarging the role of, and efficiency in functioning of Governmentis decentralisation in Government.  For example, in primary schools or watermanagement, the approach in some State seems to be through decentralisation orexcel 4of more stable policies.but, the new balance will have to ensure healthy competition.State level public enterprises, on the basis of their guarantees.Centre for their relative performance. place a significant responsibility on the Development Bank or the World Bank.localised water management users’ committees or village panchayats.  This may alsoinvolve emerging new balances between Ministries or departments at Stateheadquarters and local bodies, in While re gulatory framework would be critical for development of physicalinfrastructure, social infrastructure would require significant Government funding.No doubt, the traditional water tight division between Government or public andprivate sector each combining within itself funding and provision may get blurred andlarger scope realised for intermingling of the two.  Such intermingling may involvenon-Governmental organisation as well as local initiatives.  These are in a nascentstage but evolution of new balances between public and private sectors is on thehorizon.  Funding and provision of social infrastructure will, however, remain theIn brief, the major focus of economic reform in India has to be State s.  Second,the inter-State issue will have to be the major concern of Governments.  Third, thefocus of economic-management may shift from Ministries to regulatory bodies.Fourth, the major thrust of reform is to expand what may be called socialinfrastructure especially drinking water, health and sanitation, elementary schools,roads etc. all of which require large public funding and scope for private funding isextremely limited in the short run – especially among poorer regions.  Fifth, theobjectives of reform can be attained by fiscal reorientation towards largerresponsibilities for States to provide public goods and social services, including anti-poverty programmes, with concomitant rollback of fiscal activism in commercialThe financial sector reforms encompassing RBI’s funding of fiscal deficit,deregulation of interest rates, regulation of banks and credit delivery through banks The introduction in 1997 of Ways and Means Advance system in respect ofthe Government of India also implies that the RBI now considers the extent ofmonetisation at its discretion, taking into account internal debt managementpolicy objectives.  In a sense this imposes limitations, if not a precise limit, on Combined with automatic monetisation of budget deficits, RBI’s contributionsto financial institutions also caused significant increases in primary or reservemoney.  This practice has been gradually discontinued in recent years on theground that in a liberalised environment, financial institutions should expandthe avenues of raising resources from the market and to the extent certainactivities require cross- subsidisation, it should rightfully be the primaryresponsibility of the Government of India. Thus, while discontinuing RBI’ssupport to financial institutions, net transfer of profits of the RBI as dividend Interest rates have been deregulated to a significant degree not only tofacilitate more effective monetary policy, but also because the administeredinterest rate regime proved to be inefficient and costly, without necessarilyensuring flow of credit to the deprived.  The RBI’s recommended approach,however, does not preclude subsidisation by the Government but, it in-principle excessive use of banking system to cross subsidise especially ascredit seepages are not controllable. RBI favours a financial system thatfavour of the latter.5disfavours(iii)has increased.(ii)expansionary fiscal policy to fund expenditures.(i)have a bearing on the fiscal management at the State level.Impact of Financial Sector Reformactivities.primary responsibility of States for a long time.provides incentives to encourage flow of credit and at the same time ensuringservicing of interest and principal, i.e., bankability of schemes.  Thus, the RBIhas introduced modified interest rate prescriptions, providing  in the case of small borrowers to size of credit limits, rather than to specifiedsectors or groups of borrowers. There are two issues relating to credit delivery on which the RBI’s initiative issought, namely, regional dimension and rural-urban divide.  The regionalvariations or inter-State disparities in credit-deposit ratio existed in the pastand continue to persist in the post-reform period also.  The variations may beless pronounced in some cases if ratio of credit plus investments to deposits istaken into consideration.  RBI has been sensitising banks to ensure flow ofcredit to all States, while at the same time, urging State Governments to createenabling environment for flow of credit. Progressively, the instrumentsavailable with the RBI to ‘direct’ credit are less in a deregulated environment,especially since financial intermediation through non-banks including mutualfunds and NBFCs, is justifiably expanding.  In fact, unequal distribution ofburden of social obligations between banks and non-banks could undermineSimilarly, on the rural-urban divide in flow of bank resources, there aresome constraints, as mentioned above, on the policy instruments available.The RBI, therefore, encourages local level financial intermediaries to addressthis issue.  These include expanding the network of urban cooperative bankswhich are also local, revitalising the Regional Rural Banks (whose bankingbusiness in recent years is growing faster than scheduled commercial bankingactivity), promoting local area banks, apart from efforts to improving theAs part of reform in the financial sector, there have been significant reductionsin statutory preemptions, under the Statutory Liquidity Ratio in respect ofbanks.  The share of market of non-public sector banks in the banking systemis increasing.   There has been diversification of ownership of several largebanks.  Insurance companies are also coming under competitive pressure, andhence there are limits to what may be termed as involuntary subscriptions topublic debt.  Under these circumstances, full subscriptions to borrowingprogramme approved by Government of India in respect of some of the Statesmay not be possible if the banks and other market participants do notvolunteer to subscribe.  At the same time, some States which are perceived by financial markets do get subscriptions at more favourable rates Monetary and credit policy in India thus focusses increasingly on what and Sen call “growth mediated security” while “support-led security”, oftenconsisting of direct anti-poverty interventions are to be addressed mainly byIn brief, as a result of financial sector reform, there are more stringent overall limits tofiscal expansion, impinging on both Central and State finances.  Second, the non-bankable components of developmental activities are required to be increasingly metby fiscal policies.  Third, the commercial components or bankable components ofdevelopment could be squarely shifted by State Government to financial sectorprovided they are made commercially viable.  Fourth, the administrative, social andeconomic infrastructure and overall perception of governance influences flow of6fiscal and other governmental activities.Dreaze (vi)when they exercise the limited option of approaching the market directly.favourably(v)cooperative credit system as a whole.the health of the banking system, which is vital to our economy.(iv)concessionalitycredit due to diversification of means of financial intermediation, deregulation andcompetition.  Fifth, the perceptions of financial markets including credit ratingagencies is relevant in ensuring full subscription to approved market borrowingprogramme incorporated in the State budgets.  In sum, State budgets may have todifferentiate between bankable and non-bankable segments, enable, expand and hiveoff the former while focussing on efficient use of resources for non-bankableReserve Bank has been in close interactive mode with State Governments inregard to fiscal matters in the recent past and has been of  mutual benefit.  There is aclear recognition among all concerned that focus of further reform would increasinglybe at the State level.  The reforms in financial sector have implications for fiscalmanagement at State level and this has been fully appreciated by State Governments.The State Governments are making valiant efforts to meet the fiscal challenges beforeThe overall strategy for fiscal improvement consistent with the reform agendathree-fold.First, commercial activities such as power, transport, water for irrigation willhave to be fully funded and operated commercially to reduce fiscal burden and also toattract financial resources from financial sector especially banks.  To the extent  is deemed necessary, it should be self balancing with no burden oneither the fisc or banks. This is a valid strategy irrespective of public or mixed orprivate ownership of the concerned commercial and financial entities.  This approachSecond, State Governments will have to concentrate their efforts oninstitutional infrastructure especially relating to law and order and provision ordelivery of essential services such as drinking water, sanitation, primary schools anddispensaries, etc. not only to serve the needs of the poor and the underprivileged butalso to attract resources from the financial sector for investments in physicalinfrastructure and also productive activities.  Improving the delivery of servicesshould be the priority. Again, this approach is feasible in the current fiscal situation ifand only if the cost recovery for commercial activities is total, with self-balancingcross- subsidisation. A word of caution is, however, necessary. To avoid seepage andmisuse of concessions, the extent of cross-Third, in the light of the above, public investments will have to be enhanced iThere is a broad consensus on the overall strategy but, in terms of managingthe fiscal adjustment, the State Finance Secretaries have articulated several issues.The main consensus expressed in the latest (Seventh) Conference can be The main fiscal problem is structural and, solutions attempted are incremental andconsequently their major pre-occupation is how to pay the each day’s bills. Theyargued, that whenever fiscal adjustment is attempted, there is a cut, in non-committedexpenditure but not in non-essential one. A predominant part of the budget iscommitted expenditure, especially interest, pensions, and salaries, which has noflexibility.  As a consequence, there is often an atrophy of delivery of services in asmuch as there may be hospitals manned by doctors and nurses but no medicines,electricity or water supply. Grants to several institutions performing vital services areoften postponed or reduced on account of fiscal adjustment.  They apprehend that cutsn7summarised.agriculture to accelerate gainful employment generation and poverty reduction.subsidisation should be limited.would also be a precondition to adopt other more compelling strategies.subsidisationcrossin general and financial sector reform in particular is them.Prospects and Issuesprogrammes, and social services. components such as anti-poverty in output tend to be highly disproportional to cuts in expenditure making expenditurecuts of non-committed items highly unproductive, thus undermining the reformprocess.  Some of the Secretaries also questioned the efficacy of increasing socialexpenditures on the ground that opening of new schools often meant onlyappointment of new teachers who do not turn up in schools in any case.  A few feltthat efficacy of social expenditures can be improved by decentralisation while a fewothers advocated contract employment of teachers instead of life-time employment.There was virtual unanimity among the State Finance Secretaries that the structuralproblems underlying fiscal situation in the States cannot be solved unless the issue ofhigh committed expenditures is resolved.  There was also a consensus that the fiscalproblem is not State specific but an all-India phenomenon, often a result of policies ofthe Central Government such as in pay hikes and, solutions would warrant initiativesFrom RBI’s point of view, there are a few issues that are being addressed inFirst, the Ways and Means Arrangements and O verdraft Scheme is beingreviewed by a group of State Finance Secretaries in the light of settledrecommendations of the Vithal Committee and those which are yet to beimplemented.  The Group will finalise its report by the end of December 2000.  Nodoubt, the review will address only temporary mismatches between receipts andSecond, recognising the need to ensure full subscription to approvedborrowing programme of all States , it has been decided that RBI would prepare atechnical paper on the subject, taking into account the needs of special categoryStates.  The role of Primary Dealers in Government Securities would also beaddressed in the paper. The paper could also consider some institutional arrangementin the form of a State Funding Corporation as suggested in the RBI Annual Report of1993-94, which could assist the States that happen to be reluctant, under certainThird, there are a few States whose cash and budgetary positions have somelinkage with consortium arrangements for food credit. Such State Finance Securitiesare being associated with the Committee being constituted for such as review, asannounced in Governor Jalan’s Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy forthe year 2000-2001.Let me conclude with an appropriate quote from the latest book from Mr. A.Control of Public Money ) :“Experience shows conclusively that a policy deficit, together with a vigilancedeficit, has contributed, over the years to a situation, where the fiscalmachinery has not been successful in addressing the concerns of the public.Despite repeated efforts at improving the machinery, the institutionalrecidivism has become quite common.  This, in turn, was partly due to the factthat the reforms did not fully address the major concerns, and partly becausethey were not fully implemented.  Moreover, the solutions of one era becamethe problems of another era.  Measures sought to be implemented within theexecutive wing of the governments were not always matched bycorresponding efforts in the external agencies, such as the audit and thelegislature.  There is a continuing need for a balanced approach towardsimprovement in the operations of the executive, audit, and the legislature.8This is the task of future managers.” (Oxford University Press Premchand circumstances, to approach the markets individually and directly.expenditures in State budgets, but not structural issues.the context of fiscal reforms at State level.by and setting an example by the Union Government.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at India States Reform Forum9organised by The World Bank, at New Delhi, on November 24, 2000.* Address by Dr. Y.V. 
