963C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006Avian Influenza Pandemic: Preparedness*within the Financial SectorRAKESH MOHANI would like to welcome all of you to India for the disrupting the normal functioning of the financial system.IMF Seminar on “Preparedness within the Financial Such disruptions require immediate interventions from theSector for an Avian Influenza Pandemic”, which has been Government and the regulatory authorities. Thus, thea source of concern not only for health experts but also scope of business continuity plans that the central banksand other institutions develop go beyond the avian flu.for policy makers in Governments and Central Banksalike. It is important to undertake activities that are Preparedness with effective business continuity plans isdesirable not only for dealing with the issue of avian flupreventive in nature, so that the probability of anundesirable event is minimised. The Fund’s efforts to but would also be helpful in case of other contingenciesof any nature.bring countries that are vulnerable to the pandemic on acommon platform by organising such seminars are highlyIn these introductory remarks, I will try to be briefcommendable. It is worth noting that if some thing doessince the programme has a panel of experts dwelling onnot happen, people generally remain unaware about howseveral aspects of avian flu. I, therefore, thought that themuch effort went into making sure that it does not happen.best thing that I can do today is to provide a briefAs I understand, the focus of these IMF seminars is onoverview on the issue mainly from the perspective of thebusiness continuity planning for a human influenzafinancial system. While highlighting the gravity of thepandemic and issues relevant to central banks, supervisoryavian flu pandemic and challenges for the financialagencies and regulated financial institutions. At this stage,system, I would also dwell briefly on our preparednessthe avian flu is not a current problem for India. However,for the avian flu epidemic.it always has the potential of becoming a severepandemic, however small the probability may be, in caseI. GRAVITY OF THE AVIAN FLU PANDEMICpreventive measures are not taken in time. It is, therefore,important to raise awareness among the concernedThe outbreak of any contagious pandemic on a largeauthorities. It is toward this end that the IMF is sensitisingscale has always had significant economic impact on thedifferent countries towards preparing for any potentialaffected economies. The outbreak of SARS in 2003outbreak of avian flu.proved that even a disease with a relatively small healthimpact can have adverse economic implications. TheAt the outset, let me make emphasize that, as Iseverity of a pandemic can be seen from a historicalunderstand it, the major part of the subject matterperspective. According to the World Health Organisationdiscussed in this seminar is not specific to avian flu but(WHO), the Spanish Flu of 1918 was the deadliest init could apply to all types of major disruptions in thewhich one-fourth of world’s population got sick and 40conduct of normal business. The important point to notemillion people died (2 per cent of global population)is that though we may believe that the possibility of(WHO, 2003).occurrence of a widespread avian flu pandemic is low,the issues that are discussed in such seminars are still In the early 20th century, science was sufficientlyuseful from the point of view of preparedness for any sophisticated to anticipate that influenza, which had twicereached pandemic proportions in the late 19th century,unforeseen eventualities that have the potential ofIntroductory remarks by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the IMF Seminar on “Preparedness*within the Financial Sector for an Avian Influenza Pandemic” at Mumbai on July 24, 2006. Assistance of Rajiv Ranjan andRajeev Jain is gratefully acknowledged.963C M Y K963964C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006would recur, but was largely powerless to blunt the There is substantial uncertainty about the potentialdevastating impact of the 1918 (H1N1) pandemic. Since economic impact of a pandemic of any given severity. Itthen, scientific progress has contributed significantly in is estimated that a modest pandemic lasting over one yearmaking possible defences against the disease in terms of might cause a loss as high as 3 per cent of Asian GDPincreased knowledge of influenza viruses that has enabled and 0.5 per cent of world GDP. This is presentlynew capacity to design and manufacture vaccines and equivalent to about US$ 150-200 billion in GDP (WHO,antiviral drugs to forestall infections. Yet the world is 2006). In addition to high morbidity and mortality, thevulnerable to the pandemic, perhaps even more than in pandemic may cause massive social, political and1918, when the pace and frequency of global travel was economic disruption. According to an estimate, the costconsiderably lower than it is today. Earlier experience to the poultry industry has already exceeded US$ 10shows that once the pandemic starts spreading, it will do billion across Southeast Asia (United Nations, 2006).so very fast giving no time to prepare. Vaccines, antiviral Financial costs of a human pandemic are impossible toand antibiotics would be in short supply and are likely to predict. The World Bank estimates that a severe avianbe unequally distributed. Widespread illness may result flu pandemic among humans could cost the globalin sudden and potentially significant shortages of economy about 3.1 per cent of world gross domesticpersonnel. The effect would be relatively prolonged when product, around US$ 1.25 trillion on a world GDP ofcompared to other natural disasters. US$ 40 trillion (World Bank, 2006).Until recently the highly pathogenic avian influenzaH5N1 virus had been concentrated in East Asia,II. AVIAN FLU AS A MAJOR PUBLIC ISSUEparticularly in Vietnam, Thailand, Indonesia and China. Given the severity of the possible threat of pandemic,However, in the last 6 to 9 months, the virus has gonethe avian flu is regarded by some observers as a majorglobal, spreading to over 40 more countries (Brahambhatt,public issue and is considered by them to be one of the2006). As on July 14, 2006, the cumulative number ofmajor risks to global growth prospects and the financialconfirmed human cases of death on account of aviansystem. Therefore, the need to prepare for a pandemic isinfluenza (H5N1) stood at 132 in 10 countries as reportedin WHO Fact Sheet. According to WHO, “If the human- becoming an important focus for governments andto-human transmission is not contained quickly the international organisations, including the Internationalmodern means of transportation will rapidly seed a Monetary Fund (IMF). At the Beijing Internationalpandemic”. Experts estimate that the next pandemic may Conference, US$ 1.9 billion was pledged to supportcause more than 1 billion cases and up to 7.4 millionefforts at all levels to help fight avian flu and prepare fordeaths. During the current H5N1 outbreaks more thana possible human flu pandemic (IMF, 2006). The World150 million birds have been destroyed or died and theBank, the World Health Organisation, the Food anddirect economic costs to affected countries amount to US$Agriculture Organisation, and the World Organisation for8-12 billion (WHO, 2006).Animal Health are taking the lead in preparing a globalAccording to an estimate by the Asian Development coordinated response strategy on the possibility of anBank, the economic impact of SARS was around US$ avian flu crisis, and helping members improve18 billion in East Asia, which comes to around 0.6 persurveillance and control capacity and to develop nationalcent of their total GDP (ADB, 2003). The recent outbreak action plans that focus primarily on human and animalof the avian influenza (H5N1), popularly known as avianhealth. We all know that the Fund can play an importantflu, which started in late 2003, has raised concerns aboutrole in encouraging its members to prepare for a possiblea new global pandemic as experts fear that the H5N1pandemic, in facilitating cooperation across thevirus strain will mutate just enough to allow it to passmembership, and advising members on appropriateeasily from person to person, potentially causing amacroeconomic policies and helping to support themcatastrophic pandemic as humans lack immunity to it.with balance of payments financing where this is needed.According to experts, the avian flu is far more lethal thanThe Fund has already indicated that its near-term effortsSARS. While SARS had a mortality rate of around 15will focus primarily on helping members prepare theirpercent, avian flu, which has now spread from Asia toeconomic and financial systems to limit the possibleEurope, can kill up to a third of the infected people.disruptions that may be caused by a pandemic.964C M Y K964965C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006In the recently held G-8 Summit at St. Petersburg illness, social and economic consequences of a pandemic.(July 16-17, 2006), understanding the gravity of the A worrisome scenario cannot be ruled out if absenteeismpossible pandemic, the member countries felt that disease and increased uncertainty about operational risks harmcan be dramatically more contagious as the world the functioning of financial markets or financialbecomes ever more interconnected. Airlines now carry institutions. Broadly speaking, financial system effectsan estimated 1.6 billion passengers every year. Trade, might be on account of reduced capacity of markets andcommerce and financial markets are increasingly institutions due to absenteeism.interrelated. The SARS outbreak of 2003 vividlyThese challenges have necessitated preparednessdemonstrated how much the world has changed in termswithin the financial sector so as to minimise theof its vulnerability to economic and social disruptionsadversities associated with a potential pandemic, thewhen disease outbreaks occur. Though it is difficult toseverity of which is still uncertain. A severe pandemicpredict the timing and severity of the pandemic but, forwill not only put substantial pressure on the fiscal balancethe first time in history, the world has the advantage ofof Governments, due to increased spending on health,advance warning about a potential pandemic. Thispublic safety, social welfare, and subsidies to businessesadvantage must be fully exploited to enhance globaland lost revenues, but it will also pose challenges for thepreparedness. Similarly, recognising the risk of avian flu,monetary authorities. For financing the increased needthe Bank for International Settlements (BIS) in its Annualfor social spending, financial markets are expected to beReport 2005-06 (BIS, 2006) reveals that businessthin at best and recourse to central bank borrowing maycontinuity planning has received additional priority inbe inevitable for most of countries.view of the need for increased preparations for a possibleIt would be prudent to assume that a severe pandemicavian flu pandemic, which would primarily affect humanmay lead to a surge in demand for liquidity and low riskresource availability (including dependencies on externalassets. Such risk aversion on the part of economic agentsservices). The Financial Stability Forum, which promoteswould lead to at least temporary declines in asset pricesinternational financial stability, in its 15th Meeting atand widening of credit spreads, for both corporations andSydney (March 17, 2006) warned, “…the uncertaintiesemerging markets. Although these effects are likely to berelating to the timing, severity and impact of a pandemictemporary, asset price declines could put the balanceare substantial, financial authorities need to consider wellsheets of some financial institutions under stress and theyin advance the potential impacts of a pandemic onmay face challenges in meeting regulatory norms. Bankingfinancial systems, to make business continuity plans forstability may not be an issue of immediate concerntheir own institutions, to review business continuity plansbecause deterioration in asset quality is not expected toelsewhere in the financial sector and to improve channelsappear quickly and we can perceive them as second orderfor communication and coordination, both within andimpact. According to the IMF, a severe pandemic mayacross borders” (Financial Stability Forum, 2006).also lead to a significant but temporary reduction in netcapital flows to emerging markets. Such a pandemic canIII. CHALLENGES FOR THE FINANCIAL SYSTEMdisrupt market operations as well in the case of abreakdown in the trading infrastructure. In short, we canThough the possible impact of avian flu would becontemplate the likely challenges for central banks in thecovered in detail in this seminar, I would like to brieflycontext of (i) financing the larger borrowing needs of thetouch upon the risks and challenges which a severerespective governments, (ii) inflation, (iii) liquiditypandemic could pose to a domestic as well as the globalmanagement, (iv) payment and settlement systems, etc.financial system. Some of these challenges are expectedkeeping in mind that disruptions in one jurisdiction couldto be similar to the strains on the financial system thathave spill-over effect in other jurisdictions.might be expected from any slowdown in growthirrespective of the source. Others will be particular to If required, central banks may have to preparethe conditions of a flu pandemic, such as uncertain labour themselves to act as lenders of last resort. In manysupply, increased operational risks, potentially unstable countries, in order to restore macroeconomic stability andinfrastructure and restrictions on travel, etc. International fiscal sustainability, central banks may have to adjustattention has focused on the need for all countries to be monetary policy to prevent a sustained increase inbetter prepared, in order to reduce the potential death, inflation, withdrawing fiscal stimulus, particularly in965C M Y K965966C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006countries facing debt sustainability issues, as well as becomes severe. Critical functions and priority would haveensuring external viability, including through a rebuilding to be identified in advance - market operations, reserveof international reserves and greater exchange rate management, clearing and settlement and bankingflexibility. Similarly, a financial institution’s risk supervision. There should be preparedness for highassessment and management plans may have to be absentee rate and back-up arrangements for key staff. Theexpanded to cover the possibility of widespread economic need for providing computers and internet connections todisruptions and their impact on loan and other asset staff at home would arise in order to facilitate “work fromperformance. home” arrangements. Problem of insufficient publicnetwork bandwidth may arise. There is a need to finaliseIn addition to the direct impact of avian flu onthe bare minimum banking services that must continueagricultural output, the indirect effects could severelyoperations in a worst-case scenario (Phone, internetdisrupt domestic economies, as tourism falls, trade andbanking, ATM, payment related service, access to safetransport restrictions arise, consumer spending drops, anddeposit boxes). The payment system and currency issuebusiness confidence and investment deteriorate. As aare important from the point of view of the central banks.result, the retail sector and services exports could beseverely affected and balance of payment pressures mightCountries, which are most vulnerable to Avian fluarise in tourism-dependent economies.pandemic, may like to initiate their own businesscontinuity plans by ensuring the continuity of criticalMany institutions in various countries have institutedfinancial infrastructure and functions of individualbusiness continuity plans (BCPs) in order to face majorinstitutions. Many countries have already starteddisruption to the operations and services of their financialstrengthening such efforts. Preparedness is highest amongsystem. BCPs are intended to mitigate this risk, bycountries like Singapore and Hong Kong that experiencedensuring the continuity of critical financial infrastructurethe SARS outbreak. Similarly, adequate preparation isand functions of individual institutions. In some quarters,unavoidable for countries that have recently dealt withapprehensions are being expressed that such BCP usingavian flu outbreaks and have large, complex financiala single back up may not prove to be much effective insystems. They are already testing their Businessthe event of severe pandemic. Although BCPs could beContinuity Plans (BCP) and creating awareness amongdesirable for every country irrespective of its size to dealtheir staff. Several Committees / task forces have beenwith contingencies like avian pandemic but its micro-set up to look into issues like business, legal, humanstructure may differ from country to country.resources, payment system, currency management,Another important implication of the avian flucommunications, health/hygiene and security. Several largepandemic could be for the insurance sector. Asglobal financial institutions also have advancedemphasized by the Financial Stability Forum, a flood ofpreparations, as do providers of payment services, mainlyclaims might strain the capacity of the global insuranceby establishing alternative sites, and recovery task forces.and reinsurance sectors. Insurers are exposed to the effectsThey have a senior crisis management team in place toof a pandemic through a number of business lines,plan for the contingency. In fact, the IMF has rightlyincluding such risks as business interruption, health,emphasized that financial institutions must have BCPs thatdisability, medical malpractice, workers’ compensation,do not focus only on a single, short-lived event (IMF,and life insurance. Estimates of the impact of a global2006). In fact, I would say that actions at country levelflu pandemic on the insurance industry vary widely.may not be sufficient and regional and globalStandard and Poor’s recently suggested a mild pandemiccoordination, therefore, will remain essential as well.might produce $15-20 billion in worldwide losses, whileCoordination efforts already made by various regions andlosses from a more severe event might total up to $200regional organisations of the world, as well as the supportbillion (Standard and Poor’s, 2005).provided by the UN system are praiseworthy.During the crisis itself, authorities will have a numberIV. POSSIBLE PREPAREDNESS ON AVIAN FLUof potential roles to play. One major job for authoritiesGiven these possible risks and challenges, it is felt is acting as a focal point for communication in a varietyof areas like (i) receiving information from marketthat there should be clear command and communicationstructure for crisis management in case this pandemic participants on the extent of disruption and on the business966C M Y K966967C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006continuity measures taken that may affect other Executive Director, Financial Market Committee toparticipants, (ii) acting as a point of liaison between monitor the developments in financial markets, and (b)financial markets and the wider government emergency assuring availability of rupee and forex liquidity. Thus, itresponse, and perhaps also with utilities andwas communicated that the Reserve Bank was keepingtelecommunications providers, (iii) providing information in touch with major settlement banks and the stockto the market and to the public on the functioning ofexchanges to ensure that payment obligations on themarkets and systems (both financial and non-financial). exchanges were met and gave assurance of selling dollarsCross-border communication, in fact, becomes eventhrough agent banks in order to augment supply ormore important than before because of the global natureintervene directly to meet any demand - supplyof the event.imbalances. Subsequent to the flashing of the pressrelease, the market witnessed a quick recovery and, in fact,Because of this central role, it would be better ifno Reserve Bank liquidity or forex facilities announcedcommunication methods are robust enough to take carehad to be used. In view of developments in stockof potential disruption to staffing and physicalexchanges after May 18, 2006 crash, the Reserve Bankinfrastructure and are equipped with multiplewas in constant touch with major settlement banks andcommunication channels available. If there are disruptionsboth the major stock exchanges to ensure that the paymentto trading and communications infrastructure, ad hocobligations on the exchanges were met smoothly.solutions may be needed in order to allow smooth processof necessary transactions and maintaining criticalSimilarly, in the aftermath of the train bomb blastsoperations.in Mumbai on July 11, 2006, the Reserve Bank made allarrangements to ensure uninterrupted continuation ofIn this context, I would like to cite some instances inour country where the central bank, other regulatory normal services rendered by it and also the criticalpayment systems. Subsequent to the experience of theauthorities and government have jointly handled thecontingencies successfully. For instance, there was the potential run on a bank in 2003, the Reserve Bank hasdeveloped standard instructions for dealing with any suchbeginning of a panic run on a bank in 2003 led by abaseless rumour at one particular place of the country. eventuality that could affect business continuity andThe Reserve Bank immediately clarified that the Bank normalcy in operations. Hence it is important to act fasthad sufficient liquidity and arranged to provide adequate whenever some potential threat is identified. Thesecash to that Bank to meet the demands of its customers episodes clearly point out that there is need for properand helped that bank to keep its branches open at the coordination among all regulators so that in the event ofaffected places even on holidays to restore customer contingency, proper coordinated response could beconfidence. If such measure were not taken in time, theninitiated. Therefore, I would stress again that the scopethere could have been a possible spill-over to other banks of business continuity plans for central banks goes beyondas other bank customers could have accessed the ATMthe avian flu.of this affected bank which could have created furtherpanic.V. A VIAN FLU: THE INDIAN CASEOther interesting illustrations of ensuring businesscontinuity in the Indian context are perhaps the stockIf seen in the Indian perspective, the first case ofmarket episodes of May 17, 2004 and more recently onbird flu in Maharashtra was announced on February 18,May 18, 2006. On May 17, 2004, in the wake of change2006 as a sample of an affected poultry farm fromof Government, stock markets in India witnessed a recordNavapur was tested positive for highly pathogenic H5N1fall in price, which triggered the index-based circuitviral strain. First case of H5N1 infection in birds wasbreaker twice during the day. The index-based circuitreported in India in February 2006. Initially, the virusbreaker triggered a stoppage of trades in the stockinfected 52 poultry farms in northern part of Maharashtraexchange for around two hours. Seeing the possibility ofand such reports put authorities in other states on higha spill-over in money, G-Sec and forex markets, thealert as such a contagious disease could be source ofReserve Bank intervened on that day and two separateconcern for the Indian economy in general and poultrypress releases were issued by the Reserve Bank indicating,industry in particular. India is the fifth largest producer(a) constitution of an internal Task Force under theof eggs and the livestock and poultry sector is one of the967C M Y K967968C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006fastest growing sectors in India. It may be noted that after the onset of bird flu, i.e., February 1, 2006 andoutbreak of Avian Flu was Navapur and Uchhal in remaining unpaid, into term loans. The convertedMaharastra was a localised one, which has been contained loans may be recovered in installments based oneffectively. The major poultry exporting States are located projected future inflows over a period up to threeat a considerable distance from Navapur. According to years with an initial moratorium of up to one year,Ministry of Agriculture, the export of poultry/poultry(ii) rescheduling of remaining portion of term loan withproducts from these States is absolutely safe as thea moratorium period up to one year depending uponsamples tested are negative (Government of India, 2006a).the cash flow generating capacity of the unit,According to the Ministry of Agriculture, there has(iii)eligibility of borrowers for fresh need based finance,been no case of avian flu reported since April 18 of thisandyear. Prudence, however, demands that we should take(iv) extension of relief measures to all accounts of poultryall possible precautions in this regard and be prepared toindustry, which were classified as standard accountsface any eventuality of any nature. According to Ministeras on March 31, 2006.of Agriculture, Consumer Affairs, Food and PublicIn addition, the Government has granted a one-timeDistribution, “though the poultry industry had sufferedinterest subvention of 4 per cent per annum on theheavily because of the outbreak of bird flu this year, Indiaoutstanding principal amount as on March 31, 2006 (notwould be in a position to declare the country free fromincluding any part of the principal amount that hasthis disease very soon (Government of India, 2006b).”become overdue) to all poultry units availing loans fromTo avoid any large scale avian flu pandemic, thebanks. To resolve any policy differences among theIndian authorities have already announced variousregulators and to discuss issues relating to any overlaps,protective measures. Action Plan has been prepared forco-ordination and co-operation, a High Level Co-the guidance of the Animal Husbandry Departments ofordination Committee on Financial and Capital Marketsthe State Governments. This Action Plan for the State(HLCCFCM) consisting of Governor of the Reserve Bank,Governments consists of three parts. Part I gives theChairman, SEBI and Chairman, IRDA along with theAction Plan in case of any suspicion of occurrence ofSecretary, Department of Economic Affairs, Governmentavian flu at any place. Part II describes the Action Planof India, is already in place. The Reserve Bank of Indiain the unlikely event of the outbreak of the disease beinghas also constituted an Inter-Departmental Committee toconfirmed by laboratory tests. Part III provides advice tolook into the details of the impact of avian flu on thepersons who may be required to handle highly pathogenicfinancial sector of the economy.avian influenza (HPAI) affected poultry. Recently, theIndian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) hasVI. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONSdeveloped an indigenous vaccine for poultry against thedeadly disease. Since the disease has got recurringAt the end, I would like to lay stress on the need forpossibility, the development of the indigenous vaccine canproper coordination between the health authorities,go a long way in tackling bird flu effectively.business entrepreneurs and the financial policy makers.As part of measures to protect domestic poultryAs the IMF is making efforts in sensitising the issue ofindustry from any loss on account of avian flu, in Aprilavian flu among the central banks for better preparedness,2006, the Reserve Bank announced guidelines for reliefthe regulatory authorities within the countries also needmeasures by commercial banks and urban commercialto sensitise the regulated entities in order to ensure betterbanks. Keeping in view the loss of income that occurredpreparedness with business continuity plans for thedue to culling of birds as well as steep fall in the demandpossible avian flu pandemic. I reiterate that thesefor poultry products and their prices on account ofcontinuity plans are desirable for all types of contingenciesoutbreak of Avian Influenza (bird flu) in some areas offor the financial sector. Pandemic drill exercises may alsothe country, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to considerbe helpful in assessing such overall preparedness. Further,extending certain facilities to poultry units financed byproper coordination is necessary to arrive at a realisticthem. Some of these measures are:estimate of the potential risk of the pandemic and align(i) conversion of principal and interest due on workingvarious measures within the financial sector with the alertcapital loans, which have fallen due for payment on/ system of health authorities. This will in turn help in not968C M Y K968969C M Y KAugust Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006only chalking out effective preparedness plans but also Institut Pasteur – Paris, France, June 29, 2006 (availableto ensure effective communication in implementation at the www.worldbank.org).process. Similarly, there is a need to strengthen joint andFinancial Stability Forum (2006), “Press Releasestrategic efforts, without which it would be a challengingon Financial Stability Forum Meets in Sydney”, Marchtask for country authorities to prevent and eliminate the17, 2006.health, security, trade and financial threats emanating fromGovernment of India (2006a), “Weekly Report onavian influenza and other animal diseases at global level.Notifiable Avian Influenza (H5 & H7) week ending JulyThis will require adequate resources, particularly in9, 2006”, Ministry of Agriculture.developing countries and regions where challenges mayGovernment of India (2006b), “Press Release onbe large and resources insufficient. Therefore, ourStates Urged to help Poultry Farmers”, Press Informationcollaboration not only in terms of financial support butBureau, Ministry of Agriculture, July 19, 2006.also information sharing and exchange of ideas on variousInternational Monetary Fund (2006), “The Globalemerging issues relating to economic and financial systemEconomic and Financial Impact of an Avian Flu Pandemichas become necessary. In this context, such series ofand the Role of the IMF”, February 2006.Seminars being organised on the initiative of the IMF onStandard and Poor’s (2005), “Determining thethe Avian Flu pandemic can prove to be quite helpful inInsurance Ramifications of a Possible Pandemic,” Ratingsunderstanding these issues and exchanging the ideas forDirect, November.apt preparedness which is the ultimate goal for all uspresent here. I wish all the success for the Seminar.World Bank (2006), “Avian Flu: The Economic Cost”,June 29, 2006 (available at www.worldbank.org).World Health Organisation (2003), “Influenza”,REFERENCESFact Sheet No. 211, March 2003 (available atAsian Development Bank (2003), Asian Developmentwww.who.int/en/).Outlook 2003, Hong Kong, China: Oxford University Press.World Health Organisation (2006), “RegionalthBank for International Settlements (2006), 76Influenza Pandemic Preparedness Plan (2006-2008)”,Annual Report, 1 April 2005 to 31 March 2006, Basel,Regional Office for South East Asia, New Delhi.June 26, 2006.United Nations (2006), Key Economic DevelopmentsBrahmbhatt, Milan (2006), “Economic Impacts ofand Prospects in the Asia-Pacific region 2006, EconomicAvian Influenza Propagation”, Speech at the Firstand Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific, UnitedInternational Conference on Avian Influenza in Humans,Nations, January 2006.969C M Y K969
