1Roll-out Strategy for RTGS ImplementationI welcome you all to this meeting. I am glad to share with you that the implementation of theRTGS Project has progressed significantly and is now critically poised. Even when I amspeaking to you, the demonstration of the Demo RTGS System to a group of bank officials isin progress in our Bankers’ Training College. The RTGS System is scheduled to be deliveredby the end of October, 2003, followed by installation, testing and commencement of parallelrun before the year-end. Therefore, we have to now prepare ourselves for the Roll-out of theRTGS System. Incidentally, my colleagues have been regularly meeting with your NodalOfficers for the Project and other Officials to assess your preparedness for participation in theRTGS System.Friends, there will be a single RTGS System for the country and all of us have to make co-ordinated and concerted efforts to ensure that the entire nation optimally benefits from theintroduction of the RTGS System.I take this opportunity to update you on the recent developments in the Payment SystemsArea. One of the primary objectives of every Central Bank is to put in a place a modern,robust, secure and integrated Payment and Settlement System to enable the common man tomake payments to anyone he likes in the most efficient and cost effective manner. Theultimate beneficiary of the Payment System has to be the ordinary bank customer. In fact, ourvision has been “Anyone can make payments to whomsoever one likes, whenever one likes, inwhatever type of currency one likes, at the cost of a few cents per transaction. There are nosettlement delays or mountains of paperwork and value is received instantaneously. Thereare no distinctions in costs or delays between a domestic and a foreign currency transaction.Interest is computed real-time rather than on a "settlement day", a relic from the ancienttimes, when accounting was done manually. Finally, privacy and security are guaranteed.”The RTGS System will facilitate large value inter-bank payment and settlement in real timeonline mode on a transaction by transaction basis. It will enhance systemic efficiency andminimise the existing settlement risks. In fact, the RTGS System the world over has come tobe regarded as the sine qua non of every advanced economy.Friends, a lot of spade work has to be done before the RTGS System could be introduced. Anumber of pre-requisites such as the availability of industry-wide communication network,reliable, resilient and state-of-the-art computer platform for the implementation of theSystemically Important Payment System Applications including the RTGS System,  facilitiesfor electronic based payment and settlement, standardization of message formats for inter andintra bank applications, robust messaging system with facility for security of internationalstandards, proper business process re-engineering by each RTGS Participant and last but notthe least, facilities for advanced Liquidity Management, will have to be met, so that the goalsof the RTGS System could be realized.A lot of preparatory work, in fact,  has already been done. The IBM S/390 MainframeSystems, which include Standby facilities to ensure minimal interruption in the availability ofservices, have been operationalised to serve as the platform for the implementation of theSystemically Important Payment System Applications including the RTGS System. TheIndian Financial Network (INFINET) has been operationalised for integrating the entirebanking and financial sector. The Centralised Funds Management System (CFMS) has beenoperationalised to provide you on-line information on your aggregate funds position,maintained across our offices. Under the CFMS, fund transfer facilities between the RBIoffices will be available shortly. This will help you in efficient deployment of your funds. Wehave also implemented the Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS) on the lines ofSWIFT and Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) to facilitate transmission of messages inter/intra-bank in standardized formats across the banking and financial sector with adequate security.As all of you are aware, our Institution for Research and Development in BankingTechnology (IDRBT) at Hyderabad has become the Certifying Authority (CA) for theBanking and Financial Sector for all the applications implemented over the INFINET. TheINFINET provides for the communication backbone for all the Systemically ImportantPayment System Applications. The Disaster Recovery Site for the Systemically ImportantPayment System Applications has also been set up.All of you will agree with me that this is a Project of national importance and therefore,necessary awareness about the proposed RTGS System has to be built up. For the purpose,we have been conducting RTGS Awareness Programmes for various target groups in thebanks such as Treasury In-charges, IT Heads, Operations Staff, Faculty Members of thebanks’ Training Institutes, Business Development Teams etc.. My colleagues have also beenvisiting banks to hold RTGS Awareness Programmes.  We have also been regularly meetingwith your RTGS Nodal Officers to take stock of your preparedness for participation in theRTGS System.As the Chiefs of the banks, all of you have to play the role of a Catalyst to build up thecritical mass of opinion in your respective organizations in this regard. You will not onlyhave to facilitate internal dissemination of information on the RTGS System, but will alsoneed to ensure complete infrastructural and human resources readiness including connectivityand security at your respective ends, so that the RTGS facilities could percolate to theordinary customers.I appreciate that all of you have initiated necessary actions. You have already put in place thePayment Systems Gateway, the box that is going to host all the Payment System applicationsincluding the RTGS module for the banks, called the Participant Interface (PI) and connectedit to our Primary and Standby sites. Limiting the preparedness only to this  will facilitatetransfer of large value funds among the bankers only and the customers at large may notbenefit from the RTGS System, defeating one of our primary goals in this regard. Therefore,you will have to take urgent steps to ensure that all your banks’ branches including those inthe country side are networked. Further, the security infrastructure for message transfer in theform of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), as per IDRBT CA, will also have to be urgentlyimplemented in your organizations, covering all the branches, which will be offering RTGSservices to the customers. You will appreciate that not only those of us who live in cities, butthe ordinary customers in the country side must also enjoy the fruits of our efforts and in fact,should also be the target group for all our new initiatives.The RTGS facilities will have to be available at every nook and corner of the country andtherefore, the required network has to be in place for the purpose. SFMS is already web-enabled and ready for use. Here, I would like to caution you that any indecisiveness/delay onyour part to provide the requisite cost effective and efficient systems for the purpose will onlydeprive your customers of the RTGS benefits and it will not be an unusual scene to becountenanced in the days to come, when exodus of customers will take place to fully RTGS-enabled bank branches.Further, the introduction of the RTGS System will require business process re-engineering inthe banks. Therefore, you will require to re-visit the existing procedures/processes in yourrespective organizations. Let me once again caution you that the recycling of the existingprocedures/processes in the unfolding RTGS environment will not help you optimally realize2benefits from the RTGS System. The RTGS System will provide real time online grosssettlement of the payment transactions depending upon the availability of sufficient liquidityin your Settlement Accounts and therefore, proper liquidity management will assumesignificantly greater importance and acquire real time dimensions for each one of you. Thiswill require process re-engineering, to be addressed by each one of you and the proceduralchanges will have to be duly communicated and in-grained in your field functionaries, thefront line interface with the ordinary customers. The whole customer banking will have to bere-oriented and the customers will also require to be educated by each one of you, as theRTGS System will be a credit transfer system only as against the current cheques/instrumentsbased systems, which  are debit transfer systems.The implementation of the RTGS System will also open up newer avenues for productinnovation, arising out of Intra-day liquidity management and the consequential financialsupport to be extended to other RTGS participants with inferior Liquidity Managementinfrastructure. Further, the fee based RTGS services extended to the customers will alsoprovide a source of additional revenue. All of you will also require to focus on these areas tooptimally benefit from the introduction of the RTGS System.Last but not the least, on account of the online real time payment and settlement under theRTGS System and the settlement taking place in the books of the Central Bank, beingauthenticated by way of time-stamp by the RTGS System itself, I would like to caution youthat the availability of float funds will either disappear or will be minimised. In the light ofthis, you may also need to take a hard look at the pricing structure of your products.The introduction of the RTGS System is expected to bring in far reaching changes in regardto large value inter-bank funds transfer in the country. Let us prepare ourselves to make themost of this revolutionary change.1 Inaugural address by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a meeting with CMDsof banks on July 21, 20033
