Contemporary issues in Banking: Reflections on Viewpoints of a Bank1EconomistDr. M. Narendra, Chairman and Managing Director, Indian Overseas Bank (IOB);Shri A.K. Bansal and Shri A.D.M. Chavali, Executive Directors of IOB;Shri N. Viswanathan, Regional Director, RBI; Smt. Indira Padmini and other GeneralManagers of IOB; Shri M. Ramaswamy, Retired Secretary of Auroville; Shri S.Muthiah, Historian; Shri M.Ct.P. Chidambaram, grandson of the founder of IndianOverseas Bank; Shri B.J. Krishnan, Environmentalist; Shri Bhakther Solomon, ChiefExecutive Officer of Development Promotion Group; Shri Dharmalingam Venugopal,who is the reason for our assembling here today; serving and retired members of thebanking fraternity, other invited dignitaries whom I have not specifically named;ladies and gentlemen. It is a matter of great pleasure for me to be present here todayon the occasion of release of Shri D. Venugopal’s book “Indian Banking Reforms andAfter: A Bank Economist’s Take”. Based on my interaction with Shri Venugopal andreading of his articles, my assessment of him is of an individual with an incisive mindand an ability to dispassionately analyse diverse subjects of concern to theeconomy.2. The book being released today is an anthology of articles written by him invarious national and financial dailies over a period of time. It deals with animpressive array of subjects and provides a bank economist’s perspective on variousissues, which certainly makes an interesting reading. I congratulate Shri Venugopalfor the book, of which I had the privilege of writing the foreword, and hope the bookgets all the success and accolades that it, so richly, deserves.3. The first thing that strikes about the collection of articles featured in the bookis the wide time horizon over which the articles were penned. The book succeeds inproviding a panoramic view of issues that have confronted the economy over the lasttwo decades, a period that has been exciting for the Indian economy with the countrymoving from the throes of despair at the beginning of the decade of the 90s to aperiod of heady growth and further, to the present, when we are facing multiplechallenges. The book deftly captures several major landmark events/developmentsin the banking sector with the perspective of the point of time when these articles1Remarks by Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a book release function organised by Indian Overseas Bankat Chennai on December 30, 2012.1were actually written. It is noteworthy that apart from India, Shri Venugopal has alsoextensively covered the economic developments in China in his articles. ShriVenugopal has made a strong pitch for economic cooperation between the two majorAsian markets naming China as the market of the future and stating that India shouldseek to get its due share of this market.  It is actually a tribute to the vision of theman, as he has intensively focussed on two economies that have, since, seen a lotof economic prosperity and have become the cynosure of all in the global marketplace. As the Indian economy battles challenges on multiple fronts, Shri Venugopal’sarticles could provide valuable insights into these challenges and provide guidancefor overcoming them.4. The Indian banking system has seen a complete transformation during thelast two decades, in sync with the progress made by the real economy. Almost everyaspect of banking operation has seen significant change during this period as bankssought to reinvent themselves in an attempt to retain their preeminent position in thefinancial system. The period saw banks moving beyond brick and mortar branches toadopt innovative delivery channels including internet banking, ATMs, call centres,kiosks, Business Correspondents (BCs), etc. New products such as retail bankinggained prominence. Banks have sought to grow, not just in terms of balance sheetsize, but also in terms of greater penetration of banking services to the hithertounbanked segments of the population. It is reasonable to say that banks havesucceeded in rising up to the challenges posed by the unique needs of atransforming economy and have, in no small measure, contributed to the nation’seconomic progress during this period.5. The growth of the banking system and its pivotal position in the country’sfinancial architecture implies that the banks cater to a whole host of diversestakeholders who have equally diverse expectations. The success of individualbanks and of the banking system as a whole depends on how well these stakeholderexpectations are met. Some of the problems currently facing the banking industrybear their genesis to banks’ inability to align their business operations withstakeholder expectations. In view of the considerable debate (and sometimes noise)generated by the ills plaguing the banking sector, I thought it appropriate to brieflyflag some random thoughts on steps the Indian banking industry needs to take, inorder to effectively meet the diverse stakeholder expectations and overcome the2present challenges. Some of these thoughts also find resonance in the articlespresented in Shri Venugopal’s book.A) Productivity and Efficiency6. Banks play the critical role of financial intermediation by performing the task ofmaturity and risk transformation, besides providing payment and settlement services.In order to effectively perform these functions, banks need to ensure that theymaintain high levels of productivity and efficiency in their operations. Two kinds ofefficiency are essential for banks:· Allocational Efficiency: This requires banks to ensure that the precious societalresources are allotted to the most productive activities. Besides, while takingallocation decisions, the interests of the most vulnerable sections of the societyshould also be taken into account.· Operational Efficiency: Operational Efficiency requires banks to perform thefinancial intermediation function in a safe, secure and speedy manner whileensuring that the cost of performing the intermediation function is minimized. Whileprofit margins are important for sustaining banking operations, the cost ofoperational inefficiencies of banks should not be passed on to customers by way ofhigher service charges and fees.7. Indian banks need to improve both, allocational and operational efficiency, sothat the financial intermediation function is effectively performed. This would includereengineering of all critical products and processes by leveraging on innovativetechnology-based solutions, while retaining a strong customer-centric focus.B) Financial Consumer Protection and its Linkage to Risk ManagementFunction8. Financial Consumer Protection has emerged as a key area of supervisoryfocus globally. The global financial crisis has highlighted the vulnerability of theconsumer class, which has been worst hit in the crisis. The key feature of theexploitation has been the discriminatory, non- transparent and illogical pricing whichhas affected the poor and vulnerable consumers most emphatically. The productinnovations have not focused on customer requirements and have, instead, aimed atserving the interests of the service provider. The basic fact, that the well being of theconsumer is essential for the sustainability and growth of the service provider, has3been lost sight of. As part of its regulatory reform agenda, G 20 Finance Ministersand Central Bank Governors have also endorsed a set of High-level Principles onFinancial Consumer Protection, underlining its overall importance for financialstability. The principles enjoin upon the supervisors and oversight bodies to ensurean equitable and fair treatment of consumers, disclosure and transparency in productand service offerings along with promotion of financial education and awarenessamongst the consumers.9. In this context, I would like to highlight some important aspects of consumerprotection and risk management that banks need to imbibe in their businessprocesses:· Pricing of asset and liability products should be transparent and non-discriminatory. At a minimum, it must be ensured that poor do not subsidize theprovision of banking services to the rich.· The business operations of banks should be customer-centric in nature. Thisshould be reflected in all aspects of banking operations including creation ofcustomized products and services, pricing of services, delivery channels, etc.Banks should, inherently, be flexible in their operations so that they have the abilityto meet the evolving stakeholder expectations.· Banks should be able to appreciate the risk-return trade-off involved in variousactivities. The basic premise that greater return would invariably come fromassumption of higher risk, needs to be appreciated and disseminated, both withinthe organization and to banks’ customers. Banks need to develop the ability todiscern good risk from bad so that they selectively take on only those risks that arein alignment with the bank’s long term strategic vision.· The culture of efficient risk management needs to be imbibed in theorganization’s ethos so that everyone from the top management to frontlinemanagers in the field shares a common vision of risk management.10. A key related issue is the integrity of MIS in banks. Each bank claims to beoriented towards its customers. But, I have a simple poser. Are the banks aware ofthe number of customers they have? I am not referring to the number of accountsbut the actual number of customers that the bank serves across all businessverticals by offering different products.  Moreover, most of the banks do not have a4system of working out activity wise costs and returns. Unless banks know the returnon each and every product, they cannot arrive at a truly risk based pricing.C) Impaired Assets11. Another issue which is generating considerable concern and is likely to impactbanks’ ability to serve its stakeholders is the rising portfolio of non-performing assets(NPAs) and restructured loans. While the downturn in business environment globallyand in India has contributed to this rise, we need to reflect on why our riskmanagement practices during boom time were unable to anticipate future downturnsand build up suitable safeguards while giving loans.12.  I do believe that the rising impaired assets is a “governance” issue as bankshave forgotten the art of saying ‘no’, except, may be, to small borrowers. Banks needto significantly improve their risk assessment capability and their ability to price risks,so that they take on only those risks that they understand and can effectivelymanage. I believe that this need is all the more pronounced in the case of publicsector banks, which, at times, end up with assets that have been exited by privatesector/ foreign banks on account of inherent weaknesses.13.  The ability to manage NPAs is important in order to preserve the strength ofbank balance sheets and to retain the appetite to take on good risks. An attitude ofcomplete risk aversion would not be appropriate as banks are in the business oftaking risks, but with adequate safeguards. I note that NPAs are a recurrent theme inShri Venugopal’s articles and hope that they do provide insights into how banks canmanage this problem.14. Another issue that I would like to bring up before you is the element ofdiscrimination practiced by the banks in restructuring of loans. Analysis of availabledata indicates that the larger borrowers have invariably received the benefit ofrestructuring of loans, while the restructuring in case of SME/ agriculture loans hasremained abysmally low. I believe that with timely intervention and support from thebanks, this sector would have definitely shown much lower levels of impaired assetsthan it presently does.5D) Financial Inclusion15.  Despite several steps having been taken by the Government and the ReserveBank of India, the extent of exclusion in the Indian financial system continues to beunacceptably high. The unbanked masses constitute a unique but importantstakeholder group for banks, even though they may not be bank customers. Meetingthe expectations of this group through financial inclusion efforts presents a hugebusiness opportunity for banks.16.  While there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach to financial inclusion, it isimportant that banks recognize three important prerequisites for maximising thebenefits of financial inclusion efforts. These are:· Holistic approach to provision of financial services, not just credit or deposit alone· Meeting the needs of small firms· Focussing on segments of population excluded by gender or geographicalremoteness17.  Banks need to focus on leveraging technology to create new business modelsand delivery channels that are customized to the needs of the targeted population.Technology has the potential to act as a force multiplier in our financial inclusionefforts, provided it is implemented in a planned manner. There is, however, anincreasing realization that mere reliance on technology-enabled non-face to facechannels alone would not be sufficient to meet our goal of creating an inclusivefinancial system. There is a need for opening more brick and mortar outlets asdelivery points, both as a control mechanism for BCs and to gain the trust andacceptability of the masses.18.  Our assessment of the progress in financial inclusion since the introduction ofBoard approved Financial Inclusion Plans is that while there has been considerableprogress in the number of accounts opened, the actual number of transactions peraccount or per BC continues to be extremely low. This reduces the viability of thefinancial inclusion efforts and would, ultimately, results in concerned stakeholderslosing interest in the exercise. The low transaction levels indicate inadequacies onboth the demand and supply sides such as deficiencies in BC operations, non-distribution of smart cards, lack of awareness on the part of the account holders, etc.6Banks need to identify the causes for the low transaction rates and urgently addressthem. In order to be successful, sustainable and scalable, financial inclusion shouldnecessarily be commercially viable for everybody including the bank, the BC and thetechnology provider. However, the pricing should not result in exploitation of thecustomers.19.  It is, indeed, very gratifying to note that besides including financial inclusionprominently in his articles, Shri Venugopal, is also working for the financial inclusionof primitive tribes of the Nilgiri district. I am also very pleased to note that he is agreat friend and protector of nature, especially the Nilgiris and has been staunchlyespousing the cause of the environment throughout his career. We need more suchdedicated persons with a genuine passion for inclusive and sustainable growth.Conclusion20.  As with the economy, the Indian banking system is also at a crossroads withmultiple opportunities and challenges before it. We need to make the right choicesnow in order to ensure the future of the banking system as the key pillar upon whichthe economic prosperity of the country rests. Banks are the lifeline of any economyand it is the collective responsibility of all of us to ensure that we have a strong,resilient and inclusive banking system geared up to face all domestic and globalchallenges.21.  Opinions of thought leaders such as Shri Venugopal are important in decidingthe right course of action for taking the banking system forward. The collection ofarticles in this book provides insights into how the economy has developed over thelast two decades and provides clues to tackling the current challenges. Thenarratives are in a very simple language and the coverage of a diverse set of topicsmakes the book eminently readable and useful to most people. I hope the book isthe first in a series of many more to follow. I once again congratulate Shri Venugopalfor the book and wish it all success. I also thank Dr. Narendra and Indian OverseasBank for this wonderful function.Thank you.7
