Vote of Thanks by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy GovernorIt is a great honour for all of us at the Reserve Bank of India to have theHonourable Prime Minister, Dr Manmohan Singh ji, our former Governor, torelease the History of the Reserve Bank and to inaugurate the Centre forAdvanced Financial Learning. Both the actions are very fitting since the Historygoes up to the time that the Prime Minister assumed office as Governor; and theinauguration of the Centre marks a forward looking approach to the developmentof the financial sector as a whole. If I may take the liberty of adding a personalnote; It was Dr Manmohan Singh who first, welcomed me at the PlanningCommission in 1980, after I had spent 16 years abroad, and again as DeputyChairman in 1986. Sir, I am therefore glad to have the opportunity of welcomingyou here at the Reserve Bank. May I on behalf of everyone in the Reserve Bankfamily express our deep gratitude for this gracious gesture of visiting us andmarking these landmarks in our development?The compilation of this year's volume of Currency and Finance has beenamong the most difficult tasks that our staff has faced. We are therefore deeplygrateful to the Finance Minister, Shri P. Chidambaram, for agreeing to releasethis volume, the first time ever that a Finance Minister has done.  Thank you verymuch indeed sir.It is seldom that we have the pleasure of hosting the Honourable GovernorShri S M Krishna and the Honourable Chief Minister Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh ofthe state that we are located in: We appreciate very much that you have takenthe time out to be with us on this momentous occasion for the Reserve Bank. Itmeans a lot to us that you are with us today.We are delighted that our former Governors, Shri M. Narasimham, Shri SVenkitramanan, Dr C Rangarajan and Dr Bimal Jalan, are with us today. Thankyou very much for taking the trouble to travel all the way to Mumbai today. Weare particularly grateful to Dr Rangarajan for having steered the compilation ofthe History, through many difficult times. Without his guidance we would not behere today. I would also like to thank Dr A. Vasudevan, Ms C Batlivala and TCASrinivasa Raghavan for all the contributions that they made, along with the staffof the Reserve Bank History Cell in compiling the history.I would also take this opportunity of commending all my staff in theDepartment of Economic Analysis and Policy for all the arduous work involved inpreparing this year's edition of Report on Currency and Finance.We have been greatly assisted by the Advisory Committee on the BTC,led by Dr R. H Patil. Many thanks for your selfless service and for coming up withthe concept of the Centre for Advanced Financial Learning. I hope that we willlive up to your expectations.I would like to thank all the esteemed guests who have graced thisoccasion.Finally, may I commend all the staff of the Reserve Bank who haveworked so hard in making this function a success, members of staff of the PMO,and all the state officials and staff of security agencies who have helped usgreatly.
