*Why is Recent Food Inflation in India so Persistent?It is an honour for me to deliver this year’s Annual Lalit Doshi MemorialLecture. I thank Principal Dr. Fr. Frazer Mascarenhas, Dr. Aditi Sawant andMs. Nikita Kohli for this opportunity. The St. Xavier's College has the distinctionof producing many leaders and intellectuals, and Lalit Doshi was a giant amongthem. He was an accomplished economic administrator and thinker. He madeimmense policy contributions to aid the industrial progress in our country, and inparticular Maharashtra.As students of economics I do not have to tell you that the central objectiveof a central bank is price stability. Central banks strive to achieve a low and stableinflation rate in order to sustain a high level of growth and maximise social welfare.In the last decade we experienced a period of high growth and low inflation untilthe global financial crisis in 2008. The crisis adversely impacted the Indianeconomy given our increasing integration with the global economy. TheGovernment and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) took several policy measures tominimise the spillover of global crisis on our economy. In the process growthbounced back but inflation also increased. More recently while growth hasmoderated, inflation still remains above our comfort levels. In the post-global crisisperiod since 2008-09 inflation has emerged as a major public policy concern.  Adisturbing feature of the current episode of inflation is that it has been accompaniedby high food inflation, which hurts most the poor and the low-income strata of oursociety.Against this background, I propose to take this opportunity to talk to youabout food inflation. I will trace food inflation over the years, analyse thedeterminants of food inflation both from the supply and demand sides, reflect on*Annual Lalit Doshi Memorial Lecture, Xavier’s Chapter, by Shri Deepak Mohanty, ExecutivethDirector, Reserve Bank of India, delivered the at the St. Xavier’s College, Mumbai on 13 January2014.  The assistance provided by Abhiman Das and Joice John in preparation of this lecture isacknowledged.1the role of monetary policy and conclude with some thoughts on the way forwardto address food inflation.Over the years we have seen that the share of agriculture and allied sector,generally representing the food producing sector, in our gross domestic product(GDP) has come down significantly: from around 25 per cent in the mid-1990s toaround 14 per cent now. However, food currently accounts for over one-third of ourwholesale price index (WPI) and over one-half of our consumer price index (CPI).Since the food economy is essentially dependent on domestic production,fluctuation in agricultural production has a direct bearing on output and inflation. Itis important, however, to note that the adverse impact of a fall in agricultural outputis significantly less on GDP than on inflation because of still a very high weightageof food in our price indices.As you know, weather plays an important part in agricultural production.We have seen this over the years that the volume and spatial distribution ofmonsoon rains have a significant impact on agricultural production and hence foodinflation (Chart 1). But can deficient monsoon satisfactorily explain the recenttrend in food inflation? Let me turn to this issue in a little more detail.Chart 1: Deficient rainfall generally pushes up food prices2If we look closely at food price index for a longer period, we could noticetwo structural breaks, one at the beginning of financial year 2000-01 and the other1in the middle of 2007-08 (Chart 2) .Chart 2: Structural upward shift in food index since 2007-08It is interesting to see that average food inflation declined to 3.8 percent perannum during the 8-year period 2000-08 from 7.1 percent per annum in the secondhalf of the 1990s despite higher GDP growth of 7.2 per cent per annum as against6.7 per cent in the preceding period. The period 2000-08 experienced two years ofdeficient monsoon in 2002-03 and 2004-05, in spite of that food inflation remainedcontained suggesting in a way that the impact of monsoon on food inflation haswaned. In the subsequent 5-year period, 2008-09 to 2013-14 so far, not only thatthe average food inflation rose sharply to 10.3 per cent per annum, it has remainedpersistent. Arguably the trigger for high food inflation emanated from the droughtof 2009-10. But good rains in the following years have failed to douse foodinflation. There are several other explanations such as that global food prices alsorose and our exchange rate depreciated which exacerbated domestic food inflation.But subsequent moderation in global food prices has not dampened our foodinflation. Of course food inflation has come off its peak, but its persistence arounddouble digit level suggests that that there must be some thing more fundamental atplay. Let us look at food inflation data at a more disaggregated level.1 Estimated trend based on Bai-Peron methodology covering monthly WPI data for the period1994: April to 2013:November.3In the more recent period, the components of food inflation seem to havechanged. Although cereal inflation has risen, it is mostly protein items as well asfruits and vegetables that have driven the overall food inflation at the wholesalelevel (Chart 3).Chart 3: Major contributors of food inflationAt the retail level food inflation has been even higher. Though foodinflations at the wholesale and consumer levels tend to move together, consumerfood inflation rises faster during  an uptrend, accentuating the divergence betweenWPI and CPI (Chart 4). The recent changes in the drivers of food inflation couldpartly explain the divergence: the retail margins tend to be higher in the case ofperishables such as fruits and vegetables.4Chart 4: Food inflation wholesale and consumer price baskets(YoY on 3 month moving average – Per cent)The household consumption expenditure surveys made available by theNational Sample Survey Office (NSSO) show that the composition of foodexpenditure has changed in more recent years. As income levels rise, it is natural toexpect that the share of income spent on food falls. Even within this reduced share,there has been a significant increase in real expenditure on protein and vegetablesin rural and urban areas across income deciles. Data for the years 1993-2012suggest that it is only in the second half of the 2000s that annual average realexpenditure turned mildly positive. But, thereafter, during 2010-12, the realaverage per capita expenditure has remained significantly positive. Moreover, thereis greater allocation of expenditure away from cereals towards other forms of fooditems such as protein and vegetables (Table).  Hence, demand seems to be one ofthe factors driving the prices of protein and vegetables.5@Table: Average annual growth in real household monthly per capita expenditure1993-2000 2000-05 2005-10 2010-12Group/Sub-groups R U R U R U R UCereals -0.6 0.0 -2.6 -2.4 -1.7 -0.8 -4.2 -3.6#Protein 0.1 0.4 0.2 -1.1 2.4 1.8 9.2 5.6Fruits & vegetables 1.3 0.8 1.7 -0.8 0.6 0.3 2.2 1.5Other food* -0.5 -0.9 2.6 0.9 1.3 -0.1 8.5 9.6Food -0.1 0.0 0.0 -0.8 0.6 0.4 4.2 4.2R: Rural; U:Urban@ rural is deflated using CPI-AL (food) 1993-94=100 and Urban is deflated using CPI-IW (food) 1993-94=100;#pulses, milk, egg, meat and fish*Edible oils, beverages, sugar, salt and spicesAnother factor is the cost of cultivation. The prices of various inputs havegone up. The cost of fuel and fertilisers has gone up because of high internationaloil prices combined with exchange rate depreciation. The dominant part of the costof cultivation is labour. This is particularly so in our set up with the preponderanceof small holdings, which are less amenable to mechanisation. Agricultural wageshave shown a sustained increase since the mid-2000s. Even after accounting forinflation, real wage increase has been significantly positive. Non-agricultural wagestoo have shown similar increases in rural areas.There are several explanations why rural wages have increased. Oneexplanation is that socially inclusive public policy such as Mahatma GandhiNational Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) has set a floor to ruralwages and increased the bargaining power of the work force. It is not to argue thatrural wage increase is not desirable as real wages remained stagnant for quite sometime. Admittedly, when GDP was rising faster, real wage increase could besomewhat benign, but real wage increase continued to remain significant even asGDP growth decelerated. Thus the wage catch up period seems to have overshoteconomic growth cycle (Chart 5).6Chart 5: Input cost and food inflation (Per cent)Note: Series is smoothed using 3 month moving average.Input cost includes  that of electricity, fertiliser & pesticide, diesel andagricultural wagesAs students of economics you know very well that the increase in wages ifnot commensurate with productivity gains could be inflationary. Our food economyexperienced a cost shock, which was reinforced by sustained wage increasesbuttressing demand. As supply did not increase commensurately, prices rose at amore than desirable level. While stylised facts may point towards the aboveconjecture, as economists you could test this formally in different ways. I attempteda simple structural vector auto regression (SVAR) of three variables of food price,2material input price and rural wages with rainfall as an exogenous control variable.The results show that material input cost has a sharp positive impact on foodinflation. Similarly wages have a significant positive impact. However, the impactof wages is  gradual, but more persistent than material cost. Now let me turn to therole of monetary policy.2 Estimated with monthly data from 1994: April to 2013: November; material costincludes prices of electricity, fertiliser & pesticide, and diesel.7How should monetary policy respond to food inflation? From textbooks welearn that monetary policy should look through supply shocks such as a food priceincrease. But from experience we know that if the supply shock is persistent andbecomes structural it will be a mistake for policy not to respond to it. For example,many central banks accommodated the oil price shock of the 1970s judging it to bea temporary supply shock. This was a major factor in subsequent worldwideinflation. The actual policy decision, however, may not be as simple andstraightforward as that.Another layer of complexity is added to this process by the state of inflationexpectations in the economy. If inflation expectations are low and well anchored,the inflationary impact of a supply shock may turn out to be transitory; this isbecause wages normally do not react to such inflation. However, if inflationexpectations are high and not so well anchored even a temporary supply shockcould have an adverse impact on expectations and hence the medium-term inflationoutcome.We have seen it recently. As the global economy recovered from recessionin 2009, commodity prices, particularly food and oil prices rebounded raisingheadline inflation in many countries. However, headline inflation soon moderatedin many advanced economies, as inflation expectations remained well anchored,besides significant negative output gap. Of course it is difficult to measure andinterpret inflation expectations in a developing country like ours. However, theRBI’s quarterly household inflation expectations surveys conducted in select urbancentres suggest that inflation expectations in India have remained elevated in3double digits for quite some time now.  The broad consensus in policy analysis isthat while one could look through the first round direct impact of supply shockinduced inflation, policy should respond to the second round effects so that theinflation process does not get generalised. “…the direct role of monetary policy in3 Please seehttp://www.rbi.org.in/scripts/PublicationsView.aspx?id=15423 for the latest results ofthe Inflation Expectation Survey of Households.8combating food price pressures is limited, but in the face of sustained high food4inflation, monetary action may still be warranted to anchor inflation expectations.”To sum up, the nature and composition of food inflation has changed in therecent years. As per capita income has increased the demand for food has shiftedtowards protein, fruits and vegetables. As supply response has not been adequate,there have been price pressures. In addition, the agricultural sector experiencedcost-push both in terms of increasing price of material inputs and labour.Let me conclude with some thoughts on the way forward so that the foodeconomy does not pose a major constraint on the path of non-inflationary growththat could be sustained over the medium- to long-term.First, there is substantial wastage of agricultural produce, particularlyperishables like fruits and vegetables which needs to be minimised by improvingthe supply chain logistics by setting up cold chains and processing facility atproducing clusters.Second, there is a need to further liberalise agricultural trade by modifyingagricultural produce marketing committee (APMC) Acts by state governments andeven exempting perishables like fruits and vegetables from the provisions ofAPMC to give wider access to both producers and traders for better pricediscovery.Third, over the medium term supply can be improved in a non-inflationarymanner by augmenting productivity. One important way of productivity expansionis through greater mechanisation.  However, dominance of small size of landholdings puts a constraint on the choice of technology. Hence contract farming andleasing of farmland while protecting the ownership rights of small landholdersshould be facilitated to enhance production and productivity.Fourth, from the demand side dispensation of social welfare benefits throughcash transfer would help not only in rationalising demand for food products but4 Subbarao, D., (2011), “The Challenges of Food Inflation”, Presidential Address at the AnnualConference of the Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing at Hyderabad, November 22.9also in containing the  distortionary effect on the labour market resulting in a moreeconomic use of the labour supply.Finally, while the major policy actions to augment food supply may not bein the domain of monetary policy, it may have to perform a careful balancing act sothat a sharp action does not choke off supply response and a weak response hardensinflationary expectations.Thank you once again for your kind attention and for inviting me to deliverthis prestigious lecture which has been a privilege.10
