The Global Economy and Financial MarketsStatement by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India and Leader of theIndian Delegation to the International Monetary and Financial Committee(Dubai, Sunday, September 21, 2003)Mr. Chairman,The Global Economy and Financial MarketsOutlook, Risks and Policy Responses1. There have been several welcome developments in the global environment since wemet in last April.  To our relief, several uncertainties relating to Iraq war, impact of SARSand volatility in oil prices have turned out to be short-term and transitory in nature.Hostilities in Iraq have ended earlier than expected.  Reflecting the cessation of hostilities, oilprices reverted back to lower levels although they have rebounded somewhat thereafter. Theimpact of SARS has also been   successfully contained. Financial markets, which were in astate of flux, especially equity markets, have also rebounded in many countries. Interest ratesin several countries have continued to decline to historically low levels. With the recedingglobal risks, financing conditions for the emerging markets have eased considerably andspreads for many countries have declined significantly.  Despite these favourabledevelopments, the world economic outlook continues to be fragile and weighed down bydownside risks.  Labour market conditions continue to be soft. Data on industrial productionand trade growth indicate marked slowdown. Rise in oil prices in the recent weeks is alsoworrisome. Investment activity in major industrial countries is yet to show a decisiveturnaround, although it is heartening to note that signs of pick-up in growth in the US arediscernible, of late.2. During our last meeting in Washington, it was expected that the global recovery couldresume in the second-half of the year if the war in Iraq was short. While the growthperformance of the Asian region, the Middle East, CIS countries, the African countries andthe Latin American countries has shown resilience, in view of the  lack of sustained recoveryin the industrialised countries, several new uncertainties have arisen. It is not clear as to whatextent the US dollar would depreciate and how the global economy would adjust to that.  It isdifficult to say as to how and when global macroeconomic imbalances would get corrected.Low inflation combined with weak global recovery has increased the risk of deflation inseveral industrial countries.3. While faster global recovery may be the immediate global concern, there is also aneed to address the structural issues so as to place the global recovery on a sustainable path.In spite of large cross currency movements, misalignments continue to persist in the face ofthe continued global imbalances. In this context, further easing of monetary policy andstronger structural reforms in the euro area have assumed critical importance. Despite thelimits set by the Growth and Stability pact on the permissible extent of fiscal expansion,cyclical expansion may be fully allowed, at least, to neutralise the impact of shortfall inrevenue realisation in the face of an economic slowdown.  If the sources of global growth arenot diversified across regions and if countries continue to rely on the US demand to increasetheir exports and thereby grow faster, the case for US depreciation would become stronger.Rebalancing of growth dependence, therefore, would be critical to contain volatility in keyexchange rates.14. Several emerging market economies have been contending with the challenge arisingfrom current account surpluses and pressures on the exchange rate to appreciate.  Largereserve accumulation by some Asian emerging market economies, in a way, reflects theirlack of confidence in the international financial architecture. The improved reserve positionof emerging market economies will surely provide “self insurance”, giving the necessaryflexibility for exchange rate management. As the duration of the global slowdown becomesmore prolonged, fiscal and public debt problem of many countries could intensify further.Fiscal adjustment, though necessary, would have to be weighed carefully and is bestcalibrated with the pace of global recovery.5. Against the backdrop of several adverse developments including severe drought,uncertain global environment and considerable hardening of oil prices, the Indian economyperformed reasonably well during 2002-03. The growth rate of the Indian economy at 4.3 percent, though lower than expected, was one of the highest in the world. This indicates thegrowing resilience acquired by the Indian economy over the years. With a good monsoon sofar this year, a strong recovery in agricultural output is expected.  The output for theindustrial sector is expected to be reinforced by the renewal of agricultural activity, theabiding strength of export growth and the improved environment for new investments asindicated by a surge in the production of capital goods and non-oil imports.  Overall, theeconomy is expected to perform much better in the current year. The growth process wouldbe facilitated by benign inflationary conditions, adequate liquidity coupled with soft interestrates and strong external sector.  As a result of various structural reforms, the Indian financialsystem is increasingly becoming more sound, stable and efficient. The overall policyenvironment has fostered macroeconomic stability, and generated optimism regarding themedium-term. The main challenge in macroeconomic management today is reducing the highfiscal deficit and an improvement in the quality of fiscal adjustment. The recent enactment ofthe Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act is a step in this  direction,which will put in place the institutional structure for greater transparency in fiscal operationsas well as a phased decline in the Central Government's borrowings.  This will "crowd in"private sector investments for the achievement of self-sustaining, accelerated growth.6. Sri Lanka has entered into a new phase of social and economic revival with the returnof peace and a wave of new economic reforms.  Progress is being made towardsconsolidation of macro economic stability and acceleration of economic growth.  Suchpolicies are being complemented under the Fund/Bank supported PRGF/EFF and PRSCprograms.  The economy of Sri Lanka is expected to grow by 6 per cent this year andinflation is on a declining trend.  External reserve position has also improved.  Economicprospects having improved significantly, investor confidence has been growing.7. The approval of the PRGF for SDR 347 million for Bangladesh in June 2003 is asatisfying event this year.  The country is expected to improve upon its already bettereconomic performance, continue strengthening of external sector and make further progresstowards structural reforms particularly addressed to poverty alleviation.  The country hasdeveloped a competent and laudable economic management. The Fund guidance on reformsin a number of areas has been extremely valuable.8. It is refreshing to see increasing recognition being paid to the non-quantifiable but acritical factor to the Bhutanese development goals viz., Gross National Happiness (GNH).Factoring GNH, at least implicitly, as an objective of IFIs, could be explored.2Importance of the Doha Development Agenda9. As one of the founding members of the GATT (1947) and the WTO (1995), Indiaremains firmly committed towards the multilateral approach to trade relations. India iscommitted to ensure that the sectors in which developing countries enjoy a comparativeadvantage are adequately opened up to international trade. The November 2001 declarationof the Fourth Ministerial Conference in Doha, Qatar, provides the mandate for negotiationson a range of subjects. The progress so far has been reviewed at the recently concluded fifthMinisterial Conference in Cancun, Mexico.  The conference reflected the diversity of viewsand positions, particularly  in relation to agricultural subsidies and the Singapore issues.10. We believe that once the concerns of the developing countries are adequatelyreflected in the discussions, it will pave the way for rapid development in multilateral tradingenvironment. In the context of developed countries there is a need for reduction of high tariffand subsidies to agriculture, providing effective market access, facilitating trade in services,and, whenever necessary, giving effect to the clauses extending “Special and Differentialtreatment” to developing countries in the implementation of these WTO Agreements.  Thereis little doubt that potential gains from free and equitable multilateral trading system faroutweighs the costs,  and, therefore, it is of utmost importance that the internationalcommunity endeavour to reach a mutually agreed agenda within the WTO framework.Strengthening IMF Surveillance and Promoting International Financial StabilityEnhancing economic performance, resilience to crises and financial stability through IMFsurveillance11. A major initiative towards preventing crisis has been enhancing the effectiveness ofsurveillance, and incorporation of a fresh perspective to the Fund’s analysis and policyrecommendations. Considerable work has already been done with a view to preventing crisis,including the emphasis on public and external debt sustainability assessment, analyses basedon financial soundness indicators (also known as Macro-Prudential Indicators) and balance-sheet weaknesses, preparation of ROSCs and reporting of political economic issues in thestaff report. However, several more steps are required to improve the efficacy of thesurveillance mechanism. First, the vulnerability assessment exercise for the emerging marketeconomies needs to be improved. Secondly, early warning system models today are far fromperfect and suffer from high false-to-signal ratios.12. As regards strengthening of surveillance, we have come to a stage when we have allthe tools available, but there are still doubts about their effectiveness for a variety of reasons.We should recognize that origins of crises in the past were also in the industrial countries andadvanced financial centers leading to sudden capital flow reversals. While markets havestarted to learn to discriminate among countries, there is still a long way to go.  Therefore,  insurveillance, the Fund has a  significant role in building confidence of both borrowers andlenders, which is important for an orderly market behavior. We are indeed happy to note thatthe Management has proposed an even handed approach to the Fund’s surveillance in thisregard.  Secondly, the fundamental question relating to Fund’s surveillance is what purpose itserves and to whom it is meant for. The objective is no doubt to identify vulnerabilities and3pre-empt crises from occurring or minimizing severity of such crises, when they occur.  Someclarity and transparency about the target of surveillance would be in order. In this respect, theFund has to take a view on whether the Fund’s assessment is meant for national governmentsin its role as a confidential advisor, or for the market players who in any case rely onalternative avenues  for assessing publicly available information.  It needs to be mentionedthat immediate market reactions to sensitive information may have serious implications onmembers' efforts to address a problem in hand or their plans for addressing an impendingcrisis. Our view is that the Fund should preserve its role as a confidential adviser and theFund’s assessment should be to help national authorities in reducing the recognition lag andrecommending measures that could help in containing vulnerability. However, we are notopposing the dissemination of relevant information giving due consideration to the specificcircumstances that members and the Fund are dealing with.The Role of the CCL and precautionary arrangements in Crisis Prevention13. The Contingent Credit Line (CCL)  was expected to play a critical role to serve as aprecautionary line of defense, reducing vulnerability and bolstering investor confidence ineligible emerging market economies. Unlike other existing Fund facilities, the objectivebehind CCL was to prevent crises by making available adequate liquidity upfront to amember with sound fundamentals so as to deal with the pressure of contagion. CCL,however, has not been used by any member so far because of a number of concerns,including: (a) the entry problem – i.e. the fear that access under CCL would convey anegative signal to the market, (b) the exit problem- i.e. the uncertainty about the withdrawalof eligibility, (c) insufficient automaticity, and (d) stringent pre-qualifying norms. The veryfact that no country has so far requested the Fund for using CCL resources suggest that it didnot serve the intended purpose and it should be allowed to expire in November 2003.  Whilewe support the option of allowing the facility to expire, however, if there is a distinctpossibility of evolving workable strategies in the near future, we are willing to go along witha consensus for further review.14. The existing precautionary arrangements could be suitably modified so as to enhancethe capacity of the members to prevent capital account crises.  We suggest that since theobjective behind a modified precautionary arrangement is to prevent a capital account crisis,the access limit under the first purchase must be large (i.e. a top-down staircase pattern ofdisbursement rather than the present bottom-up staircase pattern) and the performance criteriamust be relevant to deal with a capital account crisis (implying less emphasis on conventionalperformance targets and complete avoidance of the saw-tooth problem).  Since the IMFwould endorse the policy framework of a country before entering into a precautionaryarrangement, repeated programme interruption and subsequent granting of waivers wouldneed be avoided. Overemphasis on “safeguarding Fund resources” would reduce theeffectiveness of a precautionary arrangement by subjecting the programme to performancecriteria that would not be critical to deal with the capital account crisis.Progress with Crisis Resolution Initiatives15. Efforts are also underway to develop Collective Action Clauses (CACs) to augment amarket-led process for restructuring of sovereign bonds.  It is heartening to note that rapid4progress has been made in promoting the inclusion of CACs in international sovereign bondissuances.16. We welcome the positive developments relating to the development of a voluntaryCode of Conduct to deal with debt restructuring . We urge that the Code should be developedin full and voluntary agreement of creditors and debtors and neither a mechanistic nor aprescriptive or standardized approach should be followed.17. In recent years, increasing attention has been accorded towards development andimplementation of standards and codes to strengthen the international financial architecture.The IMF and the World Bank have taken the initiative to monitor and assess membercountries’ financial sectors as also their observance of standards and codes through Reportson the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs).  In future, ROSCs will help nationalauthorities develop their own reform plans, assess compliance with international standardsand codes, and serve, if published, as a signal of their policies’ enhanced transparency. Theywill also provide helpful inputs for IMF surveillance and technical assistance.Accelerating Poverty Reduction and Strengthening Sustainable Economic Growth inLow income countriesMillennium Development Goals, the Monterrey Consensus, and progress with the PRSPapproach: the role of the IMF18. Monterrey has generated consensus on the issues that need to be addressed toeffectively alleviate poverty. This consensus needs to be transformed into concrete actionurgently. A comprehensive and transparent system to monitor progress towards fulfilling theMillennium Development Goals (MDGs) of poverty reduction, sustained economic growth,and promotion of sustainable development would need to be developed. The IMF hasattempted to achieve this through two programmes- the PRSP and the HIPC initiative. ThePRSP has been instrumental in addressing medium term policy reforms to promote broad-based growth and reduce poverty. The initial experience with PRSP approach underlined theneed for (i) improving public expenditure management (PEM) systems, (ii) buildingcapacities for monitoring and evaluation, and (iii) strengthening and institutionalisingparticipatory processes. There is a need for working with other donors for improving theeffectiveness of aid in these countries.  A strengthened PRSP approach will certainly emergeas the crucial link between national public accounts, donor support, development outcomesneeded to meet the MDGs, the operational basis for Fund concessional lending and for debtrelief under the Enhanced Heavily Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative.19. While an important constraint in improving low-income countries' economic growthis inadequacy of finance, this problem could be mitigated by ensuring their access to theprivate capital also.  Institutional change along with appropriate economic policies are mostcritical. Strong institutions could provide necessary support that cuts across level of economicdevelopment, country grouping, and geographical and historical endowments. However, thereare genuine uncertainties surrounding as to what constitute an appropriate institutional reformagenda. Keeping in view the country-specific imperatives, it is felt that case-by-case studycould be the preferred approach to initiate institutional reforms. This would allow appropriateinnovation and adaptation to suit the local conditions.5Minimising Vulnerability to Exogenous Shocks20. The role of Fund Assistance for countries facing exogenous shocks can hardly beoveremphasised, given the fact that these shocks can have negative impact on developingcountries’ growth, macroeconomic stability, debt sustainability and poverty ratios. Theimpressive gains made by developing countries in recent years can be considerably erodedwhen they face such exogenous shocks. It is a welcome step on part of the Fund to include asystematic focus in Surveillance and fund assistance programmes towards tackling theadverse effects of exogenous shocks, with a view to reducing response delays. Also welcomeis the recent initiatives to strengthen existing instruments with the Fund, e.g., EmergencyNatural Disaster Assistance, Compensatory Financing Facility (CFF), Stand by credittranches, and augmentation of PRGF programmes.21. We believe that there is a clear need to establish a  broad menu of instruments, andapply the appropriate instrument depending on the nature of the shock, based on country-specific requirements. Sufficient flexibility is needed on part of multilateral agencies to meetthe financing and adjustment needs of low income countries affected by exogenous shocks.Enhanced financing may be warranted depending on the intensity of shocks.Progress with the HIPC Initiative22. The HIPC initiative has existed for some time, with the prime motive of alleviatingthe unsustainable external debt burden of low income countries. Despite a commendablecoordinated programme of various multilateral/bilateral creditors, HIPC initiatives faceddifficulties due to inadequacy of resource, global economic slowdown, delay inimplementation of policy reforms in highly indebted countries, and litigations by non-participating creditors for recovery of dues.  There is a critical need for recognising countryspecific constraints and work out an agenda for reducing the debt burden of HIPC countries.However, debt restructuring in these countries must look beyond outright write-off of debtand explore innovative measures such as debt-equity swaps, use of export proceeds to donorcountries to retire debt, and stepping up investment opportunities in these countries.Progress ReportsIMF Quotas and Governance23. Recent measures to increase administrative and technical support to the ExecutiveDirectors of the developing and transition countries are welcome. However, the present quotaformulas do not reflect a position that is truly representative of a country’s profile in theworld economy. Despite increasing recognition of this fact, the consensus to bring about therequired reform continues to elude us. We, therefore, believe that the responsibility restsprimarily with the developed countries who, as the majority shareholders, must demonstratethe will to reform the international financial architecture in line with the changed realities.624. The quota review exercise in future should ensure adequate, equitable and appropriaterepresentation of developing countries. Such a broader representation of the developingcountries would enhance the acceptability, ownership and effectiveness of the IMF’sprograms and policies. While arriving at the quotas, the GDP must be computed on a PPPbasis, as this is a more representative measure to define the relative position of a country inthe world economy. Lack of data availability has often been cited as one of the significanthurdles to the adoption of the PPP based approach. We suggest that the Fund  should work onhow this deficiency could be satisfactorily addressed.Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism25. The Indian government vehemently opposes all forms of terrorism and all activitiesabetting it.  We fully endorse the UN Security Council’s Resolutions on combating thefinancing of terrorism (CFT). We restate our commitment to fight against the abuses of thefinancial system, including money laundering and terrorism financing. In India, we havealready enacted a comprehensive Prevention of Money Laundering Act and there existsadequate legal and institutional framework to address ML&FT. We commend the Fund, theBank, as well as all member countries, for the adoption of a comprehensive single assessmentmethodology for AML/CFT.  Cooperation among FATF, IMF, World Bank and othermultilateral institutions will ultimately lead to more efficient use of resources and a better co-ordination of the policies, taking into account country-specific problems for combating thismenace.26. While we would like to await the full report of the pilot program for detailedevaluation and discussion of the future road map, we have noted the observations made in theMD’s report that the assessments completed or underway reveal not only a great deal ofpriority attached to meeting international standards by authorities but also a wide range ofcompliance levels.27. In the countries in my constituency, adequate legal and institutional frameworks toaddress the money laundering and financing of terrorism are in place. In India, this has beenfurther strengthened by enacting a comprehensive Prevention of Money Laundering Act. ThisAct had factored in the relevant portions of the FATF-40 recommendations. India, an activemember of the APG (a FATF-style Regional Body), has completed and sent in FATF’s Self-Assessment Exercise on the Eight Special Recommendations.  Membership of FATF is in anadvanced stage of processing with the FATF Secretariat. In order to strengthen internationalcooperation, exchange of information and outreach, India is also in the process of upgradingits Economic Intelligence Bureau into a full-fledged FIU.  We had attended the last twoplenary sessions of the Egmont Group with Observer status.Independent Evaluation Office28. The establishment of an Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) in July 2001 by theIMF marks an important step towards enhancing the transparency of activities and economicpolicy formulations.  IEO has produced extremely insightful reports on the IMF’s role in therecent capital account crises and fiscal adjustment in Fund supported programs, providingobjective assessments of arguably some of the most controversial and contentious issuesrelated to the functioning of the Fund. We are impressed by the iterative process by which the7IEO continues to improve upon the quality of its work, and the Fund, particularly theManaging Director is responding to suggestions and benefiting from them.8
