Development of Money Market in IndiaI am grateful to the Andhra Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to deliver the FifthJ.V.Somayajulu Memorial Endowment Lecture. I consider it a great privilege and an honour,since luminaries like the Honourable Shri.R.Venkatraman, Shri.C.Subramaniam,Shri.N.Rangachary and Dr.Abid Hussain have delivered the earlier lectures. Mr.Somayajuluwas a rare combination of being both a theoretician and a practitioner in the field ofeconomics. He devoted a great deal of his life not only towards developmental activities butwas also associated with a variety of social, literary and cultural organisations. He was ofcourse a special person for Telugus in Chennai city. He was a reputed stockbroker whobecame the President of the Madras Stock Exchange. It may, therefore, not be out of place if,Recently, a number of measures were undertaken by us in Reserve Bank of India(RBI) to widen, deepen and integrate the different segments of the financial market, viz.,money market, debt market, especially Government Securities market, and foreign exchangemarket. In the past, I have spoken at length elsewhere on the developments and agenda forreform of foreign exchange and debt markets. Hence, I will speak on the development ofAfter explaining the functions and features of the money market, I will briefly recountthe evolution of money market in India. Significant reforms in the money market in the‘nineties and current functioning will then be detailed. I will thereafter present a tentativeagenda for further action and will elaborate   the rationale behind actions that we arecontemplating and, how we plan to go about it. The concluding part will be a broad statementThe money market is a market for short-term funds, i.e., up to one-year maturity.Thus, it covers money, and financial assets that are close substitutes for money. The moneyFirst, it should provide an equilibrating mechanism to even out demand for and supplySecond, the money market should provide a focal point for central bank interventionThird, it should provide reasonable access to providers and users of short-term fundsRBI is the most important constituent in the money market. By virtue of theimplication for the conduct of monetary policy, money market comes within the directpurview of RBI regulation. The primary aim of the Reserve Bank of India’s operations in themoney market is to ensure that the liquidity and short-term interest rates are maintained atlevels consistent with the monetary policy objectives of maintaining price stability, ensuringadequate flow of credit to productive sectors of the economy and bringing about orderlyconditions in the foreign exchange market. The Reserve Bank of India influences liquidityand interest rates through a number of operating instruments, viz., cash reserve requirementsof banks, operation of refinance schemes, conduct of open market operations,  repotransactions, changes in the Bank Rate, and at times through foreign exchange swapoperations.to fulfill their borrowing and investment requirements at an efficient market clearing price.for influencing liquidity and general level of interest rates in the economy.of short-term funds.market is generally expected to perform three broad functions.Functions and Featureson the role of the money market in the conduct of monetary policy in India.Money Market in India now.today, I  speak on ‘Development of Money Market in India’.Mr. Chairman and friends,Evolution of Money Market in IndiaThe Committee to Review the Working of the Monetary System (Chairman :Shri.Sukhamoy Chakravarty) was the first to make several recommendations in 1985 for thedevelopment of money market. As a follow-up, the RBI set up a Working Group on MoneyMarket under the Chairmanship of Shri.N.Vaghul, which submitted its Report in 1987. Basedon the recommendations, RBI initiated a number of measures in the ‘eighties to widen andFirst, in order to impart liquidity to money market instruments and help thedevelopment of secondary market in such instruments, the Discount and Finance House ofIndia (DFHI) was set up as a money market institution jointly by the Reserve Bank of India,public sector banks and financial institutions in 1988. RBI has since divested its shareholdingSecond, to increase the range of money market instruments, Commercial Paper,Certificates of Deposit, and Interbank Participation Certificates were introduced in 1988-89.Third, to enable price discovery, the interest rate ceiling on call money was freed instages from October 1988. As a first step, operations of DFHI in the call/notice moneymarket were freed from the interest rate ceiling in 1988 and in May 1989, the interest rateceiling was completely withdrawn, for all operators in the call/notice money market and oninterbank term money, rediscounting of commercial bills and Interbank ParticipationCertificates without risk. Currently, all the money market interest rates are by and largeIn line with the deregulation and liberalisation policies of ‘nineties, financial sectorreform was undertaken in our country early in the reform cycle. Naturally, reform in themoney market formed a part of the reform process. I will first cover reform in  the markets,both call money and term money. I will then take up market instruments – CP, CDs, TreasuryBills, and repos. From the RBI’s point of view also, apart from T-Bills, RBI repos andrefinance are important. Finally, money market mutual funds are referred to as another recentThe call/notice money market was predominantly an interbank market until 1990,except for UTI and LIC, which were allowed to operate as lenders since 1971. The RBI’spolicy relating to entry into the call/notice money market was gradually liberalised to widenand provide more liquidity, although Vaghul Committee had recommended that the call andnotice money market should be restricted to banks. In the absence of adequate avenues fordeployment of short-term surpluses of non-bank institutions, easier norms were announced bythe RBI for increasing the participants in the call and notice money market. Entities thatcould provide evidence of surplus funds have been permitted to route their lendings throughPDs. This was also meant to further help corporates, who had just moved to the term lendingdiscipline from the earlier system of cash credit, with large balances to deploy their funds inthe short-term and get some return. The minimum size of operations for routing transactionshas also been gradually reduced from Rs.20 crore to Rs.3 crore.  Reducing the minimum sizeof operations has served to increase the number of participants, provide greater flexibilityThus, as of now, broadly speaking, banks and PDs are operating as both lenders and2though it has not resulted in any substantial increase in the liquidity in the market.Call Money Marketdevelopment.Reform in the Money Market in the Ninetiesdetermined by market forces.There is a wide range of instruments now as will be explained later.and is only a minority shareholder now.deepen the money market. The main initiatives were:borrowers, while a large number of financial institutions and mutual funds are operating onlyas lenders. The behaviour among banks in the call money market is not uniform. There aresome banks, mainly foreign banks and new private sector banks, which are active borrowersand some public sector banks that are major lenders. As will be explained later, the RBI hasbeen a major player in the call/notice money market and has been moderating liquidity andvolatility in the market through repos and refinance operations and changes in the proceduresA reference rate in the overnight call money market has emerged recently through theThe term money market in India until recently has been somewhat dormant. Statutorypre-emptions on interbank liabilities, regulated interest rate structure, cash credit system offinancing, high degree of volatility in the call money rates, availability of sector specificrefinance, inadequate asset-liability management (ALM) discipline among banks and scarcityof money market instruments of varying maturities were usually cited as factors that inhibitedRBI has gradually removed most of these constraints over the years. While there hasbeen some activity in the term money market in the recent period, after the above reforms, theCP is a money market instrument, issued in the form of a promissory note, by highlyrated corporates for a fixed maturity in a discounted form. CP was introduced in India in1989 to enable highly rated corporate borrowers to diversify their sources of short-termborrowing and also to provide an additional instrument to investors. Terms and conditions forissuing CP like eligibility, modes of issue, maturity periods, denominations and issuanceprocedure, etc., are stipulated by the Reserve Bank. There are no interest rate restrictions onCP.  With experience, refinements were made to the instrument by removing/easing numberof restrictions on the maturity and size of CP, requirement of minimum current ratio,restoration of working capital finance , etc. Corporates, PDs and SDs are eligible for issuingCP for a minimum period of maturity of 15 days and maximum period of 1 year. It isThe issuance of CP has been generally observed to be related inversely to the moneyWhile deposits kept with banks are not ordinarily tradable, when such deposits aremobilised by a bank by issue of a CD, then such deposits get securitised and, therefore,In India, CDs were first introduced in 1989. The terms and conditions for issuing CDslike eligibility, maturity periods, size, transferability, applicability of reserve requirements,etc., are stipulated by the Reserve Bank. CDs in general represent relatively a high costliability.  Hence, banks resort to this source generally when the deposit growth is sluggish butTreasury BillsTreasury Bills are instruments of short-term borrowing of the government and play avital role in cash management of the government.  Being risk-free, their yields at varied3credit demand is high.become tradable. Thus, CDs represent essentially securitised and tradable term deposits.Certificates of Depositmarket rates.significant to note that there is no lock-in period for CP.Commercial Papervolumes  have not yet become significant.the development of term money market.Term Money MarketNational Stock Exchange and Reuters.for maintenance of cash reserve ratio.maturities serve as short-term benchmarks and help pricing varied floating rate products inthe market.  Treasury Bills market has been the most preferred by central banks for marketinterventions to influence liquidity and short-term interest rates, generally combined withrepos/reverse repos.  Hence, development of this market is very crucial for effective openFor record, let me say a few words about history of Treasury Bills. There was anactive Treasury Bills market in the Bank’s history before 1960’s when 91 day Treasury Billswere auctioned weekly and the bills were widely held in the market. Two importantdevelopments in the early period should be mentioned.  First, in mid-1950’s, the system of hoc 91 day Treasury Bills was introduced to replenish on automatic basis, the CentralGovernment’s cash balance with the RBI to restore to its minimum required level, whichopened up the era of uncontrolled monetisation of Central Government’s deficit.  Secondly,the auction system for issue of 91 day Treasury Bills to the market was replaced by the Tapsale of bills in mid-1960’s.  Though the Tap bill rates were varied consistent with changes inthe Bank Rate till 1974, the discount rate on ad hoc and Tap bills continued unchanged sincethen at the uniform rate of 4.6 per cent.  Combined with the regime of administered interestrates, there was no congenial environment for  Treasury Bills market to develop. However,the interest in development of Treasury bills market came up with the introduction of 182 dayTreasury Bill on auction basis in November 1986 and the constitution of DFHI as a moneymarket institution, along with other steps taken to develop the money market.  182 dayTreasury Bill  was replaced by introduction of 364 day bills on fortnightly auction since April1992 as part of reform measures.  Subsequently, 91-day bills were introduced on auction inJanuary 1993.  The parallel existence of 91 day Tap Treasury Bills and ad hoc Treasury Billscontinued till March 1997.  To enable finer cash management of the government and toprovide alternative avenue for state governments and some foreign central banks to investsurplus funds, 14-day intermediate Treasury Bills and auction bills were introduced in AprilReverting to the current situation, the Treasury Bill issues now consist of  weekly 14day and 91-day bill auctions and 364 day bill auctions on a fortnightly basis combined with14-day intermediate bills available for state governments and foreign central banks. I wouldsubmit that there have been, recently, very significant initiatives by RBI in this area. Theauction procedures were streamlined to have notified amounts for all auctions and to acceptnon-competitive bids outside the notified amounts.  A uniform price auction for 91 day billshas also been introduced as an experimental measure. Reserve Bank’s purchases and holdingof Treasury Bills have become totally voluntary with the discontinuation of ad hoc and Tap91 day Treasury Bills and extinguishment of 14 day intermediate bills on rediscounting.Another significant recent development has been the addition of Treasury Bills in the openmarket sale window of the Bank.  In brief, development of Treasury Bills market is at theheart of money market development and hence the Reserve Bank has been paying specialAs in the case of other instruments, the demand for Treasury Bills is also inverselyrelated to call money market rates.  The supply is adjusted taking duly into account thedemand conditions as also the short-term needs of the Central Government.  In 1998-99, theavailability of fixed rate repos at 8 per cent since August 1998 caused some disinterest inTreasury Bills; with the auction rates more aligned with the market recently, the interest in41997.adTreasury Bills has significantly revived.attention and continuously reviewing the development of Treasury Bills market.market operations.Ready Forward TransactionsRepo refers to a transaction in which a participant acquires immediately funds byselling securities and simultaneously agreeing for repurchase of the same or similar securitiesafter specified time at a given price.  The transaction combines, elements of both a securitiespurchase/sale operation and also a money market  borrowing/lending operation.  Typically itsignifies lending on a collateralised basis.  The terms of contract is in terms of a ‘repo rate’representing the money market borrowing/lending rate.  As in the case of other instruments,repos also help equilibrating between demand and supply of short-term funds. Internationally,repurchase agreement (Repo) is a versatile and perhaps the most popular money marketinstrument.In our market, two types of repos are currently in operation - interbank repos  and theRBI repos. Interbank repos are permitted under regulated conditions. After the irregularitiesin securities transactions in 1992, eligible participants and instruments have generally beenNow all Government securities have been made eligible for repo. Further, besidesbanks, Primary Dealers are allowed to undertake both repo/reverse repo transactions.  Non-bank participants have also been allowed recently to lend money through reverse repos toother eligible participants. In terms of instruments, the repos have also been permitted in PSUbonds and private corporate debt securities provided they are held in dematerialised form in adepository and the transactions are done in recognised stock exchanges.  However, asexplained later, this can be operationalised after Government issues a clarification regardingapplicability of stamp duties on dematerialised instruments.  In the latest statement onmonetary and credit policy, the RBI removed the restriction of a minimum period of 3 daysfor inter bank repo transactions.  It is hoped that this would further enable banks and otherRBI has been using its repo instrument effectively for absorbing excess liquidity andfor infusing funds to ease the liquidity.  The repo rate set by the Bank has also more recentlyThe repo rate curr ently in a wayserves the purpose of a floor and the Bank Rate/Refinance Rate somewhat as a cap for theRepo auctions were conducted for varied periods ranging between a day and 14 daysbetween 1992 and early 1995, when the auctions were discontinued due to lack of demand onaccount of tightness in the market.  Auctions on a 3 to 4 day cycle were introduced again inearly 1997.  Daily repos of thee-four day cycle on a fixed rate basis was introduced inNovember 1997 to bring about orderly conditions in the foreign exchange market.  The fixedThe monetary and credit policy for the first half of 1998-99 proposed to use bothfixed interest and auction based repos, as appropriate.  It also stated that in addition to thecurrent three-day and four-day repos, RBI will, in due course, use one-day repos (includingreverse repos) to absorb (or infuse) liquidity into the system.  Also, RBI will have toconsider use of auction repos at an appropriate stage. These are all intentions or optionsannounced by RBI to demonstrate transparency and interactive or proactive approach toRefinance from Reserve Bank of IndiaRedis count/Refinance is used by central banks to relieve liquidity shortages in the5markets.repo rate is adjusted to reflect the policy objectives on short-term interest rate.money market to operate within an interest rate corridor.become a sort of signaling rate along with  Bank Rate. participants in the repo market to adjust their liquidity in a more flexible manner.restricted but liberalised gradually. RBI repos are used for absorption/injection of liquidity.Repurchase Agreements (Repos)/system, control monetary and credit conditions and direct credit to selective sectors.  Thesystem of refinance provided by the RBI to scheduled commercial banks has generally beenfunctioning as an active instrument of monetary and credit regulation in India.  The relativeimportance of this policy instrument in different periods depended upon the degree ofliquidity in the banking system and the need for ensuring credit flow to select sectors.  Thequantum and cost of refinance do play an important role in the liquidity management. Thefundamental principle is that refinance facility in terms of both cost and quantum has to beadjusted to reflect the monetary policy stance in response to market conditions and suchfacilities should not be construed as permanent sources of funding from the Reserve Bank.The RBI had used in the past a number of sector specific refinance facilities – food creditrefinance, export credit refinance, government securities refinance, discretionary refinance,standby refinance, etc.  These represented a means of achieving discretionary policyobjectives.  Over the years, the Reserve Bank of India has sought to regulate and graduallyreduce the access to refinance facilities through a combination of lowering/raising the cost ofsuch accommodation and/or regulating the availability in terms of quantum by adjusting theformula for fixation of eligible limits.  With the emergence of the Bank Rate as the signalingrate of monetary policy stance, the present policy has been to keep the refinance rate linked toConsistent with the goal of shifting monetary policy interventions from direct toindirect methods, the objective has been to move towards a general refinance/liquidityadjustment facility and doing away with all sector specific and discretionary refinancefacilities.  Thus, currently, there are only three refinance schemes in operation and availableto banks – export credit refinance, general refinance and special liquidity support facilityagainst investment  made out of RIB funds.  Of these, special liquidity support is purely an Money Market Mutual Funds (MMMFs) were introduced in India in April 1991 toprovide an additional short-term avenue to investors and to bring money market instrumentswithin the reach of individuals.  A Task Force was constituted to examine the broadframework outlined in April 1991 as also the implications of the Scheme.  Based on therecommendations of Task Force constituted for the purpose, detailed scheme of MMMFs wasThe portfolio of MMMFs consists of short-term money market instruments.Investment in such funds provide an opportunity to investors to obtain a yield close to short-term money market rates coupled with adequate liquidity. The RBI has been making severalmodifications to the scheme to make it more flexible and attractive to banks and financialinstitutions.  For instance, the ceiling for raising resources and stipulation regarding minimumsize of MMMFs were done away with and the prescription on limits for investments inindividual instruments was withdrawn except in respect of CP. Recently, in October 1997,MMMFs were permitted to invest in rated corporate bonds and debentures with a residualmaturity of up to one year, within the ceiling existing for CP. The minimum lock in periodThe growth in MMMFs has, however, been less than expected. Though, in principle,approvals had been granted to ten entities, only three MMMFs have been set up, one in theprivate sector and the other two by IDBI and UTI.  The total size of these funds is also notvery large.   It appears that growth in MMMFs can really occur when money market grows in6Money Market Mutual Fundsadvolume and acquires depth – for which a number of initiatives will have to be taken.was also reduced gradually to 15 days, making the scheme more attractive to investors.announced by the Reserve Bank in April 1992.measure slated to be discontinued after March 31, 1999. hoc the Bank Rate.Narasimham Committee on banking sector reform (1998) has provided a frameworkfor reform in the money market also.  RBI has already acted on many of them.  Let mesummarise the recommendations and what we have done so far. The Committee suggestedrestriction of the call money market to banks and PDs, imposing prudential limits forindividual bank’s reliance on call money borrowings, introduction of one-day repos by theReserve Bank of India, withdrawal of the RBI from the primary market in 91-Day T-Bills,access to foreign institutional investors in the T-Bills market, RBI support to the marketthrough Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), free access to bill rediscounts, CP, CDs andMMMFs to non-bank parties, reduction in the minimum period of fixed deposits to 15 daysAs I have already mentioned, some of these recommendations, like the minimummaturity for term deposits, minimum lock-in period for CDs and units of MMMFs haveThe RBI has also circulated draft guidelines for ALM  for banks, which indicatesprudential limits for call borrowings. These guidelines will be operative from April 1, 1999.As I mentioned earlier, three, four-day repos are also being conducted by the Reserve Bankof India currently, and one-day repos will be introduced when the situation so warrants.Banks are now permitted to enter into repos for a minimum period of one day. FIIs are nowpermitted access in the T-Bills market.  We have also increased the number of PDs from 6 to13 and once the new PDs become  operational, there should be reduced scope fordevolvement on the RBI.  The Reserve Bank of India can then phase out its presence from theT-Bills market. Recently, the RBI also offered to sell T-Bills in the secondary market. Theother recommendations of the Narasimham Committee, especially those relating to callmoney market, LAF, etc. have considerable implications for the market and the participantsand the conduct of monetary policy, and will have to be implemented gradually. Mostimportant, implementation will have to be designed and phased in such a manner that existingTo advise us on the development of money market, a Standing Committee on MoneyMarket has been set up by the RBI in 1997. The Committee’s membership includesrepresentation from financial institutions, Indian and foreign banks, public and private sectormutual funds and economists, apart from RBI officials. All major issues are discussed in themeetings of the Standing Committee. In fact, many of the issues that I flag as the agenda forLet me go over in detail some of the substantial issues that are engaging our attentionThe call/notice money market is an interbank market the world over and NarasimhamCommittee recommended that we adopt the same.  Standing Committee on Money Market isalso of the same view. In the past, permission to non-bank institutions in the call moneymarket had been granted since the market did not provide instruments for the deployment ofshort-term surpluses of these institutions at that time, which is not equally true today. Whennon-bank participants, who are free from reserve requirements, are permitted to operate in thecall/term money market, there is some distortion of the signals of liquidity conditions in thesystem. Thus, the banking system has to bear the brunt of the shortage or excess liquidity aswell as the volatility in the flow of funds. Also, non-bank lenders may be in a position toeither create artificial scarcity for funds or exploit situations of tight monetary conditions,7 Interbank Call/Notice/Term Money Marketcurrently.future have already been intensely discussed in the Standing Committee meetings.players will have the flexibility to adjust their asset-liability structures.already been implemented.as also a similar minimum lock-in period for  money market instruments.Agenda For Further ActionTherefore, it is  justifiably held, as announced in the October 1998 review ofmonetary policy, that call, notice and term money market should purely be an inter-bankmarket with additional access only to PDs. Consequently, the infusion/contraction of liquidityin this market will be the prerogative of the Reserve Bank of India. Of course, RBI has toensure that  the exposure of banks and PDs in the call money market are within prudentiallimits.Secondly, as mentioned earlier, phasing out non-bank participants other than PDsfrom the call money market must be implemented gradually in such a manner that theseplayers have time to readjust their asset-liability structures. Non-bank players have to beencouraged to deploy their short-term surpluses in other money market instruments. Forinstance, they can be permitted to borrow and lend freely through repos in both Governmentand non-Government securities before they are phased out of the call/notice/term moneyThirdly, compared to before, there are more instruments now in the money market.The interbank repo market in Government securities has also been picking up. Repos in non-Government debt has not taken off, pending clarification on stamp duties on dematerialisedIn brief, phasing out of non-bank participants from the call/notice/term money marketshould go hand in hand with the development of repo market as also the market for otherThe Narasimham Committee has observed that the RBI support to the market shouldbe through a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) under which the RBI would periodically, ifnecessary, daily, reset its repo  and reverse repo rates which would in a sense provide aCurrently, the RBI uses 3/4-day repos to siphon off liquidity from the system.  Asalready mentioned, liquidity is also made available to banks in the form of refinance at BankRate or rates related to Bank Rate. In addition, liquidity support is available to PDs at theBank Rate.  Thus, in effect, there is an interest rate corridor in the inter-bank call moneymarket with the repo rate effectively operating a floor and the refinance rate acting as the cap.At times, call money rates have breached the repo rate since the repo rate is a  3 – 4 day ratewhereas the call money operates on overnight basis and also because of market uncertaintyand different perceptions in the overnight rates. Once the call/notice/term money market ismade purely inter-bank, it will be the prime responsibility of the RBI to ensure orderlyconditions in interest rate movements in the money market. This can only be done if the RBIThe thrust of the Narasimham Committee recommendation on LAF is the continuouspresence of the Reserve Bank in the money market through the operation of repos window.While repos will be used for absorbing excess liquidity at a given rate (floor) and infusingliquidity into the system through reverse repos at a given rate (cap), the floor and cap rates setby the repo window are expected to provide an effective corridor for the operation of the callmoney market.  Depending upon the stance of the policy to ease or tighten the liquidity, floorand cap rates could be adjusted from time to time. This  kind of approach to short-termliquidity management on a daily basis, raises a number of issues which should be addressedcarefully before putting it into operation.  While on the floor side of the market, the ReserveBank’s repo window has been by and large effectively operating, supply of liquidity at a cap8is continuously  present in the market.reasonable corridor for market play.Liquidity Adjustment Facilitymoney market instruments.securities.markets.thereby distorting the interest rate structure and increasing the volatility in the money market.We will discuss some of the other aspects that are relevant to the establishment ofFirstly, as mentioned  earlier, while  even at present an interest rate corridor operatesbetween the repo rate and the Bank Rate/Refinance rate, this is not totally an automaticliquidity adjustment mechanism since the Reserve Bank may not be providing a perfectlyelastic supply of liquidity at the cap rate.  In other words, eventhough the refinance/liquiditysupport facilities are extended at a given rate of interest, it is not the intention of the bank tosupply any amount of liquidity at that rate. In the present condition of a skewed call/noticemoney market, with a few banks having over-extended positions in the market, elastic supplyof liquidity is fraught with danger. Therefore, there may be a need to place limits both fromSecondly, an elastic supply of liquidity at a given cap rate would imply targeting ofshort-term interest rates irrespective of its impact on quantum variables like reserve money.Thirdly, another issue to be considered is whether the supply of liquidity by theReserve Bank  should be in the form of a refinance facility or in the form of reverse repos. Asan instrument, reverse repo is more flexible. However, parties that enter into reverse reposmay face some operational difficulties. They will not be able to sell the securities in whichthey have entered into repo during the period of repo. Since the refinance mechanism iseasier, we have moved towards it for providing liquidity support to PDs. Also, banks will beable to enter into reverse repos only to the extent of  their excess holding over SLR. Adifferent system may have to be devised to provide liquidity to banks that do not have excessSLR. Further, until the real time gross settlement system (RTGS) is in place with electronicfund and securities transfer procedures, it may be practically difficult to introduce LAF in theFourthly,  banks are currently provided with refinance, with both the limits or ceilingsand the rate being predetermined. Once the LAF is introduced, ideally, the existing refinanceFifth, a view has to be taken on differentiation to be made between banks and PDs forthe purpose of LAF. If PDs are also brought under the purview of LAF, the present liquiditySixth, liquidity forecasting techniques of the Reserve Bank of India may have to beSeventh, dependable criteria for fixing individual limits under the LAF needs to beEighth, the process of determination of interest rates is another issue that needs to bedecided. The repo/reverse repo or even the refinance can be on auction basis or can be on aAll these issues are being studied and need to be resolved before deciding on theIt is widely accepted that the banking sector needs a deep and liquid term moneymarket for managing its liquidity and asset liability mismatches. There is no clearly definedinter-bank term money yield structure in India beyond the overnight rates. A call money9Development of Inter-bank Term Money Marketintroduction of LAF.fixed rate volume tender basis.evolved.refined in order to have a reasonable fix on the liquidity in the system.support scheme may need to be reviewed.schemes may have to be phased out.form of reverse repos.Currently, the market does not seem to be ready for such a shift.the prudential and monetary impact angles.such a Liquidity Adjustment facility in greater detail.rate has to take into account several considerations.reference rate has emerged through the NSE and Reuters. Development of an inter-bank termI have already listed a little earlier the steps that we have taken to facilitate thedevelopment of the term money market in India. There is a continuous demand that a pre-requisite for the development of a healthy and vibrant term money market in India is theremoval of the minimum statutory reserve requirements on inter-bank borrowings. There is apretty convincing view that the inhibiting factor is not merely the reserve requirements.Currently, inter-bank borrowings are exempt from CRR and SLR subject to maintenance ofAs I have already alluded, the current structure of the call/term money market hasresulted in participants taking a myopic view on the liquidity and interest rate conditions. Infact, at times, long-term investment decisions are based on the call money rates. Hence, asrecommended by the Narasimham Committee, it is essential to place clearly definedprudential limits for banks’ reliance on the call money market. With the introduction of goodasset-liability guidelines already circulated to banks, prudential limits on exposure to the callmarket and online connectivity between major branches of public sector banks, the stage isExpansion of Repo MarketJust as we have a Standing Committee on Money Market, we also have a TechnicalAdvisory Committee on Government Securities Market. An internal sub-group of thisCommittee is looking into various aspects of expansion of the repo market, including issuesFurther, repos among eligible participants are currently permitted only in Mumbai andthe RBI also conducts repo operations only at Mumbai. Eventually, it is proposed to extendthis to other centres also, which is dependent on the establishment of VSAT network andA number of suggestions have been received by us in RBI towards furtherdevelopment of the market.  We need to  examine all these carefully. I will list a few of themThe Reserve Bank of India, at present, does not permit underw riting of CP. The CPmarket has been witnessing ups and downs, depending primarily on the conditions in the callmoney market. Suggestions have been received regarding the introduction of CP withRevolving Underwriting Facility (RUF) which is a popular financing facility availableabroad. A CP with RUF is akin to a revolving LC and will reduce funding cost. However, itbecomes like a funded loan if devolvement takes place on banks. Credit risk is a majorconcern in the case of RUF as there is a possibility of banks overextending credit. As RUF isa non-funded commitment, it calls for appraisal by banks in a systematic manner. Thus, whileCP with RUF is a good treasury product, issues like mechanism for rating of underlyinginstruments, number of time it revolves, etc., have to be carefully examined before theThere is a suggestion that floating rate CDs could be considered for  introduction inour market. There are two issues that need examination. Currently, CD is a discountinstrument. Floating rate CD would imply that CD is an interest bearing instrument. Thesecond consideration relates to what is the benchmark interest rate against which the CD10the statutory minimum on total net demand and time liabilities.would float.(b)product can be introduced.(a)here, to help some sort of debate.Instrument Development and Market Microstructureconnectivity of all Public Debt Offices of RBI.comprising legal status, regulatory framework, standardisation of accounting practices, etc.expected to be set for the emergence of an interbank term money market.money market is essential if credible reference rates across the yield curve have to emerge.It has also been held that brokers could be permitted in the mon ey market to improveliquidity. We have to examine this in the light of the role played currently by Primary Dealers Yet another idea is to rationalise the tenor for issue of CDs of financial institutionsfrom 1-3 years to 3 months-3 years. Ideally, this could be examined in the light ofharmonization of roles between banks and Financial Institutions.Introduction of Interest Rate SwapsThe monetary policy of October 1998 had announced the intention to introduceinterest rate swaps to further deepen the money market as also to enable market participantsto hedge interest rate risks. The Reserve Bank has been working towards a framework foroperationalising this derivative instrument in the Indian market. Market participants havebeen consulted on relevant aspects such as standard documentation, benchmark, etc and thedraft proposals are ready. In fact, this will be the main item of agenda in the next meeting ofthe Standing Committee on Money Market, scheduled for February 3, 1999.  I am confidentTo curb certain unhealthy trends that had developed in the financial market in thepast, and particularly to prevent undesirable speculation, the Government had prohibitedforward trading in securities in June 1969 through a Notification.  It is often argued thatrescinding this Notification is now necessary for the development of the financial market. Inparallel,  Simultaneously, there is a proposal to amend the Securities Contracts RegulationAct,  to add an enabling provision to give powers to Government to provide jurisdiction tothe RBI also in the regulation, say  of the money and debt markets.  When this amendment isapproved, the respective regulatory roles of SEBI and RBI in the money and debt marketscould be formally delineated by Government.   The proposed changes in the SCRA couldt of financial markets is being inhibited by multiple prescriptions ofstamp duty which is creating friction in active secondary market trading by increasing thetransaction cost and administrative hassles. Although the State Governments claim right tolevy stamp duty, exemption of financial instruments from stamp duty is advocated in theinterest of development of efficient financial markets. Introduction of Repos in privatecorporate securities in dematerialised form through a depository has also been  stalled on thiscount.  In regard to instruments which fall within the jurisdiction of Central Government,such as promissory note and transfer of shares, they have already been granted remission bythe Central Government.  State Governments may be finding it difficult to grant remission tofinancial transactions since for the purpose of stamp duty, almost all items fall within theThis is a matter of crucial importance and exemption of money market and debtinstruments from stamp duty or alternatively rationalisation of the procedures by imposing aflat fee would go a long way in increasing secondary market activity and liquidity in moneymarket and debt instruments. The suggestion that the Indian Stamp Act be amended to enact aspecific provision exempting transactions of all securities in Depository in dematerialised11form from stamp duty could also be  seriously considered.description of financial transactions excepting a couple of items.DevelopmenStamp Duty Reformpave way for a much more active repos market.(Regulation) Act, 1956Amendments to Securities Contractsthat we will be able to come up  with an operational framework very soon.(d)in the market.(c)Electronic dealing systems certainly lend transparency and efficiency to marketoperations.  Ideally, the screen could cover OTC deals in money market instruments like calland notice money, term money, repos, as also Government Securities including TreasuryBills.  Besides banks, PDs, financial institutions and other market participants, the RBI coulduse the screen in the conduct of its open market operations as also for monitoringThe RBI is actively coordinating with the Primary Dealers Association in developingan Electronic Dealing System to facilitate dealing in call, notice and term money, TreasuryBills, Government Securities and repos. This is expected to be operationalised by MarchMoney Market and Monetary Policy in IndiaA central bank seeks to influence monetary conditions through management ofliquidity by operating in varied instruments.  In an administered or controlled regime ofmoney and financial markets, the management of liquidity is essentially through directinstruments, like varying cash reserve requirements, limits on refinance, administered interestrates and quantitative and qualitative restrictions on credit.  Thus, the cost, availability, anddirection of funds flow come under the direct influence of the central bank.  In a deregulatedand liberalized market environment, the position is different, since  the interest rates arelargely determined by market forces.  In that situation, there is still  a need to influencemonetary conditions through management of liquidity, but, this has to be achieved mainlythrough market based operating instruments, like open market operations and refinance/discount/ repo windows.  The central bank becomes, in a way, a part of the market, though itis still above the market, by virtue of its power to influence primary liquidity.  The success ofmarket based indirect instruments, of course, depends upon the existence of a vibrant, liquidand efficient money market, well integrated with the other segments of financial market, inparticular the government securities and foreign exchange markets.  Such an integrated andefficient market  is necessary, for monetary policy impulses, sent through money marketinterventions to be reflected in the monetary conditions, through the transmission channel ofThe financial sector in India is still, in a state of transition, because of ongoingreforms and growing integration between different segments.  No doubt, the degree ofoperational freedom of the Reserve Bank has been enhanced with the elimination of CentralGovernment’s automatic access to Reserve Bank credit.  However, a major constraint in theconduct of monetary policy is the inadequate depth and liquidity in the secondary market forgovernment securities and money market instruments.  The Reserve Bank, therefore, stillrelies on cash reserve ratio as an important operating instrument. Open Market operationshave have also been increasingly used,  especially in the current year, to bring aboutcontraction of liquidity in the  system.  Since April 1997, the Bank Rate is also being used asa signaling mechanism of the stance of policy. It has been the endeavor of the Reserve Bankto develop both depth and liquidity in money and Government Securities markets, throughAn internal RBI Working Group on liquidity forecasting, in the last year, has madeseveral recommendations for assessing the short-term liquidity on a periodic basis with thehelp of data available with the Reserve Bank as also from the Government.  Reserve Bank121999.institutional measures so that eventually the dependence on CRR is reduced.the general level of interest rates.money market and monetary policy in India.Let me conclude by mentioning, in a sort of summary form, the linkage between themoney/securities market activity.Electronic Dealing Systemhas already been using this framework. The Reserve Bank has also been endeavouring todevelop models to assess short-term liquidity. In that regard, initiatives have recently beentaken in the Bank to develop a short-term liquidity model by an in-house group consisting ofmembers from relevant operational and research departments of the Bank.  The Group wouldhave the benefit of expertise from an Advisory Committee comprising of well known senioracademics.  The model, besides providing a general theoretical rationale, is expected to beOutlookA review of money market development in India and the current efforts for furtherdevelopment would show that though a late comer, India is not lagging behind in anysignificant manner.  However, while a base has been created with a variety of products in themoney market, the market has not acquired the required depth in terms of both volume andliquidity.  It is our hope that the institutional and other reforms identified as agenda willprovide the necessary depth.  With that, the money market should gradually get integratedwith debt and foreign exchange markets and in turn, pave way for the Reserve Bank’s greater• Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Fifth J.V.Somayajulu MemorialLecture, at Madras, on February 1, 1999. I am grateful to Shri.K.Kanagasabapathy and Dr.A.Prasad for theirvaluable assistance.13reliance on indirect tools of monetary regulation.Let me conclude now, Mr.Chairman.operationalised for short-term decision making.
