November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Indian Banking and e-Security*RAKESH MOHANI. INTRODUCTION results. Doing economic research was impossible withoutproximity to a large library and a large computer. NowThank you very much for inviting me to this inauguralinformation is available off the internet and all thesession of the Conference on e-security. With thecomputing power you want is in the economist's ownexpansion of IT applications in the Indian bankinghome.system, there is a concomitant increase in concernsThe banking sector is no exception to this changingrelating to e-security. It is, therefore, very appropriatescenario which is sweeping across the world. Most ofand timely that the Indian Banks' Association (IBA) andthe banks have already started to feel the impact of theManufacturers Association of Information Technologyoperations of the new banks in the country. The single(MAIT) have come together to organize this conference.biggest advantage of these banks is the large scaleThe banking sector is one of the leading users of deployment of IT in their business environment. Theirinformation technology worldwide. The introduction ofbusiness processes have been architectured around ITinformation technology has transformed banking almostSolutions that solve problems as they emerge so that ITbeyond belief in the last decade and a half. Most of all,has become an integral part of their regular operations.customers have benefited, as have the banks themselves.The changes staring in the face of bankers relate toThere have been very significant gains in the efficiencythe fundamental way of banking - which is undergoingof banks leading to greater potential for higher profitabilitya rapid transformation in the world of today. It is widelyand consequent benefit to the economy as a whole.recognised that the core banking functions alone do notThe Indian software industry is among the leadersadd to the bottom line of banks - value added servicesin providing software to the leading banks of the world.are slowly but steadily emerging as a substantialI think it is correct to say that the new millennium hasopportunity for banks to exploit. Prime factorsbrought in a much greater pace of absorption of IT innecessitating these changes relate to the forces ofour banks, and in the Reserve Bank of India. What is competition, productivity and efficiency of operations,important is that we must recognise our own strengthreduced operating margins and the need for better assetin IT and leverage it to make it a source of comparative- liability management. With hair-thin profit margins beingadvantage for the financial system as a whole.the order of the day, the solution to this would lie inincreasing volumes so as to result in better operatingIt is therefore entirely apposite that these two basicresults for banks. This is best achieved by exploitingstakeholders in this symbiosis of banking and informationthe benefits of technology which facilitates handling oftechnology (IT) have come together to deliberate on anincreased volumes at higher levels of efficiency. It is inissue of critical significance.this context that there is an imperative need for not mereIt is now trite to say how the world has changedtechnology upgradation but also integration of technologywith IT in the last decade and a half. In my ownwith the general way of functioning of banks.profession our mode of work has got completelyWith this backdrop, today I will delve into two relatedtransformed. I remember the time, in the mid 1970s,issues - one general and the other specific. The generalwhen I had to stay up nights in the Princeton Universityissue relates to the progress of IT in Indian banking,Computer Centre to run econometric regressions or towhile the specific issue is the theme of today's lecture,simulate models which I programmed myself inviz., IT in banking in e-security.FORTRAN and then wait till the next day to get theKeynote address by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, the then Deputy Governor, RBI at the Conference on e-Security organised jointly*by IBA and MAIT on July 30, 2004 at Mumbai. Dr. Mohan is grateful to Dr. R.B. Barman, R. Gandhi, Dr. A.M. Pedgaonkar,S. Ganesh Kumar and Partha Ray of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance.1029November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004II. PROGRESS OF I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY INAll these have been aimed at exploiting the benefitsBANKING IN INDIAof IT to provide products and information conduits tobanks that would enable them in turn to offer betterWhat have been the major strides in IT initiatives inservice to their customers. It may also be observed thatbanking? Taking a broad brush of history, the initiationthe recent past has witnessed new concepts such asof the process can be traced to the mid-1980s with the'Anywhere Banking' and 'Any Time Banking' beingintroduction of mechanised cheque processing usingadopted by banks, which are but offshoots of technologyMagnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) technologyimplementation by banks. With the introduction of ATMsand the efforts towards introduction of networks ofcustomers can even go to any networked branch orcomputers in bank. These measures have resulted in allnetworked ATMs, and carry out many bankingbanks, including the public sector banks, embracingtransactions. With e-banking, many activities can betechnology in a large way.carried out from within the customer's home. SuchThe Reserve Bank of India, as both a supervisor ofinnovations have had a positive impact on customerthe banking system as well as a custodian of the paymentservice - besides the benefit that is derived by banks insystem, has played a major role in the innovation processterms of reduced costs of operation.of assimilating IT in banking. While a detailed accountIT has also resulted in a major attitudinal changeof this process could be seen as self-congratulatory, inrevolutionising the concept relating to treatment oforder to put the issues in perspective, let me enumeratecustomers of banks; with the death of geographicala quick run down of the various initiatives that havedistances, banks need to treat the customer as a customerbeen taken in this regard.of the bank and not as a customer of any particularl Introduction of MICR based cheque clearing andbranch. This is now possible thanks to the usage of ITits proliferation to 39 centres as on date, which hason a large scale whereby centralised data bases areresulted in reduced time for realisation of cheques;possible in a bank with decentralised access. AnotherImplementation of safe, secure and quick modesloption to achieve this objective is to have clusteredof electronic funds movement for both corporatesolutions in a bank with data of customers residing inand retail segments, in the form of Electronicthese systems. Banks need to constantly look forClearing Service (ECS-Credit and Debit Clearing)innovative services which offer customers theand Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), and theconvenience of transacting from anywhere, at any time,Special Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT), all ofand using delivery channels that are suitable for them.which now cover about 10,000 branches of banksThese are frontiers which would add value to the servicesspread across about 200 cities and towns of theoffered to customers and at the same time act as acountry;means for increasing the profits for banks too.l The introduction of the Negotiated Dealing SystemOne of the most significant areas where IT hasfor screen based trading in Government Securitieshad a positive impact is on substitutes for traditionalby RBI regulated institutions;funds movement services. With the advent of electronicl The introduction of the Real Time Grossbanking, electronic funds transfer and other similarSettlement (RTGS) System for online settlementproducts, funds transfers across different constituentsof inter-bank funds transfers on a transaction-is now easily possible - within time frames which wouldby-transaction basis has been a significanthave appeared impossible a few years ago. Withachievement. This has resulted in risk free creditnetworking and inter connection, new challenges aremode of funds settlement. The RTGS systemarising related to security, privacy and confidentialitywitnesses inter bank transactions amounting toof transactions. Many new players are entering intoan average of Rs. 5000 crore on a normalthe arena of funds transfer services and the pride ofworking day in Mumbai;place enjoyed by bankers is under severe threat. Thel Introduction of the Online Tax Accounting Systemcompetition is not just from organisations performing(OLTAS), which has facilitated electronicfunds transfer services but from other seeminglytransmission of tax related information fromunrelated channels such as service providers for messagebanks to the Tax Information Network (TIN) oftransfer, quick delivery of instruments and the like whothe Income Tax Department1030November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004detect unusual usage patterns and deficiencies. It is hereall facilitate the movement of funds based messages atthat e-Security gains significance.speeds faster than before.Yet another factor which is the driving force behindIII. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN B ANKING AND the use of technology in banking relates to the everE-SECURITY increasing expectations of the customers. Today'scustomers are more demanding and are also more techno-No innovation is without challenges - IT is no savvy compared to their counterparts of the yester years.exception to this rule. The most prominent challengeThey demand instant, anytime and anywhere bankingarising from these innovations relates to the conceptfacilities. Unless the banks recognize this and reorientof security. With the delivery channels relating to fundsthemselves, they will have no future. It is informationbased services - such as movement of fundstechnology which enables banks in meeting such highelectronically between different accounts of customersexpectations of the customers.- taking place with the use of technology, theWe are at the threshold of a significant change inrequirements relating to security also need to undergothe way banking in the country is poised to be in themetamorphosis at a rapid pace. Various concepts suchdays to come. The future lies not in mere use ofas digital signatures, certification, storage of informationtechnology by banks in the form of computers andin a secure and tamper-proof manner all assumerelated equipment but in the use of networkedsignificance and have to be part of the practices andcomputing resources.procedures in the day-to-day functioning of banks ofBoth these factors require the usage of Informationtomorrow. I must hasten to add at this stage that allSystems which not only perform their assignedthese would be added requirements and the wellfunctions, but also provide for seamless interactionestablished practices of today may also have to notacross different segments between the customer of aonly continue but also co-exist along with the newbank and the banker, after passing through many layersrequirements.of network based communication and countless numberThe Reserve Bank of India has taken upon itselfof systems. It is here that the integrity of the messagethe setting up of a safe, secure and efficientand its safe delivery - without any distortion or changecommunications network for the exclusive use of the- becomes of paramount significance. E-Security has abanking sector. Named the INFINET (for the Indiandefinitive and substantive role to play here and all largeFinancial Network), this network is already being usedIT users are now actively and seriously addressing suchby a large number of banks for funds and non-fundssecurity concerns.based message transfers, and is made available by theTraditionally, IT has been providing solutions toInstitute for Development and Research in Bankingbanks to take care of their accounting and back officeTechnology (IDRBT), Hyderabad. INFINET is perhapsrequirements. This has, however, now given way toamong the few networks in the world which uses thelarge scale usage in services aimed at the customer oflatest in technology and security called Public Keythe banks. IT also facilitates the introduction of newInfrastructure - PKI, which is not only state-of-the-artdelivery channels - in the form of Automated Tellerand robust but also well within the legal requirementsMachines, Net Banking, Mobile Banking and the like.of the Information Technology Act, 2000.Further, IT deployment has assumed such high levelsFor all these systems to be effective, there is a needthat it is no longer possible for banks to manage theirfor an effective security policy which would offer aIT implementations on a stand alone basis. To leverageshared vision of how the controls in the workplace shouldthe benefit of the IT revolution, banks are increasinglybe implemented with the objective of protecting data,interconnecting their computer systems not only acrossinformation and eventually, the economic value of thebranches in a city but also to other geographic locationsorganisation. This has to be supplemented by educationwith high-speed network infrastructure, and setting upand training in these areas and reinforced by the actionslocal area and wide area networks and connecting themand concerns of the top management so that a cultureto the Internet. As a result, information systems andof security can be created. These controls have to benetworks are now exposed to a growing number and asupported by surveillance, monitoring and auditing towider variety of threats and vulnerabilities.1031November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004The Reserve Bank of India constituted a 'Working few shared ATM networks have already beenGroup for Information System Security for the Banking commissioned by banks), offering payment servicesand Financial Sector' in 2001. The Group's beyond the existing time zones. The Reserve Bank isrecommendations have been the basis for the Information also facilitating new projects such as the Multi ApplicationSystems Audit Policy for many banks and other financial smart card project which, when implemented, wouldentities. facilitate transfer of funds using electronic means and ina safe and secure manner across the length and breadthAs increasing dependence on information systemsof the country, with reduced dependence on paperdevelops, the need for such systems to be reliable andcurrency. The opportunities of e-banking or e-power insecure also becomes more essential. As growing numbersgeneral need to be harnessed so that banking is availableof ordinary citizens use computer networks for banking,to all customers in such a manner that they would feelshopping, etc., network security is potentially a massivemost convenient and if required, without having to visitproblem. Over the last few years, the need for computera branch of a bank. All these will have to be accompaniedand information system security has become increasinglywith a high level of comfort, which again boils down toevident, as web sites are being defaced with greaterthe issue of e-security.frequency, more and more denial-of-service attacks arebeing reported, credit card information is being stolen, One of the biggest advantages accruing to banks inthere is increased sophistication of hacking tools that the future would be the benefits that arise from theare openly available to the public on the Internet, and introduction of RTGS. Funds management by treasuriesthere is increasing damage being caused by viruses and of banks would be helped greatly by RTGS. With almostworms to critical information system resources. 70 banks having joined the RTGS system, more largevalue funds transfers are taking place through thisAt the organisational level, institutional mechanisms1system . The implementation of Core Banking solutionshave to be designed in order to review policies, practices,measures, and procedures to review e-security regularly by banks is closely related to RTGS too. Core Bankingwill make anywhere banking a reality for customers ofand assess whether these are appropriate to theireach bank, while RTGS bridges the need for inter-bankenvironment. It would be helpful if organisations sharefunds movement. Thus, the days of depositing a chequeinformation about threats and vulnerabilities, andfor collection and a long wait for its realisation wouldimplement procedures for rapid and effective co-operationsoon be a thing of the past for those customers whoto prevent, detect and respond to security incidents. Asnew threats and vulnerabilities are continuously discovered would opt for electronic movement of funds, using theRTGS system, where the settlement would be on anthere is a strong need for co-operation amongalmost instantaneous basis. Core Banking is already inorganisations and, if necessary, we could also considervogue in many private sector and foreign banks; whilecross-border information sharing. We need to understandits implementation is at different stages amongst the publicthreats and dangers that could be vulnerable to and thesector banks.steps that need to be taken to mitigate thesevulnerabilities. We need to understand access control IT would also facilitate better and more scientificsystems and methodology, telecommunication and decision making within banks. Information systems nownetwork security, and security management practice. We provide decision makers in banks with a great deal ofshould be well versed in the area of application and information which, along with historical data and trendsystems development security, cryptography, operations analysis, help in the building up of efficient Managementsecurity and physical security. Information Systems. This, in turn, would help in betterAsset-Liability Management (ALM) which, in today'sThe banking sector is poised for more challenges inworld of hairline margins is a key requirement for thethe near future. Customers of banks can now looksuccess of banks in their operational activities. Anotherforward to a large array of new offerings by banks.benefit which e-banking could provide for relates toFrom an era of mere competition, banks are now co-Customer Relationship Management (CRM). CRM helpsoperating among themselves so that the synergisticin stratification of customers and evaluating customerbenefits are shared among all the players. This wouldneeds on a holistic basis which could be paving the wayresult in the formation of shared payment networks (a1 As of October 2004 (i.e., around the time the address was going to the Press), 92 banks had joined the RTGS system.1032November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004for competitive edge for banks and complete customer I am also told that there will be increasing inter-care for customers of banks. linking between internet and intranets of banks. As thisconnectivity expands there will be greater need forsecurity features that guard against e-contagionsV. THE FUTUREspreading, should such unfortunate events take place.Regulators have so far been concerned with contagionHow do we see the future? Not being trained inin the financial sector resulting from adverse developmentsastrology let me try to track the future in terms of thein the overall economic environment. We will also nowrecent initiatives.need to be concerned with e-contagion resulting fromRecognising that paper based cheques would continue technology developments. In fact, we will have to maketo be in use in the country, the RBI has begun to looksure that the probability of such events is only an epsiloninto ways and means to reduce the time taken for away from zero.realisation of these cheques. As an effective andI have already mentioned the initiation of the OLTASimplementable model, truncation of cheques is beingproject. This is related to online transmission of bothintroduced by the RBI This would facilitate quicktax revenue and the connected information. It goesrealisation of cheques without the actual physicalwithout saying that security in such transactions is ofmovement of such collection instruments. A pilot projectthe utmost importance. The electronic data interchangein this regard, has been launched covering the Nationalsystem connected with trade activities facilitating just inCapital region of Delhi and its nearby places in the firsttime processing is another system that has to be fullyinstance.secure. Moreover, the success of state level of VAT willElectronic mode of payments are increasinglyalso be related to electronic payment system, accountingreplacing the traditional paper cheque. It is almostand related security system.impossible to imagine now how payment settlements wereOther new products such as smart cards and otherdone physically before the electronic age. ECS is nowcards with embedded money will need to be introducedmore than 10 years old. The per transaction limit forcarefully with full security for customer and paymentECS (Credit) is Rs.5 lakh and for ECS debit it is Rs.1and settlement system alike.lakh. The Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) System wasWe need to give greater thought to all the issuesintroduced by RBI in 1997. There is currently aconnected with actual implementation of e-Security.maximum limit of Rs.2 crore for individual transactions.The Special EFT system was introduced just a year ago. Security is actually not built over any existing block;in today's world it has to be an integral part of theEach of these systems of electronic transfer of funds isblock itself. This is where the need for implementationgrowing at a very rapid pace. These various maximumof e-security from the stage of manufacture - of thelimits were fixed considering the levels of comfort ofhardware, software, during its integration and finalbanks and for greater acceptability in the initial stagesimplementation - assumes significance. It is hearteningand also because of security considerations.to see the confluence of manufacturers and users inThere is now an increasing demand for expandingthis seminar and I am sure that there will be manythe scope of EFT facilities and to provide solutions forlessons which we will all carry back home to implementfaster movement of funds for the capital markets to takeand practice on a regular basis. I request you all tocare of the requirements of the T+1 settlements. The ECSfind solutions to the vexing problem of e-security toand EFT systems are now PKI enabled and messagethe best possible extent so that we could prove to thetransfers take place in a secure environment. This issuerest of the world that the collective efforts of theis therefore under our active consideration and I amsuppliers and the users would be the best and the mosthopeful that we can enhance these limits or eliminate them2 effective barrier to such security violations. I am veryentirely . As such decisions are taken, the need for aoptimistic that this can be an achievable reality.constant upgradation of their security features is obvious.2The per transaction limits have been removed with effect from November 1, 20041033
