March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004*Credit Policy, Systems and CultureY.V. REDDYComing to the Institute kindles a feeling on January 21, which would also provide thisof festive occasion and it is a privilege and an Institute an opportunity for exploring furtherhonour to be here with you. There have been avenues of learning through collaboration andsignificant achievements, in training, in interaction with others.diversified fields, with new initiatives and a widerFinancial Deepeningcoverage in the area of research andAmong the major indicators that weconsultancy. Admittedly, there is more ofwould have to look at from a longer termsponsored research now. Incidentally, one of myperspective of financial sector development,former colleagues Ms. Indrani Banerjee, whoare some of the financial ratios that signifyalong with others worked with me on a money-the nature and extent of financial deepening.laundering Report in the Reserve Bank, is withThe data shows that banking and insurancethe Institute now. I am happy that the Instituteas a percentage of GDP has grown from justis beginning to use RBI’s human resourcesabout 1.6 per cent in 1969 to 6.5 per cent.productively. The exchange of knowledgeWithin the services sector, its share has grownresources amongst our institutions is bound tofrom about 4.2 per cent to 11.8 per centprovide increasing returns to both. It is good toindicating that the financial sector has rapidlynote that distinguished banking colleagues aregained prominence in the overall economictaking advantage of the services of the Instituteactivity. The flow of funds accounts for theand surely they will continue to do so in aIndian economy which are available till 1995-greater measure in the years ahead.96, show that the finance ratio, i.e., the ratioThere is a reference in Dr. Saha’s reportof total financial issues to national income, hasto the possibility of making our presence feltgrown four times between 1969-70 and 1995-in the neighbouring countries and this seems96 from 10.4 per cent to 41.1 per centvery appropriate because we have a SAARCindicating considerable financial deepening. ItFinance Group which is likely to meet in Aprilis interesting that the intermediation ratio has2004. Also, as Dr. Saha knows, Ms. Annegrown at a much lesser pace i.e., 57.8 perKrueger, the first Deputy Managing Director ofcent to 70.2 per cent during the same period.the IMF who was also the Chief Economist ofThis means that although the Indian financialthe World Bank 10-15 years ago, is visitingsystem is largely bank-oriented, the financialthis Institute shortly. She will deliver a lecturedeepening has been supported, both bySpeech delivered by Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at National Institute of Bank Management*(NIBM) during the NIBM Annual Day celebrations on January 6, 2004, Pune.303March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004financial intermediaries as well as financial monetary and credit policy. In India, we nowmarkets. We have to constantly take note of call our policy statement as Monetary andsome of the characteristics of the financial Credit Policy Statement. Upto 1992, ourdeepening and the nature of development of statement was called Credit Policy Statementthe financial markets. and the Cell (in RBI) was called CreditPlanning Cell. Beginning 1998, it is renamedOf particular interest to our country is theas Monetary Policy Department. This denotedshare of commercial banks in rural householdthe shift in the policy from a planned anddebt which rose from barely 0.3 per cent inadministered interest rate system to a market-1961 to 29 per cent in 1991. The question thatoriented financial system but while making thearises is what has been happening thereafter.shift, we have been sensible enough not toThere is some quantitative indication anddiscard the importance of credit and focuscertainly a strong perception that commercialonly on conducting monetary policy. The realbanking activity for the rural households mayissue is to define the nature of the linknot be increasing at the same pace as beforebetween monetary and credit policies, how it1991. It is good to note that during the reformis changing and how we have to manage it.period, the role of capital markets improved butPast experience shows that credit allocationis it good to learn that the presence of banksand administered pricing certainly ensure ain the rural households is not increasingreasonable level of credit flow in the desiredcommensurately? This leads to the real issuesdirection at the desired price, but at a costof credit delivery mechanisms, which wealong with inefficiencies as well as distortions.flagged in the monetary policy this time. WhatIn such a situation, the cost has to be borneare the constraints which are affecting the flowin different ways – including pre-emptionof credit? What is the role of credit flow in athrough Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR), which atderegulated financial environment in anthe time of initiation of reforms had touchedemerging country? ‘Emerging country’ bythe statutory maximum of 15 per centdefinition, has structural or institutional(excluding the incremental CRR onbottlenecks. In such a situation, how toincremental NDTL) and Statutory Liquiditymaintain a balance between deregulation thatRatio (SLR) at 38.5 per cent, almost touchingbrings about medium to long term efficiencythe statutory maximum of 40 per cent. Sincegains and the credit flow that is urgentlythe reform, the focus of the policy environmentrequired to various sectors? It is critical at thishas been to remove most of these constraintsjuncture, to address these issues at this stagebut the question is whether the purpose ofof our economic development and state ofcredit delivery at a reasonable price of creditfinancial sector.has been served and whether the new systemMonetary, Credit and Regulatory Policiesis admittedly superior in all respects?Basically, there is a recognition about theRecent experience shows that policiesdifferentiation as well as the link betweenof liberalisation, deregulation and enabling304March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004environment of comfortable liquidity at a of India has? The central bank, until a decadereasonable price do not automatically translate ago, was focusing on growth and price stabilitythemselves into credit flow. There are glitches and the trade-off between growth and priceor hurdles in a well intentioned monetary stability. A more recent addition reflecting thepolicy to be translated into desired credit developments in the financial markets hassystem, and these, I believe, are the linkages been the third objective, viz., financial stability.to be explored. The monetary policy looks at this thirdobjective also and there are certain trade-offsThere is another aspect to the issue ofinvolved between the three objectives,credit pricing and credit delivery flagged in theparticularly in the short run. There are alsoMid-term Review of Monetary and Creditcomplementarities between the three more soPolicy statement this time. The regulatoryover the longer run.policies relating to banks have a bearing onWhile there are three objectives withcredit flow. For example, tightening of thetheir own interrelationships, we also haveregulatory policies in particular cycles,three instruments – monetary policy, creditespecially the downside cycle, will sometimespolicy and regulatory policies. The threeworsen the situation. The regulatory regimeinstruments are also used interchangeably tohas a tendency to be pro-cyclical and,serve different objectives. For instance,therefore, it has implications for both,interest rate changes serve as monetarymonetary and financial stability, especiallypolicy signal, while at the time changing thewhen the regulatory regime itself isprice of credit as also ensuring stability intransforming. In brief, there is an imperativeasset prices. The use of instruments resultsneed to clearly discern the links betweenin short-term trade offs, requiring some othermonetary policy, credit policy, and regulatorycomplementary measures. In highly integratedregime in a dynamic situation, involving theeconomies with no institutional bottlenecks,overall structural transformation of the realmonetary and regulatory policy co-ordinationsector, the financial sector and the openingis essential, but for us, because of transitionalof the economy. As you are aware, RBI is alsoproblems and transactional costs, we have toregulator of banks, non banking financialhave a credit allocation policy and, therefore,companies, Primary Dealers, governmentone should look at the changing dynamics ofsecurity markets and money markets.these relationships in what may be called theTherefore, in policy making, RBI now looks at3 x 3 matrix.what may be called the 3 by 3 matrix andsee how we can capture these linkages. TheCredit Systems3 by 3 matrix consists of three policy–There are three pillars on which ourobjectives and three policy-instruments.credit system was based in the past – oneLet us start with the objectives. What arewas fixing of prices of credit or interest ratethe policy-objectives that the Reserve Bankand on occasions even quantum linked with305March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004purpose; second, insisting on collateral; and take recourse to the more costly informalthird, prescribing the end-use. One pillar finance in preference to the formal lender ifrelating to interest rate prescription and fixing the borrower has shortage of funds. Currently,quantum has been significantly reduced. since there is no way for the formal sector toThere are issues in security-based or be able to cater to all the credit requirements,collateralised lending and how do we handle especially for consumption purpose, perhapsthat? What will happen to the services sector, we should think about what suits our ownwhich accounts for slightly more than 50 per culture such as family-based credit in ruralcent of GDP if we keep insisting on collateral? areas rather than consumption credit,Similarly, if technology is more important than production credit, etc. Ultimately, we should trythe material component what is the role of to bring about a degree of convergencecollateral? The third is the end-use between formal and informal sectors perhapsspecification. Given the fungibility of by pushing the supply of credit from the formalresources, multiple sources of flow of sector in a supply leading approach to reduceresources, as well as application of funds, are the price or interest. How do we go about it?end-use restrictions relevant and operationally We would appreciate suggestions from thefeasible? I would solicit views of the bankers bankers and others assembled here.so that we can move forward with changes.Micro-finance is in a way bringing aboutThere is another issue relating to the link the convergence. In micro-finance, whereasor absence of the link between formal and there are no collaterals and, interest rates areinformal sectors which is still persisting. high, the level of NPAs is low. Is there aNormally, in a fairly liberalised environment, if lesson for our banks? A possible explanationmarkets are reasonably integrated, the is in terms of what is called “apparent cost”divergence in credit terms, especially interest and “total real cost”. “Apparent cost” is whatrates, between the formal and informal sectors is shown on the loan document, whereas theshould not be large. However, almost “total real cost” includes cost incurred oneverybody in our country concedes that formalities including documentation etc. Thesignificant divergence in lending terms between number of photocopies that are required, tripsthe two sectors still persists. The interest rate to the Sub Registrar’s office, the paper work,in informal markets, particularly in rural areas, the aspect of timeliness – if all those areis 3 per cent per month or annualised rate of added to the apparent cost, then it becomesover 38 per cent whereas in formal sectors, it the “total real cost”. There is a view that theis 10 or 12 per cent per annum. The divergence between the formal and informalpersistence of divergence means that, with all is only because of the differences in thethe deregulation, the formal credit mechanisms “apparent cost” indicated in informal sectorare not able to pierce the informal system. The and total real cost in the formal sector. Theseincentives emanating out of the divergence in are some important areas of studies in creditterms of credit is such that the borrower will systems, that should perhaps be undertaken.306March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Another aspect with which we have been there is a credit, there are two sides of thegoing along till now is that credit business has credit – the lender and the borrower. I amto be a stand-alone credit business and I think sharing the above thoughts with NIBM for awe have had the purist approach, viz., that possible inclusion of the action pointsbank credit should not be contaminated with stemming therefrom in its research agenda.other business. The telecom revolution wasMicro Aspectsstarted with STD kiosks, which in realityBetween March 2001 and end 2003, i.e.,rendered several other services. There isover the last two and a half years, while theneed to think of combining credit with physicallending rates of banks have been reduced bysupplies of inputs/outputs. Perhaps, inabout 1 per cent, the deposit rates of 1 to 3considering credit delivery in rural areas, weyears duration have been reduced by abouthave to look at the delivery mechanisms, by3 per cent. It is difficult to justify this. While itstudying production, distribution andcan be said that the term deposit rates areconsumption processes, especially theirfixed for two to three years and so are lesslinkages.flexible as compared to lending rates whichCredit Informationare far more flexible, the divergence shouldhave been bridged over time. This asymmetryA Credit Information Bureau has beenin the treatment by banks, between depositorsset up, but it collects information only aboutand borrowers needs some analysis.the borrowers and their track record andOne has to recognise that there is amakes it available to banks. We are passingwidespread perception about the asymmetricala law where Credit Information Bureau willtreatment by the financial intermediaries, asgive credit information that is needed by thebetween different borrowers also. That thebank. But there is no similar publicly-availablesize of the borrowing, as well cost of service,information about banks to the borrowers. Thedo warrant some amount of differential pricingsame Credit Information Bureau should beis known, justifiable and acceptable. But ifable to give information about banks to thethere is a feeling that such a differential pricingcustomers, such as, on the interest rates thatis not justifiable or that it has reached suchare available for different types of loans, theproportions that the difference is not justifiable,requirements for loan etc. Where thethere could be a backlash.borrower’s track record is given to the bank,the borrower should also have the trackI shall give you an illustration of whatrecord of all the banks in dealing withhas happened more recently. Essentially,borrowers. This is an issue which has beenPLR was meant to be the prime lending raterarely addressed because we are orientedfor prime borrowers. A facility has been givenmore to handling the bank’s problem ratherto charge below PLR in exceptional cases.than the bank’s customer’s problem. Is thereOn this assumption, a particular interest ratean asymmetry? From a social point of view, ifwas fixed for the Food Corporation of India307March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004(FCI) as the average of PLRs of five banks. differences in pricing of credit to differentWhen the FCI found in the last four years classes of borrowers by banks.that all the market interest rates have beenAnother interesting point which has beenmoving down, whereas the banks’ PLRsraised about NPAs is that there is anhave not come down as much, they haveimpression that priority sector lending hasexpressed their preference to raise fundslarge NPAs. The statistics may or may notfrom the capital market. As Reserve Bank ofconfirm this. If you take priority sector andIndia, we have no way in which to say, thatremove the government-sponsoredthe FCI cannot raise funds from the market.programme on the one side and if you removeThe FCI argues that they have a virtualpublic sector (IOC, ONGC, other banks)government guarantee; have not defaultedcomponent from non-priority sector, there mayand have virtually no NPAs. Hence in theirbe only a marginal difference in NPAs ofview, it is not justifiable for banks to chargebanks lending to priority sector and banksthem even PLR. This shifting away fromlending to private corporate sector (many ofbanks may start with big customers but therewhom incidentally enjoy rescheduling orwill be small customers also responding inrestructuring facilities that are not reflected indifferent ways. In other words, it is not onlythe risk premium). Therefore, the issue thatbottom line calculation that is relevant inneeds to be addressed in this context isbanking business; but banking is based onwhether the risk premium charged to differenttrust on both sides – trust from the people,segments of borrowers is disproportionate towho are depositing money in the bank, andthe difference in the NPAs that have beentrust from the people who are borrowinggenerated in the past or on reasonablemoney from the bank. Similarly, some of theassumptions?State Governments started relating the banksThe issue is similar in respect of smallsubscription to debt papers issued with Stateindustries. Many small industrialists haveguarantees at different interest rates to thementioned to me that in the last 10 yearsextent of their default in the last five years.despite servicing interest and principalThe State Governments contend that thoughregularly they are still charged 11 per cent -default is negligible, the rates of interest12 per cent. On enquiry, I was told that therecharged are way above those applied tois a thumb rule of some sort in banks – smalllarge corporates. They claim that they areindustry means 11 per cent, agriculture meanshonouring their guarantees of borrowings by10 per cent, “somebody else” means 7 perState level enterprises reasonably well andcent. Is it possible that we have still notyet corporates who have the options of debtdeveloped the systems for risk assessmentrestructuring, rescheduling of debt, etc. areof the individual customer? Is it possible thatable to get loans at 300 basis points lessas a result of the old administered interestthan State guaranteed debt. It is necessaryrate structure, inspite of deregulation ofto be able to explain the basis of such308March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004interest rates, banks have moved from the banking system will become a conduit toadministered interest rate into category-wise channel deposits from one area, say rural,specification of interest rate which is consistent and one sector, say agriculture to lend towith the age-old culture of India? According another sector (urban or industries) whichto Manu, the interest rate for Brahmin per counters the intention of the public policy.month was 2 per cent, for Kshatriya, 3 perInstitutional Aspectscent per month, for Vaishya, it was 4 per centWe have to look at the monetary policy,per month and for Shudras it was 5 per centreal sector policy, and financial stability but weper month. So charging interest rate on analso need to do further work on the legal andattributable basis of a category rather thaninstitutional structures to see what needs to beactual assessment of risks of each case ischanged. For example, State Financialboth consistent with the ancient culture andCorporation (SFC) Act enables seizure of andlegacy of planned administered interest rate.sale of property of borrower by SFC. IWe have to get out of that, if deregulationremember many banks wanting a similar powerand competition has to really make sense.to be vested with them. But, as many of youBanks should, therefore, analyse systems ofmay be aware, most of the SFCs are sick. So,risk assessment not only for their ownthe power by itself is no answer to the issuesatisfaction but to be able to justify to theof NPAs. Further, if one sees the total amountborrowers the basis on which the riskrealised by SFCs, by invoking such powers, itassessment is made.is barely 20 per cent, on average, whereasAnother interesting aspect I found is thatone-time settlement of the banks has given anthe share of public sector banks in theaverage of 40 per cent to 60 per cent. So thedeposits is more or less maintained, butempirical evidence is not in favour of suchlending is coming down. They have 79 perpowers, but still we persist with the samecent of the share in deposit and 74 per centapproach. Is it that banks want power to bein credit, in the system, but foreign banks withable to do something? We have to look at it5 per cent deposits lend 7 per cent. Privatevery carefully.banks with 16 per cent deposit, lend 19 perSimilarly, many people seem to believecent. Is it that in a way some banks arethat to stop something that is considered togradually becoming only deposit-taking banksbe bad for the financial system, make it aand others are becoming only lending banks?“crime” and the problem will be solved. WeThis may or may not be good, but I have ahad Foreign Exchange Regulation Actproblem from a policy point of view with the(FERA), a tough legislation, under which oneway the existing branch network is spreadcould be easily put in jail. As long as we hadover the country, with wide geographical andthe apparatus of stringent FERA, foreignsector-wise coverage only for some banks.exchange virtually went underground and weGiven this type of spread of branch network,even had several foreign exchange crises.if some banks become deposit-taking, then309March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004We removed the FERA, realigned several compete? In fact, the “overhang problem” ofpolicies consistent with appropriate incentive problem ridden banking sector in otherframework for compliance, and introduced countries was isolated first. They created aFEMA which is far less stringent and we have level playing field between private and otherno forex crises or forex shortages. In other banks or new private banks, old private banks,words, the issue is that prescribing a serious by solving the overhang problems i.e., the non-punishment by law does not automatically performing assets, etc., and then there wasdiscourage illegal activity. Criminals may be competition. In our banking system, thefraudulent people but they are also good “overhang problem” of the NPAs, staffrational analysts of costs and benefits as well regulations, etc., of PSBs has been left to theas probabilities. They analyse the probability public sector banks themselves. The publicof being caught, the probability of being taken sector banks are required to absorb theto court, the probability of being punished, the overhang problem over a period. So in a sensedegree of punishment and when the there cannot be a situation where opening uppunishment is likely – in their lifetime or after! is envisaged without a level playing field. TheseOnce they examine these probabilities as they are the dilemmas which have to be resolved,exist and operate now, what we state in law if a central bank, as a regulator of banks hasoften appears at best irrelevant and to move ahead with full-fledged competition inoccasionally useful for harassing. So one must banking industry. No doubt, PSBs have thelook at this in a realistic way and work on the advantage of large branch network andbasis of incentives to comply or otherwise and established relationship with savers andnot proceed on the basis that enactment of borrowers.law would ensure compliance. I am mentioningSometimes, and of late, one noticesthis in the context of demand from somethat there is less of a relationship bankingbankers to make diversion of funds a criminaland that savers will always be with banks. Ifoffence and to imprison willful defaulters.banks want to be in business, the base isI want to be quite open in terms of the the savers, and they have to be taken careconstraints on monetary and credit policy as of. Banks may have to revisit the relationshipthey relate to institutional structures. The between banks and savers if they want todominant players in Indian banking system are continue to be in business of banking,the public sector banks (PSBs) and the particularly in the context of the recent trendsdominant role in the banking system is that of in the capital markets. The sensex has nowthe PSBs. From a regulatory point of view, a surpassed 6000 mark. If equity premium inregulator cannot proceed with any policy relative asset returns rises, banks shouldchange without taking into account the possible consider its potential impact on the coreresponse from this biggest chunk of regulated banking business. Then, regardingentities. How far does the biggest chunk (i.e., borrowers, the most important aspect thatPSBs) have adequate manoeuvrability to needs to be recognised by banks is the310March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004system of risk assessment of individual excessive? (b) others are paying reasonably?borrowers and realistic pricing of risks. The (c) these taxes are unnecessary? and, (d) thewhole idea of banks vis-à-vis other financial money which is collected as tax is usedintermediaries in the intermediation business appropriately. These are all the factors thathas to be considered. Therefore, the whole influence tax compliance. Now the sameissue of credit culture and credit system principle can be applied to credit. In credit, isshould encompass the legal and institutional honest repayment by a borrower honoured,aspect of the policy environment, the way the recognised or are others who are not as good,saver or depositor and the borrower – both being charged less interest?. Though policysmall and big are treated and the way banks environment is very critical, there are severalposition themselves to face these challenges. aspects to credit culture. Credit culture is aquestion of sense of fairness in India, sinceCredit Culturepeople repay loans out of moral compulsionas there are difficulties in forcing borrowers toFinally, let me complete with the issue ofpay, in view of the complications and delays incredit culture in a broader sense. We, thelegal processes. Now, if we do not ensure astudents of economics, assume that humansense of fairness, this moral compulsion maybeings are rational and they work on the basisbe eroded. Therefore, we should apply ourof enlightened self-interest. But, the reality ismind to the issues of credit culture in additionthat in every human being, in the context into institutional, legal changes and policywhich one is maximising “self-interest”, thereinitiatives. We have to work towards evolvingis also a strong sense of fairness. The sensea conducive credit culture and perhaps theof fairness also influences economic behaviour.critical factor on which it anchors is fairness.I can give an illustration first with taxes andAre we fair to savers? Are we fair tothen pose it as an issue for credit. When taxborrowers? Are we fair to all employees ? Areis being paid by an individual, there is awe fair inter se ? I leave the thoughts for yourtendency to not just look at the tax rate inbest judgement.isolation but also to compare whether (a) it is311
