Fifteenth C. D. Deshmukh Memorial Lectureby Prof. Joseph StiglitzA Revolution in Monetary PolicyLessons in the Wake of the Global Financial CrisisJanuary 3, 2013Welcome Remarks by Dr. Duvvuri SubbaraoGovernor, Reserve Bank of India______________________________________________________On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India, I have great pleasure in welcomingProf. Joseph E. Stiglitz, who will shortly be delivering the C.D. DeshmukhMemorial Lecture. Also, a warm welcome to Mrs. Anya Stiglitz who hasaccompanied him. I am delighted to acknowledge the presence here of the familymembers of Sir Chintaman Deshmukh - Shri Atul Deshmukh, Smt. SheetalaDeshmukh, and their children, Ashish and Priyanka, Prof. Sunita Chitnis and herson Dr. Ajay Chitnis. Your presence here means a lot to us. Finally, andimportantly, a warm welcome to all our invitees to this prestigious lecture.C.D. Deshmukh2. Sir Chintaman D. Deshmukh has a special place in the history of theReserve Bank. He was the first Indian Governor of the Reserve Bank, and servedthe institution with great distinction and dignity from August 1943 to June 1949.He presided over the transformation of the Reserve Bank from a privateshareholders' bank to a nationalised institution and was the intellectual force behindthe enactment of a comprehensive legislation for the regulation of bankingcompanies which has stood the test of time. Governor Deshmukh participatedactively in the establishment of the Bretton Woods Institutions in 1945 and playeda critical role in managing India’s nascent economy as we confronted thechallenges of war financing following the Second World War.3. After leaving the Reserve Bank, Shri Deshmukh went on to become theFinance Minister of India, a career graph repeated by our current Prime Minister,Dr. Manmohan Singh nearly forty years later. Shri Deshmukh brought to the officeof the Finance Minister a passion for newly independent India’s development and ahumane and inclusive vision for nation building. By all accounts, Sir ChintamanDeshmukh was one of the finest public policy intellectuals of post-independenceIndia.4. The Reserve Bank instituted the C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture in 1984to honour the memory of this illustrious Governor of the Bank. The last DeshmukhMemorial Lecture was delivered by Lord Adair Turner in February 2010 on: “Afterthe Crisis: Assessing the Costs and Benefits of Financial Liberalization”.Today’s Speaker - Prof. Stiglitz5. It is befitting that the fifteenth C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture today willbe delivered by a pre eminent public policy intellectual and one of the mostinfluential economists of our time. Introducing Prof. Stiglitz is a challenge becausehe is so well known and that no introduction can be original or revealing. It is achallenge also because his contribution to public policy has been so enormous andphenomenal that it is difficult to summarize that briefly. Nevertheless, I will takeon the task of introducing Professor Stiglitz if only to pay homage to a tradition.26. Professor Joseph Stiglitz is currently University Professor at Columbia inNew York and Co-chair of Columbia University’s Committee on Global Thought.7. In 1979, Joseph Stiglitz was awarded the coveted John Bates Clark Medal,given by the American Economic Association to an economist under 40 who hasmade the most significant contribution to the field. Prof. Stiglitz lived up to thatearly promise by winning, as we all know, the Nobel Prize for Economics in 2001for his analysis of markets with asymmetric information. He has the distinction, ina sense, of a ‘double Nobel’ as he was a lead author of the 1995 Report of theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which shared the 2007 Nobel PeacePrize. In 2011, the prestigious Time magazine named him one of the 100 mostinfluential people in the world.8. Prof. Stiglitz helped create a new branch of economics, "The Economics ofInformation", exploring the consequences of information asymmetries andpioneering such pivotal concepts as adverse selection and moral hazard which havenow become standard tools not only of theorists, but also of policy analysts.9. I am sure many in this audience have read his book Globalization and ItsDiscontents. Some of you may have read the authorized edition, some may evenhave read the pirated edition because this seminal book has been translated into 35languages, besides at least two pirated editions. In the non-pirated editions, it hassold more than a million copies worldwide. His most recent book, The Price ofInequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future, hit the New YorkTimes best seller list within a few weeks of publication. The book provides a3powerful critique of the free market orthodoxy, but ends on a note of hope, arguingthat ‘another world is possible’.Revolution in Monetary Policy10. The topic for Prof. Stiglitz’s Lecture today is: “A Revolution in MonetaryPolicy: Lessons in the Wake of the Global Financial Crisis”.11. Since the topic is about a revolution in monetary policy, I can do no betterthan invoking Vladimir Lenin, something of an authority on revolutions, who said:“A revolution is impossible without a revolutionary situation”. Globalmacroeconomic developments over the past five years have indeed led centralbanks to a revolutionary situation. When the crisis hit following the collapse ofLehman Brothers, central banks acted with an unusual show of policy force,quickly exhausted their conventional tools, then threw out the rule book and wenton an uncharted territory of money creation which has taken many names andmetamorphosed into many acronyms.12. Today, there is quite some bewilderment among policy makers, particularlycentral bankers, about what else can be done to engineer a recovery. Thisbewilderment has spawned a vigorous, interesting and instructive debate on thepursuit of monetary policy. Let me briefly outline some key issues in this debate.Quantitative Easing13. The point of departure in this debate is the view that after policy interestrate has been brought to the zero lower bound, nothing else needs to be done exceptfor the central bank to say that it will keep interest rates low in the future too. It is4argued that this would encourage people to borrow more and spend it, bailing theeconomy out of recession.14. But this idea of topping up monetary easing with communication may notalways work. People may not believe that the central bank will keep its promise oflow interest rates. Even if they believe the central bank, they may not still borrowsince what they are trying to do is to get out of debt rather than get into further debtas is the case today.15. So, how do central banks improve their credibility? By tying their promiseof low interest rates to specific quantitative real sector variables? The US FederalReserve has recently led the way in this direction by saying that it will keep interestrates low as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 per cent, and in theprocess, is willing to tolerate inflation slightly above its long-run target. Anotherway of reinforcing this promise of low interest rates is the idea of shifting fromtargeting inflation to targeting nominal GDP.Financial Stability16. Quantitative easing has not been the only issue in this monetary policyrevolution. A parallel, if also related, debate has been about the role of financialstability in the monetary policy objective function. This has raised severalquestions. What is the role of central banks in preserving financial stability? Whenand how should they use monetary policy to pursue financial stability?  If youadmit the argument that one instrument can secure only one objective, do centralbanks have the policy instruments to pursue the financial stability objective?5Independence of Central Banks17. A third major debate in monetary policy has been about the independenceof central banks. In recent weeks, we have all seen this issue of central bankindependence play out in Japan with political pressures on the Bank of Japan toadopt a higher inflation target so as to create more room for growth stimulus. Theexample of Japan is recent and high profile, but by no means an exception; theissue of monetary policy independence has acquired greater potency following theexpansion of the mandates of central banks and their more explicit pursuit of realsector targets such as growth and unemployment.Emerging Market Economies and Monetary Policy Revolution18. Revolution in monetary policy is not exclusive to advanced economycentral banks. Emerging market economy central banks are going through arevolution too with, of course, different nuancing. They have not been inflationtargetters in the strict sense; they have always struggled to maintain the balancebetween growth and price stability. And learning from the experience of severalcountry specific and regional crises, they have also added, either explicitly orimplicitly, financial stability to their objective functions.19. Monetary policy revolution in emerging market economy central banks hasan additional dimension, which is that in formulating their monetary policy, theyare having to contend with the forces of globalization, in particular the spilloverimpact of the advanced economy central banks. The ‘impossible trinity’ asserts thata country cannot simultaneously maintain all three policy goals of free capitalflows, a fixed exchange rate and independent monetary policy. Recent experience6in emerging market economies has demonstrated that the ‘impossible trinity’ is nolonger a text book paradigm; balancing between these three policy goals isbecoming a practical policy consideration.Monetary and Fiscal Policies20. Even as monetary policy, both in advanced and emerging marketeconomies. is going through a ‘revolution’, one thing is clear. Central banks cannotfix economies by themselves. Governments need to act too from the fiscal side, andmonetary and fiscal policies have to act in harmony. On top of this, governanceneeds to improve to inspire the trust and confidence of consumers and investors.21. The crisis is still with us; and the revolution in monetary policy is still workin progress. But it has thrown up a number of questions. How will this revolutionplay out? What will it mean for the mandates of central banks and the autonomywith which they will deliver on that mandate? Who will win and who will lose?And, to sum it all up, what are the lessons from this ‘revolution’ for monetarypolicy? For answers to these weighty questions, who better to turn to than ProfessorJoseph Stiglitz.22. Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming Professor JosephStiglitz to deliver the C.D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture on: “A Revolution inMonetary Policy: Lessons in the Wake of the Global Financial Crisis”.7
