Inaugural Session on Technical Session I – Reorienting StructureIntroductionIt gives me great pleasure to address this gathering of professionals from the financialsector.  I have been impressed by the arrangements which have been made for theconduct of the program, and hope that the proceedings will also match theorganisation in grandeur.I have had the opportunity to go through the papers which are being presented at thissession and I am very happy to note that they are of a high quality and raise verypertinent issues. In fact, I find that the papers presented at BECON have beenimproving in quality every year and this trend should be nurtured.  The provision ofincentives in the form of awards for outstanding papers this year is a good innovationand should be continued.  After all, an important goal of this conference is tostimulate thinking on financial sector issues and to strengthen the linkage betweenresearch and policy.  I look forward to this event being elevated to the level of aninternational conference where meaningful interaction and experience sharing cantake place on issues of common concern.In my address for today, I would like to dwell upon the issues raised in the papersbeing presented in this session and present the regulatory perspective on these issuesas relevant to the Indian context.  As you are aware, this session broadly covers thearea of “Reorienting Structure” and is more specifically intended to cover topics onCorporate Governance, Reforming Capital Structure, Universal Banking and the NewCapital Accord.Corporate GovernanceThe fact that many papers have been received on the subject of CorporateGovernance in banks, is an indication of the interest that this issue continues togenerate.  The papers have dwelt on crucial issues such as the professionalisation ofBoards through selection of competent independent directors, role of the auditfunction, conflict of interest of having regulators on the Boards and the role of theCEO.  Some suggestions have also been made regarding expanding the role of theBoard for Financial Supervision (BFS) to oversee the bank audit function.  I wouldlike to clarify here that the role of the BFS is to provide expert advice and guidance tothe Reserve Bank on matters relating to oversight of banks, financial institutions andNBFCs and it cannot directly undertake audit/inspection of the entities mentionedabove.The papers have highlighted the relentless march in the corporate world towardsbetter corporate governance standards and adoption of uniform accounting standardsand disclosure requirements.  The appropriateness of these twin requirements is muchmore to banking sector where depositors’ funds are many times higher thanpromoters’ equity.Corporate governance is no longer a concept to be discussed endlessly; rather itshould be an action point to be addressed at the earliest with all the seriousness itdeserves.  In my view, this should be so even without any regulatory or otherpressures but as an inevitable adjunct in a highly competitive market.  It is also truethat the obligations of corporate governance are becoming more and more mandatorythrough listing and other requirements with the capital markets placing greaterdemand on corporates including banks for information flow.  The obligations ofdirectors to furnish corporate governance reports to shareholders under the listingagreement with SEBI is a clear pointer in this regard.The lines of responsibility in the banks’ Board therefore need to be clearly drawn toensure that  :(a) the policy initiatives to keep the wealth of the bank growing are clearly drawn(b) action plans towards their implementation are conceived realisticallyconsistent with available human and other resources and(c) there is a constant review mechanism to get a feed back on theimplementation efficiencies for course correction.The demands on the Board of banks are therefore going to be truly onerous.We have come across instances of members of certain bank Boards showingreluctance to ratify and adopt the covenants circulated by the Reserve Bankcontaining the recommendations of Dr. Ganguly Committee on theprofessionalisation of the bank Boards.  I truly hope that the bank Boards will rise tothe occasion and discharge their fiduciary duties to the fullest in all respects.  Afterall, good corporate governance can not be enforced by regulatory dictates but is alarger issue of ethical standards.Role of the Chief Executive Officer (CEO)It is the CEO who is the most important instrumentality for implementing corporategovernance in banks and who has the duty of carrying all the stakeholders with him,including the Board and the bank.  There are some areas where the CEOs have toparticularly focus their energies in the coming year. First and foremost is the effort tobuild a team of performers and motivate the organisation as a whole.  CEO’s jobshould not always be aimed to improve the bottom line of the bank.  Efforts should bemade to go into the staff psyche and HRD issues to create a vibrant structure.  Noorganisation can ever stand on a disjointed and non motivated personnel structure,however efficient and high performing the CEO is.  We have shining examples of two2weak public sector banks having been turned around where the CEOs have provedhow much an institution could achieve with the same set of staff by identification oftalent and proper motivation.Another area is that of induction of new talent – many banks, particularly publicsector banks and a few private sector banks, have successfully implemented VRSschemes,  but how many of them have taken steps to put in place special talentscouting plans.  Similarly, while banks often announce new products, sometimes onlyas a matter of competition, I am not sure  whether issues like strategic planning,mobilization and recruitment of appropriate talent and provision of required trainingfacility to the staff to handle such new products are adequately addressed by them.Successful banks have invariably spent a lot of time in product planning andmarketing which has provided them the cutting edge in this area.Then there is the issue of education of non official directors on the Boards ofbanks.  Non-official nominees play an important role in the deliberations of theBoard and it is essential that the CEO carries them along with him.  This applies inthe case of all banks cutting across ownership pattern.  Whether it involves promoterdirectors, or government nominated independent directors, I will exhort the CEOs tospend significant time in briefing the new entrants on organizational structure,strengths and weakness of the institution, gray areas of internal control and regulatorygaps observed in the past audit/inspections, business plans both near term and longterm, and seek their suggestions for addressing the issues in these areas.This brings us to the crucial issue of the interaction of the CEO with the Board.When we talk of disclosure, what is also included is proper disclosure to the Board bythe CEO.  There have been instances in banks and financial institutions where theBoard has not been kept properly informed but has been held responsible for theactions taken by these institutions.  The blame for this often falls upon the Directorsnominated by the Government or RBI, as they are seen to be more responsible thanthe others for safeguarding the institution.  There is of course a larger issue in thiswhich has been mentioned in the papers being presented, and that is of the conflict ofinterest in the role of the RBI as a regulator and as a director on the Board of abank/financial institutions.  I must clarify here that we too are more than aware of thisconflict  and are reluctant to take on this role, and do so only in cases where we haveno option – either where it is a legal requirement or where a bank’s conditionfinancial or otherwise, warrants presence of RBI nominee.  Even in these situations,to minimise the conflict, officials from the areas of supervision or regulation are notnominated on the Boards of these institutions.There are certain other areas in which the CEOs should bestow their personalattention.  I shall mention three important ones: housekeeping, fraud preventionand NPA management.3(a) In the area of housekeeping, there must be a concerted effort to clear backlogin balancing of books especially in large branches, tighten control to ward off clearingdifferences which are fraud prone and streamline inter-branch and nostro accountsreconciliation.   Systems should be put in place for control over unusual build up ofoutstanding entities in suspense and sundry deposit accounts, a fertile field forperpetration of frauds.  Strict observance of Know Your Customer (KYC) proceduresis essential to prevent reputation risks emerging in the area.(b) Coming to fraud prevention, CEOs should ensure that there is follow-up  andquick disposal of cases relating to large value frauds of say Rs.1 crore and abovewithin the time limit of 4 months as prescribed by CVC.  They should also implementfraud control procedures by the early implementation of Mitra Committeerecommendations and adopt best practices, strengthen internal audit and controlsystems and put in place accountability process for audit and inspection staff.  Theyshould also establish systems and procedures for immediate reporting of large valuefrauds to RBI/CBI/CVC, co-operate with investigation agencies for tracking down theculprits and complete the disciplinary proceedings as quickly as possible.(c) A lot has been said about NPA management in different forums, but giventhe magnitude of this ailment, I do not have any hesitation in reiterating someimportant points in this forum.  CEOs should adopt dynamic approach in going forcompromise settlements.  Fear of CVC/CBI need not exist as long as banks follow atransparent system through constitution of Settlement Advisory Committees,adoption of committee approach, obtention of Board approvals whenever needed etc.Banks should also make effective use of DRT / Lok Adalats, and the CDRmechanism to further the cause of NPA resolution.  Finally, now that the SRFAESIAct has been passed by the Parliament, banks must set up task forces to make judicialuse of the Act’s provisions with appropriate back up framework to take over, manageand dispose of assets of the defaulting borrowers.I am happy to note that the issue of a regime of corporate governance in urban co-operative banks has also been raised in some papers.  Whatever I have mentionedearlier regarding corporate governance in commercial banks holds equally true for co-operative banks.  In fact, it takes on an even greater meaning in the urban co-operative structure because of the influence of political personalities, the regulatorygray areas on account of dual control and the weak regime of audit to which they aresubject.  I would, therefore, exhort all stakeholders of urban co-operative banks towork towards strengthening corporate governance structure in this sector also.Universal BankingThe presentations on Universal Banking have appropriately flagged the burningissues in a very topical area.  It has been mentioned that the speed of consolidation inbanking has begun to slacken, and the model of universal banking which was earlier4being hotly pursued by the big banks is now considered as flawed.  It is also pointedout that recent events have brought to the fore the inherent conflicts of interestbetween commercial banking and investment banking being conducted within onebank.  Further, despite the theoretical arguments in support of cross-selling ofproducts such as insurance, there are few success stories possibly because thisrequires team building and selling skills, which all banks do not have.Extending the above arguments to the Indian context, it is mentioned that the mergerstrategy to create size is likely to be witnessed here and is likely to result in the takeover of the old private banks by public sector banks.I would first like to comment on the issue of mergers.  Let me very clearly state thatthe regulators are interested in seeing a banking sector which has a diverse array ofwell-capitalized and sound banks which have the skill and appetite to serve differentsegments of the population.  However, we do not prefer any particular method bywhich this should be achieved and certainly do not promote mergers between publicand private sector banks as the best solution.Mergers, especially those between banks, are not easy.  First, finding suitable partnersis not an easy task and once this is done, getting agreement on a suitable swap ratio isequally difficult.  Finally, all this requires the blessing of the regulators and is alsosubject to scrutiny at a later stage.  If the merger is approved, then there is thevexatious issue of management control, which is always a bone of contention whetherit is a merger or an acquisition. Compulsory mergers are not always a good solutionbecause they invariably involve one weak bank and lead to a loss for the shareholdersand the depositors and also has the potential to create a systemic problem.It is our view that mergers are best left to the markets to decide and regulators shouldonly create an environment which can facilitate consolidation among willinginstitutions.  However, regulators may have to step in where a weak bank can nomore exist and compulsory merger is the only option in the interests of both thedepositors and the system.However, in the Indian context, mergers have raised another type of policy issue.  Irefer here to the reverse mergers between the DFIs and banks.  With the DFI modelincreasingly becoming unviable, one DFI has already merged with the bank floatedby it; another is contemplating converting itself into a bank while a third is likely tobe reduced to a narrow bank.  The main incentive for this is of course the access tothe cheap and stable bank deposit base, but the consequence of this is the drying up ofsources of long term finance for the economy.  Banks, therefore, have to fill this gapby funding long term projects which are viable.  At the same time, they have to findsuitable ways to mange their ALM mismatches which would arise from using thelower duration deposits to fund the higher duration projects.5On the issue of diversification and universal banking, I share some of the concernsexpressed here, given that many banks have not made significant gains in alliedactivities handled through subsidiaries. The reasons for this may have beenindiscriminate entry into different lines of business.  It is heartening to note that bankshave taken stock of the situation and begun to exit from businesses in which they didnot have either skill or scope.Capital StructureFrom the presentations on capital structure of banks, it would appear that this is theright time for banks to begin planning for their capital needs for the coming years,since their performance has been better and since the markets are receptive.  Althoughthe average capital adequacy of the banking system is over 11%, this is not enough.The need for capital can go up in the coming years on account of two events.  First, ifthere is a pick up in credit demand, then banks would need to re-align their riskweighted portfolio to meet this.  Currently, they have invested 10-15% over the SLRrequirements in Government Securities, which attract 0% credit risk-weight and 2.5%market risk weight.  If this quantum is required to be redeployed in the loan book ofbanks then this loanable surplus will attract 100% risk-weight and warrant allocationof  additional capital.The second reason why banks will need to augment their capital in the coming yearsbrings us to a key topic that was listed for this session but on which no papers havebeen received – the New Capital Accord, which is also termed as Basel II.The Accord represents the ultimate convergence of research and practice insupervision as it attempts to apply state of the art financial modelling techniques tothe prescription of capital adequacy.  I will briefly mention the progress being madein the consultative process, what will be the likely shape of the final proposals andhow these would impact our banks.Basel II: The New Capital AccordWe have been actively participating in the international discussions on the proposalsand have also been in the forefront of an initiative with other non G-10 supervisors topromote the recognition of a feasible approach which could be adopted by lesscomplex banks without imposing significant costs.  We support the move towardsenhanced risk sensitivity in the capital allocation process.  However, our basicconcerns regarding the proposed framework, have been that the StandardizedApproach (SA), which the majority of the banks in the world are expected to apply, isbased on the ratings of bank borrowers by external agencies.  This approach isdeficient because penetration of such ratings is very low and not expected to increasesignificantly in the near future. Besides, such ratings are not seen as reliable in view6of the track record of some of the agencies.  Further, wherever ratings are available,these are more issue ratings than issuer ratings, and culture of rating issuers has notyet developed.  Finally, there is the important issue as to the cost that this ratingwould impose upon the system.In view of the above constraints, such an approach essentially does not enhance risksensitivity significantly in developing economies and hence is not favoured over theexisting approach.  Further, such an approach could put banks in jurisdictions wherean external rating culture was not widespread at a relative disadvantage to banks inother jurisdictions and simply lead to an increase in capital requirements.On the other hand, the internal rating based (IRB) approach is a more risksensitive option and is also theoretically sound as banks are in the best position toevaluate their borrowers.  In fact, the installation of this approach will lead to betterrisk management practices in banks and the output of these systems can be used forpurposes other than pure capital allocation. However, only banks that have thenecessary wherewithal in terms of data, MIS and skills can apply this approach in thetimeframe contemplated i.e. by 2006.Given that many countries have only recently implemented the 1988 Accord andgiven the different stages of sophistication at which the emerging economy bankingsystems are at present, it may be necessary to phase in the New Accord in countryspecific time schedules.  The Basel Committee has taken note of the concernsexpressed by India and other non-G10 supervisors and recognized that non-membercountries would need more time beyond 2006 to implement the new framework andthat they should not be considered as non-compliant till they are ready to move to theNew Accord.  The Committee is also working with a group of national supervisors,including India, to develop an option within the standardized approach that will notbe based on external ratings but will be an extension of the current risk-weightingsystem.This does not mean that our banks should take it easy as far as implementing theAccord is concerned.  On the contrary, it should be the endeavour of our banks, whichhave international presence and also those, which are technologically capable toinstall IRB systems as early as possible.You will be interested to know that the Reserve Bank has already taken steps toimplement two main components of the second pillar of Basel II, viz., Risk BasedSupervision (RBS) and Prompt Corrective Action (PCA).  PCA framework hasalready been put into operation by the Reserve Bank and banks have been advised toinitiate necessary steps to prevent them from attracting the provisions of thisframework.  Risk-based supervision will come into force from the first quarter of nextyear.7ConclusionRBI has been putting in place various regulatory requirements to bring up the bankingsystem on par with international requirements.  The measures have been introducedgradually considering the over all ability of the banks to adopt them and after dueprior consultation.  This process is irreversible and all banks and financial institutionshave to necessarily find the wherewithal to comply with them sooner rather than later.Simultaneously, RBI has also been consistently moving away from “microregulation”.  The combination of the above has resulted in considerable pressure onthe banks to reorient them and to function in a market driven environment.  Thiswould evidently need a very pro-active management which is alive to the competitionand the emerging scenario of the “low cost high efficiency “needs of operation inorder to survive in the short to medium term.  Needless to say, unless the governanceprocess at the corporate and Board level is fully attuned to this requirement and issupplemented by advice and strategies from professionals, risks of slippage wouldemerge gradually.You would see that the developments in the banking system mentioned by me, thoughseemingly independent, have a common connecting thread. Strong capitalization,sound performance, corporate governance, meeting challenges of competition,consolidation and providing market information are all inter woven.  Nonperformance or under performance in any one of these areas would attract immediatenotice of the stake holders and action from the regulators.  In this situation, efficientand alert leadership needs as also quality governance and management could nolonger be wished away.I conclude by once again complimenting the organisers of BECON for doing anexcellent job, and the authors of the papers for having raised some very importantissues.  I wish them success in their professional careers and expect them to continueto improve the quality of their research and analysis so that they can make adifference for their organisations.December 28, 2002.Address by Shri G P Muniappan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bank Economists’Conference, Bangalore.8
