Deposit Insurance Reforms in India State of the Debate *I am honoured at being invited to inaugurate this seminar on Deposit Insurance Reforms inIndia. As you are aware, reform in deposit insurance is a crucial component of financialsector reforms. The importance accorded to this area is reflected in the composition of theInsurance which had eminent bankers and academicians asmembers besides all the three Deputy Governors of Reserve Bank including myself. UnionFinance Minister Shri Yashwant Sinha had mentioned this item as a major agenda item forreform in his last budget address to the Parliament. The issue is also topical in the sense thatat the international level, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) which has been convened bythe G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to promote international stability inthe wake of the East Asian financial crisis, has already created a Study Group on DepositInsurance. This Study Group has recently published an “International Guidance on DepositInsurance” as part of the consultative process.2. In India, the Report on the Reforms in Deposit Insurance in India was submitted to theGovernor, RBI in October 1999. We have had extensive informal discussions within theReserve Bank and with the Ministry of Finance on the recommendations of the Report. had also initiated consultations with various sections of the financial sector to examine therecommendations of the Report and it is in this context that I am happy to note the responseto this Seminar  by NIBM at the initiative of its Chairman Mr.  andDirector Mr.  . I am sure that the deliberations here will be rich, fruitfulare :   Whether the deposit insurance cover should be extended to Non Banking Finance Role of the Deposit Insurance Corporation as a  Need for reform in the present system of Deposit Insurance in India4. As you are aware India was one of the earliest countries to introduce deposit insurance wayback in 1961. Later, in 1978, credit guarantee schemes were also appended to the depositinsurance schemes. The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) hasbeen handling both credit guarantee and deposit insurance claims reasonably well.  But thecredit guarantee schemes were not viable and even banks found it unattractive at a later stageforcing them to opt out.  Similarly the flat fee based deposit insurance scheme had createdmoral hazard issues.  In fact the need for reforms in deposit insurance was pointed out by Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (1998) and others as well.5. One of the fundamental issues in the debate on financial architecture is the objective of adeposit insurance system. There is a certain amount of consensus that the principal objectiveof a deposit insurance system is to protect small deposits and to contribute to the stability ofthe financial system.  Given these objectives, should participation in deposit insurance systembe mandatory or voluntary ?  Once this issue is addressed, the second question is how theachieved ? objectives of deposit insurance system can be NarasimhamWith your permission, I would like to flag certain issues for discussion in each of these areas.Institutional issues of the Deposit Insurance Corporation. (v)liquidator and receiver ; and (iv)Companies and other Financial Institutions ;(iii)Criteria for risk-rating of banks and risk-based pricing of deposit insurance ; (ii)Need for reform in the present system of Deposit Insurance in India; (i)3. The main issues regarding Reforms in Deposit Insurance in India and will provide us vital inputs in the implementation of the recommendations of Report.Subrahmanyam GantiM.G.Bhide organisedWeCommittee on Reforms in Deposit 6. Policy makers have a number of instruments to achieve objectives of deposit insurancesystem viz. imposing relatively low insurance average limits, applying some form of co-insurance, etc.  It is in this background that the issue of the limit of deposit insurance cover inIndia, which is at present Rs.1 lakh, has to be seen. In India there have been demands to raisethe insurance cover limit.  Although the Report has not recommended  any change in thedeposit coverage limit, it has recommended introduction of a limited co-insurance fordeposits between Rs. 90,000 to Rs. 1 lakh. Research and international best practices showthat the deposit insurance cover should ideally be twice the amount of per capita income. InIndia, Rs. 1 lakh deposit insurance coverage limit would be 6 times our per capita income;Africa has the highest coverage which is 6.2 times, U.S. has 3.2 times and Europe 1.6 times.A related issue is the issue of introducing the concept of per depositor concept for postinsurance cover. As you are aware, at present holding of deposits in the ‘same right andcapacity’ has resulted in numerous separately insured accounts within a single bank throughseparated insured rights and capacitities like joint accounts. Besides issues such as inclusionof foreign currency deposits has also been examined by the Committee. Views of the7. One of the controversial issues in the Indian context was the operation of the CreditGuarantee Fund, which was in deficit in recent times.  This scheme was similar to thepaybox system’, which meant that the DICGC was largely confined to paying claims on itscredit guarantees. This had considerably affected the viability and sustainability of depositinsurance system in India since both the activities were to be handled by the same institution.One of the recommendations of the Report is to dispense with the Credit Guarantee schemesaltogether and rename DICGC as Deposit Insurance Corporation (DIC). SIDBI has decidedto enter the field of credit guarantee which would take the burden off the DICGC managing8. It has been universally agreed that a flat fee based deposit insurance system providesadverse incentive and promotes moral hazard issues. The Report has recommended theintroduction of risk-based insurance. Here there are many issues – what should be the basis ofassessment of risk profile of banks.  The literature points to FDIC model of supervisory rating), risk adjusted assets basis and option pricing models.  Besides these, are thereany more approaches to risk-based pricing of insurance ?  Given the multiple regulatory andsupervisory framework for co-operative banks, is there a need to address this issue ?  Another related issue is the size of the deposit insurance fund – should it be like FDIC -1.25 per cent of insured deposits or 2 per cent as the Report has recommended.  In the US thebest banks do not pay any insurance premium and whether such a scheme is feasible in theShould deposit insurance be extended to deposits 9. An issue that has raised some controversy is the extension of deposit insurance cover todeposits mobilized by NBFC’s and FI’s. I must confess that this issue has been the mostdelicate one confronted by the Committee. The Report had recommended against theextension of deposit insurance cover to NBFC’s for the time being and suggested that thematter be re-examined later when the supervisory mechanism concerning the NBFCs is fullystabilised. As regards FI’s, the Report has not considered favourably the extension of thedeposit insurance cover. In this context, it would be important to discuss whether theFIs of  NBFCs and Indian context is one more issue, which needs deliberation.differently(CAMELSCriteria for Risk Rating of Banks and Pricing of Deposit Insurancecredit guarantee functions.‘distinguished participants on these issues would be welcome.insurance is intended to safeguard the payment system alone or it has to discharge certain10. At present DICGC is a passive player in the financial scene, with its role confined topaybox’ in the case of a bank failure.  The Report has recommended that DIC should bevested with powers to appoint liquidator/receiver in the case of failure of insured entity - torealise the proceeds to meet the liabilitiesof the insurer. This involves untying a number of legal knots.  At present several enactmentsincluding Bank Nationalisation Act and State enactments on co-operatives present hurdles inDIC acting as receiver/ liquidator. For example, under the nationalization act, only theparliament has the power to close a nationalized bank. The legal issues involved in thisrespect, like the right to take over the assets of failed entities and realise the proceeds to meetNPAs.11. Besides there are a number of institutional issues as well.  Although the Report hadrecommended on FDIC model of deposit insurance system except the supervisory role, DICdoes need to monitor financial health of the insured entities.  The Report has recommended awell-defined platform for exchange of information between DIC and the Reserve Bank,which include access to inspection reports, post-inspection discussions and to be actively12. I hope the above issues and other issues mentioned in the Report will merit your attentionand we look forward to your views which would have a bearing on our future course ofThe Role of DIC as a Pune on August 19, 2000. Institute of Bank Management,  Inaugural address at the” Seminar on Deposit Insurance Reforms in India” for Chairman of Banks at National*action. I am sure we will have very useful deliberations.involved in action plans for banks and in compliance with the action plans.Institutional Issuesliabilities of the insurer, are similar to those confronted by banks in the recovery of appoint parties to take over the assets, sell them and ‘Liquidator / Receiversocial responsibilities as well.
