Indian Banking : Paradigm Shift –A regulatory point of view      I am very happy to be here today in the midst of this distinguished gathering of practisingbank economists.  The decade gone by witnessed a wide range of  financial sector reforms,with many of them still in the process of implementation. Some of the recently initiatedmeasures by the RBI for risk management systems, anti money laundering safeguards andcorporate governance in banks, and regulatory framework for non bank financial companies,urban cooperative banks, government debt market and forex clearing and payment systemsare aimed at streamlining the functioning of these instrumentalities besides cleansing theaberrations in these areas.  Further, one or two all India development financial institutionshave already commenced the process of migration towards universal banking set up. Thebanking sector has to respond to these changes, consolidate and realign their businessstrategies and reach out for technology support to survive emerging competition. Perhapstaking note of these changes in domestic as well as international arena, organisers of thisConference have appropriately chosen the topic ‘paradigm shift in Indian Banking’ as thecentral theme for this year’s bank-economists Meet and they deserve our appreciation.  Iwould like to take this opportunity to take  stock of the impact of regulatory changes initiated,and the central bank’s expectations as regards response and performance by the bankingsystem in order to achieve the avowed objectives of ongoing financial sector reforms.2.   All of you will agree that regulatory framework for banks was one area which has seen asea-change after the financial sector reforms and economic liberalisation and globalisationmeasures were introduced in 1992-93.  These reforms followed broadly the approachessuggested by the two Expert Committees both set up under the chairmanship of Shri M.Narasimham in 1991 and 1998, the recommendations of which are by now well known.  Theunderlying theme of both the Committees was to enhance the competitive efficiency andoperational flexibility of our banks which would enable them to meet the global competitionas well as respond in a better way to the regulatory and supervisory demand arising out ofsuch liberalisation of the financial sector. Most of the recommendations made by the twoExpert Committees which continued to be subject matter of close monitoring by theGovernment of India as well as RBI have been implemented. Government of India and RBIhave taken several steps to -(a)  strengthen the banking sector,(b)  provide more operational flexibility to banks,(c)  enhance the competitive efficiency of banks, and(d) strengthen the legal framework governing operations of banks.3. (a) The important measures taken to strengthen the banking sector are briefly, thefollowing:? Introduction of capital adequacy standards on the lines of the Basel norms,? prudential norms on asset classification, income recognition and provisioning,? Introduction of valuation norms and capital for market risk for investments? Enhancing transparency and disclosure requirements for published accounts ,? Aligning exposure norms – single borrower and group-borrower ceiling – withinter-national best practices? Introduction of off-site monitoring system and strengthening of the supervisoryframework for banks.2(b) Some of the important measures introduced to provide more operational flexibility tobanks are:? Besides deregulation of interest rate, the boards of banks have been given theauthority to fix their prime lending rates. Banks also have the freedom to offervariable rates of interest on deposits, keeping in view their overall cost of funds.? Statutory reserve requirements have significantly been brought down.? The quantitative firm-specific and industry-specific credit controls were abolished andbanks were given the freedom to deploy credit, based on their commercial judgement,as per the policy approved by their Boards.? The banks were given the freedom to recruit specialist staff as per their requirements,? The degree of autonomy to the Board of Directors of banks was substantiallyenhanced.? Banks were given autonomy in the areas of business strategy such as, opening ofbranches / administrative offices, introduction of new products and certain otheroperational areas.(c) Some of the important measures taken to increase the competitive efficiency of banks arethe following:? Opening up the banking sector for the private sector participation.? Scaling down the shareholding of the Government of India in nationalised banksand of the Reserve Bank of India in State Bank of India.(d)  Measures taken by the Government of India to provide a more conducive legalenvironment for recovery of dues of banks and financial institutions are:? Setting up of Debt Recovery Tribunals providing a mechanism for expeditious loanrecoveries.? Constitution of a High Power Committee under former Justice Shri Eradi to suggestappropriate foreclosure laws.? An appropriate legal framework for securitisation of assets is engaging the attentionof the Government,4. This paradigm shift in the regulatory framework for banks had achieved the desired results.The banking sector has shown considerable degree of resilience.(a) The level of capital adequacy of the Indian banks has improved: the CRAR of publicsector banks increased from an average of 9.46% as on March 31, 1995 to 11.18% as onMarch 31, 2001.(b) The public sector banks have also made significant progress in enhancing their assetquality, enhancing their provisioning levels and improving their profits.? The gross and net NPAs of public sector banks declined sharply from 23.2% and14.5% in 1992-93 to 12.40% and 6.7% respectively, in 2000-01.? Similarly, in regard to profitability, while 8 banks in the public sector recordedoperating and net losses in 1992-93, all the 27 banks in the public sector showedoperating profits and only two banks posted net losses for the year ended March 31,2001.? The operating profit of the public sector banks increased from Rs.5628 crore as onMarch 31, 1995 to Rs.13,793 crore as on March 31, 2001.3? The net profit of public sector banks increased from Rs.1116 crore to Rs.4317 croreduring the same period, despite tightening of prudential norms on provisioning againstloan losses and investment valuation.The accounting treatment for impaired assets is now closer to the international best practicesand the final accounts of banks are transparent and more amenable to meaningfulinterpretation of their performance.WAY FORWARD5. Much more has to be done in this area and I would like the banks to view these measuresfor strengthening their fundamentals as a seamless exercise. Globally some of the bestmanaged banks in developed countries are proactive in building up reserves when the profitsare on the upswing and do not wait for regulatory goading. Many of them unhesitatinglyresort to timely write off and provisioning in respect of problem assets. This is a culture Iwould like Indian banks to emulate. I would suggest to Indian banks to go for largerprovisioning when the profits are good without frittering them away by way of dividends,however tempting it may be. As a method of compulsion, RBI has recently advised banks tocreate an Investment Fluctuation Reserve upto 5 per cent of the investment portfolio toprotect the banks from varying interest rate regime.6. One of the means for improving financial soundness of a bank is by enhancing theprovisioning standards of the bank.  The cumulative provisions against loan losses of publicsector banks amounted to a mere 41.67% of their gross NPAs for the year ended March 31,2001.  The amount of provisions held by public sector banks is not only low by internationalstandards but there has been wide variation in maintaining the provision among banks.  Someof the banks in the public sector had as low provisioning against loan losses as 30% of theirgross NPAs and only 5 banks had provisions in excess of 50% of their gross NPAs.  This isinadequate considering that some of the countries maintain provisioning against impairedassets at as high as 140%. Indian Banks should improve the provisioning levels to at least50% of their gross NPAs.  There should therefore be an attitudinal change in banks’ policy asregards appropriation of profits and full provisioning  towards already impaired assets shouldbecome a priority corporate goal.7. The banks should also develop a concept of building desirable capital over and above theminimum CRAR which is insisted upon in developed regulatory regimes like UK. This canbe at, say around 12 percent as practised even today by some of the Indian banks, so as toprovide well needed cushion for growth in risk weighted assets as well as provide forunexpected erosion in asset values.8. As banks would have observed, the changes in the regulatory framework are now broughtin by RBI only through an extensive consultative process with banks as well as publicwherever warranted. While this serves the purpose of impact assessment on the proposedmeasures it also puts the banks on notice to initiate appropriate internal readjustment to meetthe emerging regulatory prescriptions. Though adequate transitional route has been providedfor switchover to new regulatory measures such as scaling down the exposure to capitalmarket, tightening the prudential requirements like switch over to 90 day NPA norm,reduction in exposure norms, etc., I observe from the various quarters from which RBI getsits inputs that the banks are yet to take serious steps towards implementation of thesemeasures. I would like to exhort my banker friends to move in this regard at a faster pace so4that compliance with the norms is in place and at the same time, it will turn out to be apainless exercise.9.  I would like to inform that the prompt corrective action framework which had alreadybeen circulated amongst all concerned and undergoing consultative process with theGovernment may reach the enforcement stage shortly. Such a mandatory framework when itcomes into effect won’t distinguish between banks; banks which fall short of the prescribedlevels of CRAR and ROA and exceed net NPA level would be facing the mandatoryenforcement actions irrespective of the stable  ownership. The banks should well note to go infor proactive measures towards improving the financial fundamentals and restore thesoundness and stability of the institution than waiting for the supervisor’s cease and desistorders to initiate such corrective steps.10. The Boards of banks have been accorded considerable autonomy in regard to theircorporate strategy as also several other operational matters.  This does not, however, seem tohave translated to any substantial improvement in customer service.  It needs to be recognisedthat meeting the requirements of the customer – whether big or small – efficiently and in acost effective manner, alone will enable the banks to withstand the global competition as alsothe competition from non-bank institutions.11.   The profitability of the public sector banks is coming under strain. Despite the resilienceshown by our banks in the recent times, the income from recapitalisation bonds accounted fora significant portion of the net profits for some of the nationalised banks.  The Return onAssets (RoA) of public sector banks has, on an average, declined from 0.54 for the yearended March 31, 1999 to 0.43 for the year ended March 31, 2001.12. Therefore, the Boards’ attention needs to be focussed on improving the profitability of thebank.  The interest income of public sector banks as a percentage of total assets has shown adeclining trend since 1996-97: it declined from 9.69 in 1996-97 to 8.84 in 2000-01.Similarly, the spread (net interest income) as a percentage of total assets also declined from3.16 in 1996-97 to 2.84 in 2000-01. The importance of interest spreads and ways ofimproving net interest margins by public sector banks were discussed threadbare in atechnical seminar at NIBM recently which many of you attended. If the new private banksand foreign banks can despite a high cost of funds could still optimise their profits, why notpublic sector banks and old private sector banks which have a much wider reach to low costdeposits through large branch network achieve the same? I would like the CMDs of banks toinitiate cost cutting measures in the operating expenditure besides giving a customer orientedthrust for attracting quality clientele through quality service.  The banks should learn tooperate with inherent constraints.  You should compete in areas where you have competencyand cooperate with competitors where it pays. This change in attitude would, I believe, bringin better margins and optimise your profits.13.  A disheartening feature is that a large number of public sector banks have recorded farbelow the median RoA of 0.4% for 2000-01 in their peer group.  Incidentally the RoArecorded by new private banks and foreign banks ranged from 0.8% to 1% for the sameperiod. An often quoted reason for the decline in profitability of public sector banks is thestock of NPAs which has become a drag on the bank’s profitability.  As you are aware, thestock of NPAs does not add to the income of the bank while at the same time, additional costis incurred for keeping them on the books.  To help the public sector banks in clearing the oldstock of chronic NPAs, RBI had announced ‘one-time non discretionary and non5discriminatory compromise settlement schemes’ in 2000 and 2001. Though manybanks tried to settle the old NPAs through this transparent route, the response was not to theextent anticipated as the banks had been bogged down by the usual fear psychosis of beingaverse to settling dues where security was available. The moot point is if the underlyingsecurity was not realised over decades in many cases due to extensive delay in litigationprocess, should not the banks have taken advantage of the one time opportunity providedunder RBI scheme to cleanse their books of chronic NPAs ? This would have helped inrealising the carrying costs on such non-income earning NPAs and released the funds forrecycling. I would expect the banks to pursue action in tackling large wilful defaults,effective utilisation of DRTs, and go in for compromise settlements wherever feasible underthe banks’ own schemes with transparency and accountability.14. The Boards of public sector banks need to be alive to the declining profitability of thebanks. One of the reasons for the low level of profitability of public sector banks is the highoperating cost. The cost income ratio (which is also known as efficiency ratio of public sectorbanks) increased from 65.3 percent for the year ended March 31, 2000 to 68.7 per cent for theyear ending March 31, 2001. The staff expenses as a proportion to total income formed ashigh as 20.7% for public sector banks as against 3.3% for new banks and 8.2% for foreignbanks for the year ended March 31, 2001.  There is thus an imperative need for the banks togo for cost cutting exercise and rationalise the expenses to achieve better efficiency levels inoperation to withstand declining interest rate regime.15. As you have observed from Governor’s address in the recent NIBM annual day function,the corporate governance principles acquire a different connotation when applied to thebanking system. Unlike other sectors, banks are highly leveraged institutions and depositorsbeing larger stake holders than equity owners require to be protected. In a deregulatedenvironment, the Boards of banks are expected to play a more pro-active role in preservingthe financial soundness and stability of the institution for depositors’ protection, besidesenhancing shareholders value. The decisions in regard to deployment of resources and pricingof the assets and liabilities are vested with the Boards themselves.  This brings us to the needfor a professional and qualified Board of Directors who are able to guide the bank in regardto audit, risk management, transparency, etc. in a de-regulated environment.16. Taking a cue from the recent happenings in some of the banks in relation to capitalmarket exposures and recognising the need for better corporate governance in the banks, RBIhas recently constituted a High Powered Group under the Chairmanship of Dr AshokGanguly, a director of the Central Board of RBI. The group has drawn representatives fromvarious fields including from management institutes, non official directors of banks, andeminent industrialists and is in the process of formulating its recommendations to strengthenthe internal defences at all levels. The international recommendations in this area call fortransparency and accountability at the Board level as well at various senior management andother functional levels so that policy and operational aberrations and deviations from goodpractices are effectively checked and prevented. The CMDs/CEOs of banks both in privateand public sector should try to promote participative governance and adopt well defineddisclosure standards at Board level as well as at controlling levels down the line.17.  Boards of banks have much more freedom now than they had a decade ago, andobviously they have to play the role of change agents. They should have the expertise toidentify, measure and monitor the risks facing the bank and be capable to direct and supervisethe bank’s operations and in particular, its exposures to various sectors of the economy, and6monitoring / review thereof, pricing strategies, mitigation of risks, etc. The Board of thebanks should also ensure compliance with the regulatory framework, and ensure adoption ofthe best practices in regard to risk management and corporate governance standards.  Theemphasis in the second generation of reforms ought to be in the areas of risk management andenhancing of the corporate governance standards in banks.18.   Before I conclude, I would also like to touch upon another crucial area which shouldreceive the attention of the Board, viz., the preparedness for switching over to the NewCapital Adequacy Framework being introduced by the Basel Committee on BankingSupervision, effective from 2005.  The basic thrust of the New Framework is to assign capitalin relation to the underlying risk of the counterparties instead of the existing one-size-fits-allformula for assessing credit risk.  This would require a more scientific assessment of thecredit risk by the banks.  In order to have a smooth transition to the New Framework, thebanks would need to substantially upgrade their MIS and risk management systems.  Thebanks would also need to upgrade the technical skills of their staff.   The adoption of the NewFramework, it has been estimated by some analysts, could lead to an increase in the existinglevel of capital of banks by about 2 percentage points.  The signals to the banks are therefore,to enhance the level of core capital, strengthen MIS and historical data base and upgrade theskills  of the personnel.19.  I am very grateful to the hosting institution of this Conference and particularly toDr.Bidhu Bhusan Samal, the Chairman of Allahabad Bank, for giving me this opportunity toshare my views on issues which are considered vital for the financial sector in their efforts tomove towards changing future scenario.I wish the Conference all success.Text of address by Deputy Governor(Shri G.P.Muniappan) at the Bank Economist Conference onJanuary 14, 2002 at Kolkata
