CapoorAt Reserve Bank of India, we are keenly interested in purveyance of credit to all those who needit, more for the small borrowers and the poorest of the poor the most. Micro Credit, therefore,has been a thrust area with us though the vehicles of credit extension have been under constantevolution over a period of time. Without a supportive regulatory environment, a continuum ofinstitutions providing micro finance cannot flourish and it is thus imperative to promote linkageand integration of micro credit providers with the formal financial system. As the apex-levelfacilitator, RBI’s concern has always been to create an environment that enables micro creditproviders to evolve into institutions capable of achieving wider outreach and critical mass inoperations. The regulatory environment has, therefore, been reviewed from time to time to makeIn this context, RBI had set up a Micro Credit Special Cell in April 1999. Earlier, the NationalBank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD) had appointed a Task Force onthe broad thrust of their reports, we have issued detailed guidelines in February 2000 to banks formainstreaming micro credit provision in India. It will not be out of place to recount their salient• In keeping with the reform of the interest rate regime as part of the overall financialsector reforms in the country ,  the interest rates applicable to loans given by banks tomicro credit organisations or by the micro credit organisations to • The banks have been given complete freedom to formulate their own models orto choose suitable branches/pockets/areas where micro credit programmes can beimplemented. Micro Credit extended by banks to individual borrowers directly or• The criteria for selection of micro credit organisations have also not been prescribed.We have only indicated that it may be desirable for banks to deal with micro creditorganisations having proper credentials, track record, system of maintaining accountsthrough any intermediary is now being reckoned as part of their priority sector lending.choose any conduit/intermediary for extending micro credit. They have been permittedGroups/member beneficiaries has been totally left to their discretion.Self-Helpfeatures :Supportive Policy and Regulatory Framework for Micro Finance in November 1998. Consideringit easier for these micro credit providers to pursue a process of institutional development.Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of IndiaJagdish ByDevelopmental Issues in Micro Creditand records with regular audits in place and manpower for closer supervision and• Banks in India are now free to prescribe their own lending norms keeping in view theground realities. They may devise appropriate loan and savings products and theperiod, grace period, margins, etc. The intention is to provide maximum flexibility inprovision of finance to the poor.  Such credit, therefore, may cover not only• We have asked banks to include micro credit in all their credit plans right from thebranch to the state level. While no target has been prescribed for micro credit, theyhave been asked to accord utmost priority to the micro credit sector in preparation ofpart of the bank’s corporate credit plan and should be reviewed at the highest level ona quarterly basis. It is our view that maximum transparency in both credit design &delivery is necessary as opaque procedures result in sub-optimal benefits. This isimperative as active involvement of the Top Management of the bank leads to a morethe capacity of appropriate institutions, both formal and traditional and local dialogue• A simple system requiring minimum procedures and documentation is a pre-conditionthey should strive to remove all operational irritants and make arrangements toexpeditiously sanction and disburse micro credit by delegating adequate sanctioningpowers to branch managers.  The loan application forms, procedures and documentsshould be made simple.  It would help in providing prompt and hassle-free microcredit. In fact, banks must make all-out efforts to cut down the cost of financialintermediation and reduce disbursement lags. In order to have a faster feel of the, we have also put a revised MIS in2place.ground-level micro credit disbursement movementsfor augmenting flow of micro credit.  We have, therefore, advised banks to ensure thatbeing maintained in the countryside.flexible process approach with the policy delivery framework strengthened by buildingthese plans.  Our guidelines also make it clear that micro credit should form an integralbut also include their other credit needs such as housing and shelter improvements.farm and non-farm activities of the poor consumption and production loans for various regard to micro lending keeping in view the prevalent local conditions and the need forrelated terms and conditions including the size of the loan, unit cost, unit size, maturityfollow-up.• Savings mobilization being a major issue in micro finance provision, we haveintroduced certain major relaxations regarding requirement of registration,maintenance of percentage of assets and reserve fund for non-profit non-bankingfinance companies (NBFC) - Micro Finance Institutions ( MFIs). The MFIs registeredas not-for-profit NBFCs have been exempted from registration and prudentialrequirements. As for deposit-accepting-profit-oriented MFIs, the continued insistenceon ratings is primarily to ensure depositor protection, which, especially when itKeeping in view these initiatives for enabling the micro finance movement in our country to gainin the country. While the progress has been uneven, it is satisfying to note that some significantAll types of banks in India have to abide by the same prudential norms generally. As far as are concerned, there are at present about 700 NGOs under the SHG-bank linkage programme ofSHGs and entrusting them to banks orSHGs. from commercial banks both in terms of institutional structure and product portfolio, applicationof distorting the emerging market but it may also reduce the efficiency of these institutions. We,therefore, consider it desirable and appropriate to support evolution of a self-regulatoryshould now get together and come out with a set of proposed self-regulatory norms. Informationdissemination, research, database creation and experience-sharing among the micro financeWith a view to facilitating smoother and more meaningful banking with the poor, a pilot projectfor purveying micro credit by linking SHGs with banks was launched by NABARD in 1991-92.RBI had then advised commercial banks to actively participate in this linkage programme. Thescheme has since been extended to the Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs) and co-operative banksalso. The number of SHGs linked to banks aggregated 1,21,744 as on September 30, 2000. Thistranslates into an estimated 1.9 million very poor families having been brought within the fold of3practitioners would be the initial step to setting out on the self-regulation path. which would prescribe codes of conduct and ground rules. These institutions MFIs mechanism for , in our view, not only runs the risk MFIs of the same set of regulatory and prudential guidelines to  are significantly different MFIs As intermediation like routing bank credit through financial intermediation like formation of NABARD either in social MFIsstrides have been made in up-scaling the purveying of micro credit across the country.We have recently taken a review of how these guidelines have impacted provision of micro creditcredit to encourage foreign participation in micro finance projects.momentum, the Government of India has recently allowed foreign direct investment in micro/ruralinvolves savings of people, is an overriding concern.formal banking services. More than 85 per cent of the groups linked with banks are exclusiveThere is now an urgent need for micro credit providers to shift from a minimalist approach – that – to an integrated approach to poverty alleviation taking amore holistic view of the client including provision of enterprise development services likemarketing infrastructure, introduction of technology and design development. In this context, thesetting up of the Micro Finance Development Fund marks an important step. Pursuant to thehas been created in NABARD to support broadly the following exposure to self-help group (SHG) members, partner NGOs, banks and govt. agencies; (b)(c) meeting the cost of formation and nurturing of and (e) promoting research, action research, management information systems and disseminationIn the wake of this post-reforms autonomy given to banks to formulate & adhere to sound creditrural market entailing household surveys to determine use of available credit, sources, terms &conditions, transaction costs, household savings, level of indebtedness, impact of technologicalchange, production, employment & income. Coupled with this, they should also take up supplyimportant as the actual loan products need to be designed according to the target market.  It isalso imperative that banks beef up their internal supervisory mechanism with training inputs andThe stated end result – reducing poverty – is measurable only in direct relationship to the lives ofobjectives and pursuing them to the appropriate extent concerns the problem of alternativein India acquire critical importance in the fast-emerging and relatively uncharted area of microcredit delivery. In fact, without the insights of the poor people, who have a long-overlookedcapacity to contribute to the analysis of poverty, we may apprehend only part of the reality ofpoverty and its causes. We are now trying to fashion and sharpen our response initiatives4perceptions of poverty. It is in this context that dialogue-based studies on micro finance providershuman beings, the number and permutations of possible intervention effects. Choosing the correcttechnical backstopping like a revamped MIS.is side studies to take a look at their own branch network and commensurate NGO capabilities. Thispractices and respond to market signals, banks may have to initiate demand side assessment of thebuilding institutional capacity and increasing volumes.issues like institutional growth and transformation, governance, accessing new sources of funding,of best practices in micro finance. This Fund is thus expected to address institutional and deliverySHGs; (d) designing new delivery mechanisms;providing start-up funds to micro finance institutions and meeting their initial operational deficits;activities : (a) giving training andannouncement of the Union Finance Minister in his budget speech for the year 2000-01, this Fundintermediation is offering only financial women groups.factoring in the survival strategies of the poor as brought out in such intensive interaction withthem. Further, our recent studies have also thrown up important HRD issues like posting ofThe study of the role of central banks in the micro finance sector brings out the commitment, orotherwise, of the policy planners to assisting development of sustainable micro finance in thedeveloping economies. It also demonstrates the importance of good policy as an essential pre-requisite for good practice. Recent policy trends in India happily are pointers to a healthyI am glad that this panel discussion attempts to identify regulatory thresholds for micro financeactivities and affords an opportunity to deliberate on the role of central banks vis- -vis microfinance as an important tool in national anti-poverty strategies, especially so as such policyon more operational flexibility, I am sure that as healthy financial institutions,  would alsoShri Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Asia Pacific Region Micro CreditSummit Meeting of Councils at New Delhi on February 03, 2001.5Address by to track compliance with regulatory policies and procedures.observe internal or voluntary guidelines for risk management and put in place appropriate systemsMFIswill remain supportive of healthy growth and development in the micro finance sector with accentWhile I can assure you that the policy environment in India responses have been country-specific. àdevelopment approach to micro finance.attitudinal shift and an unmistakable commitment of the central bank towards the financial systemslocal capacity better.banking personnel to areas for which they have an affinity to secure greater involvement and build
