Bank Economists' Conference – 1998It is indeed a great pleasure and honour for me, as a Central banker, to be in the2. Traditionally, the underlying theme of discussions of any meetings of economists usedto centre around core economic or monetary policy issues.  However, in the context ofthe South East Asian financial crisis, the importance of an effective framework forregulation and supervision of banks and financial institutions has become a crucialelement in any discussion on financial stability. This is more so because in an integratedworld economy, banking crisis in one country can have its contagion effect even on welldeveloped banking systems as had happened recently to Japan. This has resulted inmonetary policy issues giving precedence to the more core issues relating tostrengthening of the financial systems. Central banks around the world have therefore,started working towards strengthening prudential norms and enforcing transparency infinancial reporting and accountability on the part of decision makers in financial3.   After international banking crises involving many countries, it has been recognisedthat effective regulation and supervision by the central bank of the country is crucial forpromoting a sound and strong banking system. The regulatory and supervisoryframework for banks and other institutions in India have also undergone significantThe focus of the statutory regulation of commercial banks till the early 1990s wasmainly on licensing of banks, branch licensing, administration of minimum capitalrequirements, pricing of banking services, reserves and liquid asset requirements, and4.1 Prudential Norms:I may state that after evolution of BIS prudential norms in 1988, RBI has taken aseries of measures to realign its supervisory and regulatory standards almost on par withthe international best practices. While adapting the international norms, one needs to takeinto account the socio-economic conditions of the country. The prudential norms havebeen introduced in India in a phased manner, taking into account the business practices,solvency issues.Regulatory framework for banks 4.   changes keeping in pace with the reforms introduced in the financial sector.institutions to avert any future international financial crisis.midst of practising bankers and economists today.(Presentation by S.P.Talwar, Deputy Governor,  Reserve Bank of India)The Changing Dimensions of Supervision and Regulation2payment systems prevalent in the country and the predominantly agrarian nature of theeconomy. As this august audience will observe, the recent measures introduced in the• • • • provisioning norms for standard assets and shortening the period for categorisation of• improvements in disclosure standards in line with the international best practices are4.2 Valuation of investment portfolioThe prudential norm of marking the entire investment portfolio of banks to marketis also being achieved in a phased manner.  The proportion of permanent category ofinvestments has been brought down from a high of 70% in 1992-93 to 30% for the yearended 1998-99 and the intention to mark 100 per cent of banks' current investments tomarket over the next 3 years has been announced. It is worth mentioning that the bankson their own have prudentially utilised the excess available depreciation provisions to4.3 With the deregulation of interest rates, banks have the freedom in pricing theirservices. The Government of India has also accorded autonomy status to 14 out of the 27public sector banks (in the matter of recruitment, promotion, creation of posts, etc.)which have fulfilled the criteria of minimum owned funds of Rs.100 crore, positive netprofits for the last three years, capital adequacy ratio of more than 8%, and net NPA levelbelow 9 per cent of the net advances.  As a conscious follow-up to these measures, theReserve Bank has delegated more powers to the Boards of banks in the areas ofopening/closing of branches, hiring/renting of premises and other matters incidentalthereto, payment of donations, management fees to the Directors of private sector banks,etc.  It is the expectation of the Reserve Bank that the Boards will exercise their powersThe thrust of supervisory framework for banks in India till the setting up of theBoard for Financial Supervision (BFS) in 1994 was mainly on the solvency of bankinginstitutions. The central bank's supervision over all India development financialinstitutions was confined to monitoring through financial reporting. Similarly, NBFCswere supervised with the limited intent of verification of their compliance with RBI2Directions for deposit acceptance.Supervision of banks and other institutions 5.  more diligently in the best interests of the depositors of the bank.Autonomymark to market a higher proportion of their securities than that prescribed by RBI.being introduced gradually, over a period of time.NPAs, andrisk weight on Govt. securities to take care of the market risk,prescribing provisioning requirements even on Government guaranteed advances,enhancing the CRAR to 9% which is to be achieved by all banks by 31 March 2000,Mid Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy for 1998-99, such as,35.1 The entire supervisory mechanism has been realigned since 1994 under BFSdirections to suit the demanding needs of a strong and stable financial system. Thesupervisory jurisdiction of RBI now extends to the entire financial system barring theCapital market institutions and the insurance sector. Supervisory system is always nowon its toes and timely and appropriate measures are taken to ensure that the seriousThe supervisory intervention is normally triggered by the deterioration in the level ofcapital adequacy, NPAs, credit concentration, lower earnings, and larger incidence of5.2 The periodical on-site inspections as also the targeted appraisals by the Reserve Bankare now supplemented by  off-site surveillance  which particularly focuses on risk profileof a bank,  its capital adequacy, asset quality including credit and investment, level ofNPAs,  credit concentration and group exposures, connected lendings, managementchanges, etc. A process of rating of banks on the basis of CAMELS in respect of Indianbanks and CACS (Capital, Asset Quality, Compliance and Systems and Control) inThough the rating will remain confidential, it will be communicated strictly for the eyesof the Board of directors so that the bank will know where it stands in the assessment ofthe Reserve Bank in regard to its financial strength and methods of operation. I earnestlyhope that the banks will strive hard to remedy the weaknesses conveyed in the RBIInspection Reports and to improve upon their earlier ratings till they reach the best5.3 External AuditExternal auditors of banks play an increasingly vital role in the maintenance of overallsoundness of banks. External audit has emerged as an important tool of supervision ofbanks.  Over the period, the responsibilities of auditors have been delineated not only tomake the system of audit more detailed but also to make them accountable.  The RBI'srole in the selection of auditors and in defining the responsibilities cast on the statutoryauditors, branch auditors and concurrent auditors is to ensure that the transparency andaccountability practised by bank's management is backed by scrutiny by independentexternal auditors. The methodology and processes used to generate available data ascertified by audit profession would improve the reliability of financial statements asIt would be appropriate at this juncture to evaluate the grounds covered by ourbanks so far and identify what needs to be done further to improve their financial health36. and to bring them on par with the best in the world.An assessment of banks' performanceregards their conformity with international accounting and disclosure standards.supervisory rating and maintain the status thereafter.respect of foreign banks has been put in place from the current year's cycle of inspections.frauds which reflect the quality of control.weaknesses of one bank or NBFC does not degenerate into a systemic risk.46.1. ProfitabilityIt is now commonly acknowledged that the banking sector has, as a result of thereforms, emerged strong and resilient.  The public sector banks suffered losses ofRs.3,293 crore  in 1992-93 and Rs.4,349 crore in 1993-94  as a result of the introductionof prudential norms. In 1994-95, the public sector banks turned the corner, with a netprofit of Rs.1,116 crore.  The net profits of the public sector banks have shown anincreasing trend since then and for the year ended March 31, 1998, the public sectorbanks have posted a net profit of Rs.5027 crore. However, this should not lead to any6.2. Non Performing AssetsAfter the implementation of the BIS norms, the gross increased from about Rs.18,000 crore in 1991-92 (prior to introduction of prudentialnorms) to Rs.39,253 crore as at the end of March 1993 ( as a result of introduction ofprudential norms) and to  Rs.45,652 crore as at the end of March 1998.  The quantum ofgross NPAs as a percentage of total advances of public sector banks declined from 23.2%in end-March, 1993 and 24.8% in end-March, 1994 to 16.02% in end-March, 1998.Provisions have been made for one-half of gross NPAs of public sector banks.  The netNPAs as a percentage of net advances also declined during the period: from 10.7% inend-March, 1995 to 8.2% in end-March, 1998.  As a percentage to total assets, net NPAsof public sector banks amounted to 3.3%.  I may mention that the concept of gross NPAsis unique to Indian banking as compared to other countries, for Indian banks findthemselves more comfortable in providing for Doubtful and Loss Assets rather thanOn the banks' level, there is scope for reducing NPAs to more reasonable levelsand in this context, concerted efforts need to be made for bringing down the levels ofNPAs.  It is high time banks evolve an appropriate strategy to manage their NPAs whicha an effective  and speedy approach for compromise and settlements whichb initiatives for  making use of the existing legal machinery for speedyrecoveries through DRTs; strengthening of the credit appraisal and post-disbursement supervision; Banks need to have a hard look at their existing credit appraisal techniques. TheCredit Policy document should not be a static and one-time affair but should beresponsive to dynamic changes in the system.  The Credit Policy approved by theirBoards, should also cover policy in regard to placement of experienced and well trained4NPAs of public sector bankstightening of  the loan review mechanism. dandcshould be transparent;should comprise:-writing them off, as is the common practice in other countries.complacency as pressures on earnings are quite visible in the current period.5Officers in Credit Department.  Officers should be posted to Credit Department after theyhave put in certain minimum number of years of service and after acquiring sufficientexposure in credit appraisal techniques.  Further, there should be a committee approach insanctioning of credit at different levels right from branches to zonal office and headoffice.  The bank's market intelligence should be well tuned and focussed. Better MISand Credit Investigation set up in banks would go a long way in preventing the defaultersof one bank from moving to another branch or bank in the same or another geographical6.3. Loan Review MechanismThe bane of Indian banking system has been the high level of NPAs, some ofwhich have been on account of certain unscrupulous borrowers being allowed a free handto siphon off and divert the funds.  The banks have to find appropriate ways and means toensure the end-use of funds, particularly in respect of large borrowers.  It is in thiscontext that the importance of an effective loan review mechanism in banks needs to beappreciated.  The banks should initiate early steps to put in place a loan review committeeto independently monitor the advances sanctioned over a cut off limit, from day one onan on-going basis and monitor the weaknesses developing in the accounts for initiating6.4. Non-SLR investmentsBesides credit risk, another area requiring immediate attention on the asset side ofthe Balance Sheet, which has now emerged particularly in the context of deregulation ofinterest rates, is market risk.  As Investments form 40 to 50% of the total assets, it is timethat banks start paying equal attention to market risk attendant on their investmentportfolio and more so, in regard to Non SLR Investments. Data indicate that a sizeableportion of such investments of banks is in unquoted instruments. The banks musttherefore put in place appropriate policies approved by their Boards on Non SLR6.5  Internal control systemsAnother area that is of crucial importance is strengthening of internal controlsystems in banks.   The Reserve Bank has, over the years, emphasised the need forhaving an effective internal control system in banks. The Reserve Bank has issuedcomprehensive instructions to banks to tone up their internal control systems andprocedures. Public sector banks are now required to set up Audit Committees to followup on the reports of the statutory auditors and inspection by RBI.  Immediate action ofbanks is warranted on reconciliation of  inter branch accounts which if  left  unreconciled,is fraught with grave risks. Banks should put in place a separate fast track system for5reconciliation of large entries, particularly in respect of TTs/MTs, remittances etc.investments and keep a close watch over the valuation and liquidity of such investments.corrective measures in time.area.6Any discussion on the Indian banking sector will not be complete withoutexamination of certain crucial issues affecting the earning capability of banks. With thetightening of the prudential and capital adequacy norms, banks would need, not onlyincreased capital requirements but higher internal accruals to meet the additionalprovisioning requirements. Public sector banks cannot continue to look to theGovernment for the additional capital contributions.  The additional requirements offunds for meeting the enhanced capital adequacy ratios will have to come from banks'own internal accruals or by raising resources from the capital market.  There is, therefore,greater need for increasing the internal accruals of banks.  These can be furtheraugmented by bringing about operational efficiency, efficient treasury management,paying attention to fee-based businesses, reduction in the cost of funds, control overBanks need to further improve their interest spreads which is possible only bymore efficient use of funds, competitive and efficient pricing system for their servicesand control over overhead costs.  The ratio of wage bill to total income of the publicsector banks is very high as compared to the banks in the private sector.  This needs to bebrought down to more reasonable levels to improve banks' profitability.  Similarly, thereturn on assets of the public sector banks in India is low as compared to that of the banksThere is also an immediate need for establishing appropriate Risk ManagementSystems and Practices in banks.  The Mid Term Review of the Monetary and CreditPolicy for the year 1998-99 has advised banks to introduce effective risk managementsystems to cover credit risk, market risk, liquidity and operational risk on a priority basis.The South-East Asian crisis has brought to sharp focus, the importance of a strongand vibrant financial system, of which banks are an integral part.   Globally, banks havemoved towards consolidation by the process of mergers and acquisitions. The mergersabroad have taken place amongst some of the strongest banking institutions and theunderlying motivation has been to provide synergy to the operations and exploit coreThe old private sector banks have low capital base. With the enhancement in thecapital adequacy ratios, there is an urgent need for these banks to augment their capitalbase.  One alternative is to issue fresh shares to their shareholders.  If these banks areunable to enhance their capital base, it may be necessary to think in terms of mergers8.1. Asset Liability Management68. 7. between the private sector banks, to start with.competencies for optimal earning and profits.Agenda for future growthThe Reserve Bank would be issuing guidelines on risk management to banks shortly.in the private sector and foreign banks.revenue and capital expenditure and by adopting prudent risk management practices. : Certain Critical Issues7One of the major deficiencies in the Indian banks had been the absence of anappropriate MIS for sustaining an appropriate Asset - Liability Management system.With the liberalisation in financial markets and greater integration of domestic andexternal markets, the risks associated with the banks operationally have become complexand call for strategic initiatives towards their management.  Banks need to put in placecomprehensive framework for measuring and monitoring risks associated with liquidity,In recognition of this, RBI has since circulated draft guidelines (with the finalguidelines becoming operational from April 1, 1999), for a broad framework for asset-liability management taking into account the variance in the business profile of banks inthe public sector and private sector as well as the data/information base available to banksin India. Seminars have been conducted for the banks in our Bankers Training College sothat the initial difficulties in information compilation and installation of appropriate8.2. Disclosure requirementsAnother area where RBI has moved ahead, is to impart greater transparency to thebalance sheets of banks.  This was a logical step after the adoption of prudential norms,During the last couple of years, the range and extent of disclosures has beengradually increasing so as to provide a clearer picture to informed readers of balancesheets.  The banks are now required to disclose the break-up of the provisions madetowards NPAs, depreciation of investments, capital adequacy ratio and the level of netnon-performing assets.  Additionally, with effect from 1997-98, banks are required todisclose accounting ratios relating to income heads like, operating profit, return on assets,It has also been recently decided by the Audit Sub Committee of BFS that from yearending 31st March 2000, the following information, among others, should also be• • • • 7Summing upInstructions will be issued by RBI on the aforesaid disclosure parameters shortly.Lending to sensitive sectors as defined by RBI from time to time.Movements in NPAs & Provisions,Foreign currency assets and liabilities,Maturity pattern of loans and advances, Investment securities, deposits & borrowings,disclosed in the published accounts:business per employee and profit per employee.with the banks in India coming under greater international scrutiny.systems are taken care of.interest rates, forex etc.8While concluding, I would like to reiterate that the days of soft options are over.We have reached a stage where a hard look at some of the basic issues will have to betaken to improve banks' general capabilities and to meet the prudential requirementswhich are already delineated for adoption by the industry over the next 5 years in theIn my view, the management strategy for future of any bank should have a three-• • • I would like to stress that the banks, particularly those in the public sector, have to• Control over costs;• Issues in regard to closure of non-viable and loss making branches and  staff• Technology improvements;• • Preparation for meeting Euro deadlines and redesigning forex dealing systems toIncreased capital requirements, further tightening of prudential norms to bring ourbanks in line with international best practices, declining spreads and highly competitiveenvironment are bound to put pressure on banks to seriously examine measures likeintroduction of VRS, reducing rate of interest particularly on short term deposits, closureI expect that the Conference will earnestly address and deliberate upon these issues ingreat detail and length and find specific answers to these problems which as I have said,if not tackled now will over a period 4 to 5 years, gather a form which will be formidable.I am sure, the Indian banking system will rise as an effective and robust financialI thank the Organisers of the Meet for providing me an opportunity to share myfeelings with the senior bankers and Participant Economists. I also would like toappreciate the excellent initiatives taken by Mr. Sridharan, Chairman of Canara Bank in8I wish the Conference all Success.organising the Meet.instrumentality to meet the challenges lying ahead in the coming times.of loss making units etc.manage Euro risk.Solutions for Y2K problem by March 1999 with appropriate contingency plans;redeployment arising therefrom;respond with speed and effectiveness to certain core issues for survival like,Improving Internal Control Mechanism.Introduction of adequate Risk Management Systems,  andEffective Credit Management and recovery of NPAs,pronged approach:recent Mid Term Review of the Monetary and Credit Policy.
