Valedictory Address at the Fourth Annual Conference on"Bonds & Derivatives - The Road Ahead"*Ladies & Gentlemen,At the outset, let me express my gratitude to FIMMDA and PDAI for giving me anopportunity to give valedictory address to this prestigious annual conference. The role ofFIMMDA/PDAI has become increasingly important in the development of the fixed incomemarket in India. FIMMDA has played a pivotal role in the documentation of repos, CPs &CDs, finalizing the daily / annual valuation methodology for fixed income securities /derivatives. RBI has also consistently sought FIMMDA's views for repo Accounting,finalizing the scheme of trading of government securities on the Stock Exchanges and on ahost of other issues. I particularly commend FIMMDA for the release of the "Handbook ofMarket practices ", which I think, will go a long way in standardizing market practices for thefixed income securities/ money market instruments / fixed income derivatives. Similarly,PDAI has also played a stellar role in deliberations for framing the regulatory guidelines on ahost of issues. The importance that RBI attaches to FIMMDA/ PDAI as Self RegulatoryOrganisation (SRO) is also evident from the fact that Governor, Dr. Bimal Jalan, hasinaugurated the FIMMDA Conference, for the first time. In this context, let me brieflymention the theoretical underpinnings of the role of an SRO. One can discern five broadelements of effective self regulation. Firstly, Self-regulatory bodies have the expertise anddirect market contact needed to stay abreast of rapid changes in a complex industry. An SROtypically adopts, updates and enforces its own procedural rules and rules of conduct, usinglarge network of market professionals, which contributes towards effective regulation.Indeed, SROs may offer considerable depth and expertise regarding market operations andpractices, and may be able to respond more quickly and flexibly to the changing marketconditions. Second, the self-policing method of SROs increases motivation of marketparticipants, who contribute to the development of industry best practices and standards.SROs help to develop a strong compliance culture in the institutions within their ambit.Third, inclusion of industry professionals on an SRO’s governing body and publicparticipation in deliberations pertaining to regulatory policy and rulemaking, provide thefoundation for an open transparent regulatory framework.   Fourth, historical experienceshows that self-regulation allows for greater flexibility and diversity in methods ofcompliance with rules and regulations than may be possible for a statutory regulator toprovide. Self-regulatory bodies have the ability to quickly modify their rules in response tochanges taking place in the industry. Fifthly, SROs ensure better information sharing amongparticipants, which is of immense value, as it contributes to coordination of market oversightand reduces systemic risks.  It is gratifying that FIMMDA & PDAI have been fairlysuccessful in discharging the above roles of an effective SRO.The presentations on Emerging Bond Markets, Australian Financial Markets, recentdevelopments in the OTC derivatives market and on the Indian Economy and governmentborrowing must have been very interesting and insightful. I am sure that the panel discussionson government securities market and Corporate papers were also absorbing.The theme for the Conference "Bonds and Derivatives - The Road ahead" is also extremelytopical and it speaks of the growing maturity of the Indian Financial system. The Indian bondmarket is currently at an interesting stage of development. Future progress of the bondmarkets should be generally on the following lines:1(i) Role of derivatives in risk mitigation(ii) Enlargement of the investor base(iii) Introduction of new instruments for better balance sheet managementLet me elaborate a little on all these issues.(i) Risk mitigation through derivatives: Although Indian market is far from being complete in an academic sense, we havealready initiated some steps in that direction. OTC rupee derivatives in the form of Forwardrate Agreements / Interest Rate swaps were introduced in India in July, 1999. Since theintroduction of FRAs / IRS transactions have recorded substantial increase. In terms ofnumber of contracts and outstanding notional principal amount, IRS contracts have jumpedfrom about 200 contracts amounting to Rs 4000 crore in March, 2000 to 6500 contracts forRs 150,000 crore in December 2002.Though in a majority of these contracts , the marketplayers have used NSE-MIBOR as the benchmark rate, they have also been using otherbenchmarks as Mumbai Inter bank Forward Offered Rate (MIFOR) , Mumbai Inter bankOffered Currency Swaps (MIOCS), Mumbai Inter bank Overnight Index swaps (MIOIS) ,primary auction treasury bill rates etc.  In order to give a further fillip to the market, you areaware that an Working Group on OTC Rupee derivatives under the Chairmanship of ShriJaspal Bindra, CEO, Standard Chartered Bank (Indian Region) has submitted its report to theDeputy Governor on 30 January, 2003. As and when derivatives both Over the Counter typeas well as Exchange traded ones get enabled, this will open up a range of possibilities forefficient pricing, hedging and managing of interest rate risks. But it also raises a set of newissues like counter party risks, liquidity risks etc., which, although not unfamiliar, but will beimportant in this altered milieu. I have a feeling that, for optimizing the capital charges, theclearing and settlement of contracts should increasingly be through a centralizedcounterparty. Such arrangements not only reduce counter party risk but also considerablysimplify documentation and settlement operations which reduce operational risk andsettlement costs.In June 2000, derivatives have been allowed on stock exchanges also (at NSE andBSE).   The available products are : Index futures and options, basket futures and options,stock futures and options.  As between, Index/basket derivatives and stock derivatives, stockderivatives are more popular.  Further, as between futures and options, futures are morepopular.  As between stock exchanges, derivatives have large volumes on NSE.  The marketfor stock futures is growing very fast.  During 2001-02, 43 lakh contracts for a total amountof Rs.1,03,848 crore were traded on the exchanges.  NSE accounted for 98% of the volume,while the remaining 2% by BSE.  The volumes have shown fast growth from month to month: Rs.320 crore in April 2001, Rs.840 crore in June 2001, Rs.5,680 crore in September 2001,Rs.13,005 crore in December 2001 and Rs.20,538 crore in March 2002.Some uses of derivativesYou had detailed discussions in the seminar on various aspects of derivatives, that is,types of derivatives, uses, mechanisms, benefits, current state of derivatives in India andabroad, risk management practices, and  legal issues.  There is a misconception thatderivatives are used for speculation.  While speculators can use, and do use, derivatives, theycan also be used – and are used – by businessmen and investors to hedge their risks.2There can be a variety of uses of derivatives.  We can discuss a few of them.  I amusing simple examples for an easy understanding of the subject.  Please excuse me for anyerror because of my limited knowledge of the subject.Suppose, a manufacturer has received order for supply of his products after sixmonths.  Price of the product has been fixed.  Production of goods will have to start after fourmonths.  He fears that, in case the price of raw material goes up in the meanwhile, he willsuffer a loss on the order.  To protect himself against the possible risk, he buys the rawmaterial in the 'futures' market for delivery and payment after four months at an agreed price,say, Rs. 100 per unit.  Let us take the case of another person who produces the raw material.He does not have advance orders.  He knows that his produce will be ready after four months.He roughly knows the estimated cost of his produce.  He does not know what will be theprice of his produce  after four months.  If the p-rice goes down, he will suffer a loss.  Toprotect himself against the possible loss, he makes a 'future' sale of his produce, at an agreedprice, say, Rs. 100 per unit.  At the end of four months, he delivers the produce and receivespayment at the rate of Rs. 100 per unit of contracted quantity.  The actual price may be moreor less than the contracted price at the end of contracted period.  A businessman may not beinterested in such speculative gains or losses. His main concern is to make profits from hismain business and not through rise and fall of prices.  He wants to work with peace of mindand some assurance.Let us take another example.  Suppose a person is going to retire after one year.  Hewants to invest a part of his retirement dues to be received after one year, in shares.  He feelsthat share prices ruling at present are quite reasonable, and after one year the prices might goup.  He enters a 'futures' contract for one year to buy the shares at an agreed price of, say, Rs.100 per share.  After one year, he will make payment at the contracted rate and will receivethe shares.  There is another person who holds investments in shares.  He desires to sell hisinvestments after one year, for use for his daughter's marriage.  He is afraid that if prices ofhis investments fall after one year, he will suffer a loss.  He cannot sell them now as he haspledged them with a bank as security for a loan.  He hedges the risk by selling hisinvestments through a 'futures' contract for one year at a contracted price of, say, Rs. 100 pershare.In the above two examples, at the end of one year, ruling price may be more than Rs.100 or less than Rs. 100.  If the price  is higher(say, Rs. 125),  the buyer is gainer for he paysRs. 100 and gets shares worth Rs. 125, and the seller is the loser for he gets Rs.100 for sharesworth Rs. 125 at the time of delivery.  On the other hand, in case the  price is lower (say,Rs.75), the purchaser is loser;  and the seller is the gainer  There is a method to cut a part ofsuch loss  by buying a 'futures ' contract with an 'option', on payment of a fee. The optiongives a right to the buyer/seller to walk out the 'futures' contract.  Naturally, a person willexercise option only if beneficial.  In the above example, suppose the option fee is Rs. 10,and the price of shares at the time of exercise is Rs. 75, it will be advantageous for the buyerof shares to exercise the option.  Thus, if he directly buys shares in the spot market, his costwill be only Rs. 85(Rs.75+Rs.10 fee) as against Rs. 100 which he had to pay under the'futures' contract.   In case the current price at the time of delivery is higher (say, Rs.125) thanthe contracted price     (Rs. 100) plus option fee,  the seller of shares will be similarlybenefited in opting out of the futures contract, for he can realize a higher price in the spotmarket.3We have noticed from the earlier discussion that one's gain is another's loss.  That iswhy derivatives are a 'zero sum game'.  The mechanism helps in distribution of risks amongthe market players.The above retiring gentleman also wants to invest a part of his retirement dues inbonds.  He is quite comfortable with the present level of yield.  He hedges the risk of fall inyield by entering into a 'forward rate agreement' of one year at an agreed rate.  At the time ofactual investment after one year, he will get the contracted yield on his investment.Let us see one of the uses of 'interest rate swap'.  Suppose a financial institution hassome floating rate liabilities, but all its assets are on fixed rate basis.  In case the floating rategoes up, it will be a loser.  The institution can protect its position by swapping (exchanging)floating rate on its liabilities with fixed rate.  There may be another person holding floatingrate assets.  He fears that the floating rate may go down in future.  He may exchange hisfloating rate receipts with fixed rate receipts.I would like to give an example of 'currency swap'.  Suppose a person is holding onemillion Dollars.  He does not need them now.  But, he will need them after six months forpurchase of machinery.  His calculation is that he can earn a better return on his funds byinvesting in Rupee bonds.  What he does is that he sells the Dollars in spot market forRupees.  Simultaneously, he buys Dollars 'forward' for delivery after six months.  At the endof six months, he sells his Rupee bonds and takes delivery of Dollars against payment ofRupees. He makes payment for the machine in Dollars. (The difference between 'forwards'and 'futures' is that while the former take place between two counter parties in the OTCmarket, the latter are transacted on stock exchanges.)It is also possible to hedge the risk of default on a bond/loan through a 'creditderivative'.So far, we have seen examples of derivatives for hedging business/investment risks.Derivatives can also be undertaken for speculation.  Speculators, as you know, are of twotypes.  One type is of optimistic variety, and sees a rise in prices in future.  He is known as'bull'.  The other type is a pessimist, and he sees a fall in prices, in future.  He is known as'bear'.  They undertake 'futures' transactions with the intention of making gains throughdifference in contracted prices and future prices.  If, in future, their expectations turn out tobe true, they gain.  If not, they lose.  Of course, they may limit their losses through options.Bond derivativesBonds carry several risks.  They carry interest rate and price risks, currency risk(for aforeign buyer) and credit risk(company risk and country risk).  These risks can be separatedand hedged through separate derivative instruments.In view of increasing rates of defaults and credit downgradings, the global market forcredit derivatives has been   growing very fast, during last few years.  The market has grownfrom $25 billion in 1996 to $ 1,500 billion in 2000.  However, the credit derivatives market isstill in its infancy, when compared with the global market for all derivatives at $48,000billion in 2000.4Words of cautionDerivatives market is in an evolving stage in India.  We have, therefore, to proceedcautiously to avoid pitfalls.  We have to proceed step by step, mastering the intricacies andthen proceeding ahead.  We have to be humble students of the subject.(ii) Widening the investor baseIt has been known that a wide investor base enables the system to absorb shockseffectively and prevent volatility particularly as the retail investors are largely buy and holdinvestors. In the Indian context, one of the challenges has been to enable investors in far flungplaces to participate in the government securities market easily and transparently. Allowingretail participation on a non-competitive basis in the primary auctions was a step in thisdirection. Now with trading of government securities on the Stock Exchanges becoming areality, the enabling infrastructure is finally in place for those far removed from the wholesalemarket at Mumbai. The benefits for the investors will be competitive and transparent prices,minimal settlement risks and ease of entry and exit from the market as retail trading ofGovernment securities through Stock Exchanges develops. The Primary Dealers are expectedto play an important role, serving as the critical link   between the wholesale and retailsegments of the market.For the regulated entities, settlement will be through clearing member /custodians sothat the integrity of the system is not compromised. Also, to begin with, the institutionaltrades on the stock exchanges will not be marginable and will be settled on the basis of givingand taking deliveries. This practice is identical to what is currently being followed in respectof institutional trades in the equity segment. However, the objective is to move to theinternationally accepted practice of margining all trades.  This issue is under theconsideration of RBI-SEBI Technical committee.Also, the trading of government securities in the stock exchanges represents a changein the process of price discovery from the existing telephone market. RBI has also taken stepsfor data dissemination of trades by putting the NDS trades/ quotes on our website on a realtime basis.(iii) Introduction of new instrumentsA complete financial market in an academic sense means that every financial claim inthe market can be replicated. Although, the attainment of the “completeness” status remainsan utopia even in the most advanced of the markets, it has to be acknowledged that everymarket should offer a reasonable bouquet of products to satisfy the savings and investmentneeds in a cost effective manner. I would here like to emphasize the role of STRIPS andFloating rate bonds and the crucial role of derivatives can play towards risk mitigation infinancial markets.STRIPS(Separate trading in registered interest and principal securities): The workinggroup on STRIPS has given an effective road map for the implementation of STRIPS in theIndian market. It is our belief that introduction of STRIPS will enable the market participants,particularly banks to manage their assets and liabilities in a more effective way than they arecurrently able to. Also an active STRIPS market means the evolution of a zero curve andhence more efficient pricing of bonds. However, introduction of STRIPS mean that the5market makers in STRIPS should be able to manage the risks arising out of holding ofstripped coupons effectively. RBI is aware of this and will take suitable steps as and whennecessary.Floating rate bonds / bonds with option features : Recent experience suggests that floatingrate bonds represent an effective way of managing balance sheet risks arising out of interestrate movements has not been sufficiently appreciated.  Management of such risks isparticularly crucial in a period when interest rate outlook is uncertain. I anticipate a lot ofexperimentation both in terms of choice of indices like treasury bills yields, WPI/ CPI as wellas product design. I also expect bonds with optional features (call/put) to pick up asparticipants develop skills & instruments, particularly in the derivatives market, to lay off therisks associated with such optional features.Before I conclude, I would like to touch upon certain important recent developmentshaving significant implications for the market:1. Repo Accounting: RBI is in the process of finalizing repo accounting procedure. Theaccounting procedure will provide a clear demarcation between balance sheet itemsand P&L items. With the adoption of the standard accounting methodology from thenext financial year, it will be possible  for the market participants to enter into longterm repos and conduct repo from any of the three investment categories. FIMMDAhas already finalized the documentation of the Repo with CCIL as the centralcounterparty; hence the settlement / operational / legal /counterparty risks associatedwith repo transactions have also been considerably reduced.2. Once repo accounting and documentation is in place, roll-over of repos and selling ofrepoed securities can also be considered. CCIL has also launched CBLO(Collateralised borrowing and lending obligations) enabling non bank participantswith surplus cash to deploy the same in the money markets on a collateralized basis.This measure will impart considerable flexibility to the market participants inmanaging their liquidity as well as investments.3. Consistent with the policy of extending the reach of repo markets, RBI has decided topermit repo for government securities held in the gilt accounts with CSG accountholders. Necessary notification is being issued shortly.4. A scheme of securities lending and borrowing is also under examination.  This willenable CCIL to perform its function as a guarantor of the securities settlementeffectively.In the final analysis, the insurance of any institution against the uncertain future is the qualityof its human resources. It is the not the models and systems but the quality of humanresources deployed which is of paramount importance and a source of comfort  both to thetop management as well as to the regulators. But with the tools at your disposal I think themarket is adequately geared to rise to the challenge of an uncertain future. I wish you goodluck in this endeavour.I once again thank FIMMDA & PDAI for providing this opportunity to me.Valedictory Address by Shri Mohammad Tahir, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India, at  the  FourthAnnual Conference on "Bonds & Derivatives - The Road Ahead" organized jointly by FIMMDA and PDAI atGoa on February 1, 20036
