Valedictory Address by Bimal Jalan, Governor, ReserveBank of India to the National Management Convention atCalcutta on September 19, 1998It is a privilege to be in the midst of this distinguished gathering to deliver the valedictoryaddress to the National Management Convention this evening. This is the Silver Jubilee year ofthis Convention, and represents an important event in the history of the All India ManagementAssociation.It is a fitting tribute to the Silver Jubilee year that this convention is devoted to such animportant theme as strategies for strengthening competitiveness of Indian economy. The themechosen for this convention constitutes the very substance of the recent Indian economic reformand the hope on which building a strong and prosperous Indian economy is based.I am sure the deliberations in the convention over the past two days would have producedmany valuable clues to our understanding of the competitive strength of Indian economy andcurrent management challenges facing the economy. The Indian economy has been on thethreshold of a major change since 1991-92. We are about to cross over the present millenniumwith some achievements. But the big question facing us is the challenges of the next millennium.This question is inextricably linked to how quickly and effectively we respond to the emergingglobal competition and constantly reorient ourselves to the changing requirements of the worldeconomy. What I propose to do in my address is to highlight some of the management issues thatare likely to assume importance in facing the challenges of the next century against thebackground of our history, current achievements and future requirements.Management Challenges : The Core IssueAs we cross over to the next millennium in a few years from now, we would be facedwith a world economy, which is more integrated, more competitive and substantially transformedin terms of trade opportunities. While most of the existing trade barriers among nations wouldhave been significantly relaxed with the coming into being of a multilateral regime of free trade,the cross border restrictions on movement of capital, labour and technology are also likely todiminish over a period of time. What implication does this have for India?It is clear that the expansion of global market and dismantling of protective barriers totrade and commerce would create a major impact in terms of enhancing growth opportunities forIndian economy. While trade opportunities grow, the protection advantages that a large domesticmarket offered to Indian industries would decline in importance as a source of growth of Indianindustry. Our ability to penetrate both domestic and world market would depend on our relativecompetitive strength vis-à-vis other nations. Secondly, the source and nature of competitivestrengths of nations in the Twenty-first century is going to be characteristically different fromthat of the nineteenth and early twentieth century. In the earlier century, the world leaders inbusiness mostly derived their competitive strength from breakthrough in major scientificinventions and their slow dissemination across countries. In the Twenty-first century scientificinnovations are not going to be based on capital alone, nor on the monopolistic position of a fewnations. Today, both capital and technology are fluid. It is the disembodied technology ratherthan the hard ware, which is moving faster across countries in bridging technological gaps. Intoday’s world – and more so in the next century – apart from technological leadership,competitive strength of nations would more and more depend on the strategic behaviour of firms,their adaptability to changing world environment and how they promote their core competence inseveral spheres. These challenges are to be primarily fought on management and technologyfront.For countries which are deficient in investment, improving saving and investmentperformances poses an important challenge for building national capabilities to face globalcompetition. This is a core issue for India at present, considering that our investment needs arehigh in several sectors. The stress on investment however, has to be tempered with emphasis onproductivity growth for facing competition. It has been an old dictum in economics that factoraccumulation alone can not sustain the long-term impetus to growth. Or, the steady state growthconditions are not solely influenced by how much capital an economy is able to accumulate. Thelaw of diminishing return would eventually bring down the rate of return on capital and slowdown the growth rate in the absence of productivity growth. On the contrary, long-run growthdepends on how effectively and efficiently the scarce capital and labour has been put to use.Hence efficiency, and its relative measure viz., competitiveness, forms a vital aspect of the long-run growth process of an economy. Technological progress, innovation and human skilldevelopment are some of the dominant forces that sustain long-run growth conditions andinternational competitiveness of an economy.While in all this, firm-level performance plays a critical role, it’s effectiveness alsodepends on the nature of public policy environment under which firms operate and whether suchpolicy conditions allow them to achieve the needed economies of scale and allocative efficiencyin production. This is why macro-economic policies and the nature of governance have receivedincreased attention in the growth strategies of developing economies. It is not surprising,therefore, that much of today’s struggle for survival and progress in economic field is centeredaround how to improve the relative competitive strength of an economy by adopting policies thatare efficiency enhancing in nature and instil confidence among investors and promote long termstake in the economy. And the fact that the global markets have been getting increasinglyintegrated, the risk from non-performance on the policy front is high compared to a situation ofautarky and closed financial market system. No country can afford to ignore this fact in today’scompetitive world.Let me at this stage briefly draw your attention to our long experience with economicmanagement and the lessons that we learnt, which could help us in meeting challenges of thenext century.India in the Midst of ChangeEven before a new modern nation state came into existence India had a remarkablehistory in the maritime trade, or what used to be called as emporia trade in the medieval times.India was not only exposed to free trade from a very early time it also maintained its competitiveposition in world trade in several goods. Even during the colonial times, India’s competitivestrength remained fairly intact. It however, lacked exposure to modern technology and a well-organised market and was to face internal price repression and a deluge of non-competitiveimports. It would be surprising to note that even with this disability, India generated a large orderof export surplus in most part of nineteenth and early twentieth century ; the export surplus insome years rising to as high as about 40 per cent of export values. This was also a period, when aslow process of transformation was taking place in the industrial, educational and administrativeinfrastructure, that eventually gathered momentum in the post-independence period to provide anecessary base for the growth of a strong and competitive industrial economy. While the lack oftechnology and infrastructure - except perhaps railways - stifled India’s industrial strength, thepolicy regime that the country had to face in the pre-independence period was not conducive forthe healthy growth of a competitive industrial sector and whatever competitive strength thatIndia came to possess was due to her access to cheap labour and raw materials.In the post-independence period, the problem of transforming an agrarian economy to anindustrial one, building domestic capability in crucial sectors and addressing the immediate needand aspirations of people weighed heavily as a management challenge to a newly independentnation. The role of government in the economic management therefore, grew in relativeimportance. Nevertheless, a strong foothold for private sector was maintained alongside adominant public sector.The management challenges in recent years are significantly different in nature than in earlyyears of our independence. The role of market forces in the economy has increased considerablywith the dismantling of industrial licensing and control system, liberalisation of foreigninvestment and technology transfer, gradual deregulation of financial sector and reduction ofdomestic protection through lowering of tariffs. The industrial sector has been exposed to bothinternal and external competition. As a result, a process of restructuring has started with respectto firms’ core competence and long-term strength, need for diversification, leveraging position,strategic alliances, marketing strategy and research and development need. This change inapproach is seen in both private and public sector. The industry has become more and moreconscious of building advantages in technology, technical skill and cost competitiveness. Aperceptible difference is observed in the attitude of entrepreneurs and mangers in givingimportance to consumer preferences, forward looking planning, and devising unique firmspecific strategies to improve the share in the market.The growth of a consumer - focussed management culture has been at the heart of themodern day economic liberalism. Its necessity stems from the primacy of ‘choice’ and‘individual initiative’ as the basis for improving efficiency. Hence, the role of governmentmanagement has accordingly changed to a more complementary position of providingmacroeconomic stability, protecting citizens’ rights and creating equal opportunities.India’s long history of economic management has led to consolidation of strength inmany areas. Among the significant areas of strength are the emergence of a strong anddiversified industrial sector, gaining of self-sufficiency in food, growth of indigenoustechnological capability in several core areas and a steady growth of higher education which hashelped create a large pool of technical talent. The country has a fairly developed institutionalinfrastructure in financial, legal and corporate governance, which are essential for the growth ofmarkets. The overall growth of the economy remains good. Domestic saving and investmentrates are high. In the productivity front, although long term trends do not indicate a strongposition, in recent years there have been evidences of significant improvements. For example,some studies have estimated the total factor productivity growth in the Indian economy at 2.3percent during the eighties, surpassing that of many fast growing economies.There have been also areas of weakness. These mainly relate to instituting a stable andsustained investment environment, providing for enough physical and social infrastructure,promoting competition and demonstrating the required degree of managerial drive that could letthe domestic capabilities translate into international competitive advantages. Our share in worldexports remains very small. India’s competitiveness score as revealed by the globalcompetitiveness indicators also remains low. However, it is interesting to note that in terms ofsubjective assessment of business respondents’ India’s ranking of competitive strength is high(according to Global Competitiveness Report, 1997). This indicates that investors’ perceptionregarding the growth prospects of Indian economy remains stronger than what is indicated by thecompetitiveness index. This is a positive indication as far as long term investment prospects areconcerned. Our high potential competitiveness needs to be translated to quantitativeperformances in future.In short, India has come of age through its long development experience. It has acquired thepotential that would require a society to emerge as a competitive economy. The steady progress,which has been recorded by the economy in the recent years show positive indications of India’srising competitive strength. With its present level of domestic strength India is poised to takemaximum advantages of the greater cross border flow of trade, capital and technology created bygrowing openness of world economy. A growing open economy also exposes firms, investorsand the economy to external competition. It poses the challenge of cutting through severalrigidities that could pose potential risk to the industry and the economy. This is where themanagement challenges are at their toughest test.Meeting Management ChallengesAs I have tried to bring out in the previous sections, our management challenges areprimarily on the front of improving international competitiveness of firms through strategicorientation and by adopting policies and practices that improve productivity and efficiency in theeconomy. As the cream of the best professional talents in India, I am sure, the distinguishedgathering here is more informed and competent than me to judge our present competitivenessstandards and chart out a road map for future. In what I have to say in this regard, I would merelyrepeat some of the obvious aspects.The Indian industry has already demonstrated the kind of resilience and strength requiredin withstanding external competition and eking out a strong presence for them in both domesticand international market. The industry has been going through a process of restructuring in therecent period and the managers have responded to growing competition with enthusiasm andcompetence. This is reflected on the cost of transition to the economy, which has beenexceptionally low, compared to many developing countries in Latin America and Africa thathave recently embarked on reforms. Let me place before you a few of my thoughts on thepossible ways we should respond to the intensified global competition that is to follow in thenext century.The primacy of ‘professionalism’ and "organisational effectiveness" as national standardscan not perhaps be over-emphasised in the context of meeting global challenges. Competition, byits very nature, distinguishes the weak from the strong. With growing openness of worldeconomy, this aspect will receive even more significance, since what is strong domestically maynot be that strong internationally. It is the professional standard – be it in dealing with customersand client groups or improving quality standards and business effectiveness – from where thewestern countries derive most of their competitive advantages. Professionalism is a product ofboth individualist pursuits such as respect for values and mutual trust and the organisationaleffectiveness of a group or firm that harnesses these individual attributes collectively. Thisorganisational effectiveness of a society is often referred to as social capital of a nation. It hasbeen argued by sociologists that although United States and Japan belong to two different socialvalues - the former driven by individualism and the latter by group-oriented society – they sharethe common spirit of high trust societies and high professional standards, that give them an edgeover others in terms of improving professionalism and organisational effectiveness. As FrancisFukuyama, a noted social scientist observes"The future may belong to neither large nor small companies per se, but rather to thosesocieties that can innovate and create the appropriate organisations to meet needs of21st century business."Improving professionalism and organisational effectiveness applies both to private and publicsector and this is where our social values will play an important role in shaping ourcompetitiveness in future.Another challenge stems from preparing for greater degree of openness in trade andmoving away from a protection syndrome. The successive tariff liberalisation attempted since1991-92 has already reduced the degree of domestic protection to industry to a substantial extent.Industry has also responded well to this challenge by readjusting to competitive environment.With global trade integration and obligations under Uruguay Round of GATT agreement, India’stariff rate would have to be further aligned to international level. This would require furtheradjustment by way of improving the flexibility with which an industry can diversify its operationto gain competitive advantage.The most important element of sustaining competitiveness is to build internal strength ofa company by imparting a long-term focus to its planning and developing its unique strength inthe market. This requires identifying our core competence and investing to strengthen this uniquestrength. Given the long history of India’s corporate strength, building core competence on thelines of our comparative advantages should not pose an uphill task. The Indian firms alreadyenjoy a pre-eminent position in several products. There are many Indian business firms that haveexcelled in quality and cost competitiveness in these products to sustain a long-term domesticand international clientele. In order to face increased global competition, it is important toconcentrate on our long-term competitive strength and gear our research and development,technological requirement and managerial strength towards that end.Meeting challenges on the policy front also assumes a great deal of importance in a moreopen world economy. It needs to be mentioned that firm specific strategy to be successfulrequires an enabling policy environment, which promotes competitiveness and efficiency. Herethe role of government comes into focus as a confidence builder, a catalytic agent and amediating agent. Let me note three major areas which assumes significance in this context. First,in an interconnected global market, macro-economic policies need to be geared towards reducinguncertainty and risk to investors and savers. This would require ensuring internal and externalstability in the economy through maintaining sustainable policies and putting in place a propersafeguard system for the financial sector against adverse international shocks and limitingexposure to risk. The macro-economic fundamentals of the Indian economy remain strong asreflected in our relatively low inflation rate, low current account deficit in balance of payments,the large order of fiscal compression that has taken place and the prudential norms in thefinancial sector limiting exposure to systemic risks. These fundamentals will assume much moresignificance as the world economy becomes more integrated.The second important area of policy priority is increasing investment in physicalinfrastructure. It is difficult to think of gaining a long-term competitive strength withoutsubstantial improvement in the power, transport and communication situation. There is at presenta large gap between the demand and supply of infrastructure and compared to some of the fastgrowing developing nations our infrastructure deficiency is very apparent. For example,according to available statistics the electric power generation per 100 persons was 9.2 millionkilowatts in India in 1992 compared to 165.4 million kilowatts in Japan, 154 million kilowatts inHong Kong and 61.7 million kilowatts in Korea and 22.1 million kilowatts for Thailand.Reducing this infrastructure disparity is a task, which needs to be addressed through both publicand private investment. World over the general trend has been to involve the private sector ininfrastructure investment. For example, in some Latin American countries private sectorinvestment in infrastructure is as much as or even more than the public sector. While in Chileand Argentina about 50 per cent and 70 per cent, respectively of infrastructure investment isprivate, this share is comparatively less around 12 to 18 per cent in East Asia, and lesser than thatin India. Increasing public investment in infrastructure and involving private sector ininfrastructure development is a key task for the future.The third major area of policy emphasis for meeting challenges of the next millenium ison building social infrastructure. Our ability to face competitive pressures of a globlised worlddepends on our effort to raise productive efficiency of the human capital. Sustainable economicgrowth is linked to the productive efficiency of the labour force which, in turn, is positivelyinfluenced by nutritional adequacy, health care, educational attainment, skill formation and otherbasic needs of the people. High investment in physical and human capital has been thecenterpiece of many success stories of the world. The general quality of life in India hasimproved substantially during the past several years of development effort. The next milleniumwould present us with the challenge of bringing about a significant improvement in this regard, ifwe were to remain globally competitive.ConclusionLet me conclude. India has a history, surpassing hundreds of years. It has come throughseveral difficult challenges with many achievements in different spheres. It has a strongindustrial base, a highly educated and skilled lot of professionals, rich technological capabilityand entrepreneurial skill, and a mature democracy with sound rule of law. The managementchallenges for the next century are in the field of technology, organisational restructuring, skilldevelopment and public policy. India’s current position in these spheres, though impressive,would require further strengthening in order to enable us to face the next millenium withconfidence. In the context a more open world economy, it is the relative competitive strength thatwould matter. India now has the skill and the will to take maximum advantage of the newopportunities in technology, industry and services.************ 
