Public Sector Banks and the Governance Challenge:Indian Experience*The objective of this paper is to detail the Indian experience in meeting thegovernance challenge with special reference to public sector banks (PSBs) or State-owned banks as they are described in some countries. The paper sets out the historicalcontext of the Indian experience since the governance challenge is significantly related tothe background in which state ownership emerged. This will be followed by an accountof the pre-reform status encompassing the policy, regulatory and structural environments.The measures undertaken to tackle the governance issues during the reform follow. In thecontext of the recent on-going exercise relating to India’s status, vis-à-vis theinternational standards and codes, an assessment would be made on the governanceissues with special reference to the banking sector, based essentially on the assessment ofindependent advisory groups and current proposals under consideration for enhancingcorporate governance in the public sector banks are discussed. An attempt would be madeto highlight what may be termed as tentative issues and lessons emerging from the Indianexperience. By way of a summing up, some random thoughts are set out to provokeanalysis and debate on the subject.Historical ContextIndia had a fairly well developed commercial banking system in existence at thetime of independence in 1947.  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) was established in1935. While the RBI became a state owned institution from January 1, 1949, the BankingRegulation Act was enacted in 1949 providing a framework for regulation andsupervision of commercial banking activity.  The first step towards the nationalisation ofcommercial banks was the result of a report (under the aegis of RBI) by the Committee ofDirection of All India Rural Credit Survey (1951) which till today is the locus classicuson the subject. The Committee recommended one strong integrated state partneredcommercial banking institution to stimulate banking development in general and ruralcredit in particular.  Thus, the Imperial Bank was taken over by the Government andrenamed as the State Bank of India (SBI) on July 1, 1955 with the RBI acquiringoverriding substantial holding of shares.  A number of erstwhile banks owned by princelystates were made subsidiaries of SBI in 1959.  Thus, the beginning of the Plan era alsosaw the emergence of public ownership of one of the most prominent of the commercialbanks.  There was a feeling that though the Indian banking system had made considerableprogress in the ‘50s and ‘60s, it established close links between commercial and industryhouses, resulting in cornering of bank credit by these segments to the exclusion ofagriculture and small industries.To meet these concerns, in 1967, the Government introduced the concept of socialcontrol in the banking industry. The scheme of social control was aimed at bringing somechanges in the management and distribution of credit by the commercial banks.  Theclose link between big business houses and big banks was intended to be snapped or atleast made ineffective by the reconstitution of the Board of Directors to the effect that 51per cent of the directors were to have special knowledge or practical experience.Appointment of whole-time Chairman with special knowledge and practical experienceof working of commercial banks or financial or economic or business administration was2intended to professionalise the top management. Imposition of restrictions on loans to begranted to the directors’ concerns was another step towards avoiding undesirable flow ofcredit to the units in which the directors were interested.  The scheme also provided forthe take-over of banks under certain circumstances.Political compulsion then partially attributed to inadequacies of the social control,led to the Government of India nationalising, in 1969, 14 major scheduled commercialbanks which had deposits above a cut-off size. The objective was to serve better theneeds of development of the economy in conformity with national priorities andobjectives.  In a somewhat repeat of the same experience, eleven years afternationalisation, the Government announced the nationalisation of six more scheduledcommercial banks above the cut-off size. The second round of nationalisation gave animpression that if a private sector bank grew to the cut-off size it would be under thethreat of nationalisation.From the fifties a number of exclusively state-owned development financialinstitutions (DFIs) were also set up both at the national and state level, with a loneexception of Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation (ICICI) which had a minorityprivate share holding. The mutual fund activity was also a virtual monopoly ofGovernment owned institution, viz., the Unit Trust of India.  Refinance institutions inagriculture and industry sectors were also developed, similar in nature to the DFIs.Insurance, both Life and General, also became state monopolies.Pre-Reform StatusThe regulatory framework for the banking industry under the Banking RegulationAct was circumscribed by the special provisions of the Bank Nationalisation Act both ofwhich had elements of corporate governance incorporated with regard to composition ofBoard of Directors in terms of representation of directors, etc.  While technically therewas competition between banks and non-banks and among banks, substantively,competition was conditioned by policy as well as regulatory environment, commonownership by the Government and agreement between the Government of India as anowner and the workers represented by the Unions.  Subsequent efforts during the reformperiod in terms of hesitancy in permitting industrial houses as well as foreign ownedbanks should be viewed in this historical context.  As regards the policy environment, it must be recognised that almost the wholeof financial intermediation was on account of public sector, with PSBs being the mostimportant source of mobilisation of financial savings.  Resources for DFIs were alsomade available either by banks or mostly created money and governmental support.  Themajor thrust was on expansion of banks’ branches, provision of banking services andmobilisation of deposits.  The interest rate regime was administered with interest ratesfixed both on deposits and lending. At the same time, there was large pre-emption ofbanks’ resources under the cash reserve ratio or in the form of statutory liquidity ratio.The delivery of credit was also by and large directed through an allocative mechanism oras an adjunct to the licencing regime.  In the process, the private sector banks tended tobe confined to the local areas and were unable to expand in such an environment.  Banks,mainly public sector banks became the most dominant vehicle of the financialintermediation in the country.  To a large extent, entry was restricted and exit wasimpossible and there was little or no scope for functions of risk assessment and pricing of3risks. The Government, thus combined in itself the role of owner, regulator andsovereign.The legal as well as policy framework emphasised co-ordination in the interest ofnational development as per Plan priorities with the result, the issue of corporategovernance became subsumed in the overall development framework.  To the extent eachbank, even after nationalization, maintained its distinct identity, governance structure asincorporated in the concerned legislations provided for a formal structure of relationshipbetween the RBI, Government, Board of Directors and management.    The role of theRBI as a regulator became essentially one of being an extended arm of the Governmentso far as highest priority was accorded to ensuring coordinated actions in regard toactivities particularly of PSBs.  The SBI, which was owned by the RBI, was in substanceno different from the other banks owned by the Government in terms of Boardcomposition, appointment procedures of the executives and non-executive members ofthe Board of Directors.  Both Government and RBI were represented on the Board ofDirectors of the PSBs.  There has been significant cross representation in terms of owneror lender and in other relationships between banks and all other major financial entities.In other words, cross holdings and inter-relationships were more a rule than an exceptionin the financial sector, since the basic objective was coordination for ensuring planneddevelopment, with the result, the concepts of conflicts of interests among players, checksand balances etc., were subordinated to the social goals of the joint family headed by theGovernment.Reform MeasuresThe major challenge of the reform has been to introduce elements of marketincentive as a dominant factor gradually replacing the administratively coordinatedplanned actions for development.  Such a paradign shift has several dimensions, thecorporate governance being one of the important elements.  The evolution of corporategovernance in banks, particularly, in PSBs, thus reflects changes in monetary policy,regulatory environment, and structural transformations and to some extent, on thecharacter of the self-regulatory organizations functioning in the financial sector.Policy EnvironmentDuring the reform period, the policy environment enhanced competition andprovided greater opportunity for exercise of what may be called genuine corporateelement in each bank to replace the elements of coordinated actions of all entities as a“joint family” to fulfill predetermined Plan priorities.  The measures taken so far can besummarized as follows :First, greater competition has been infused in the banking system by permittingentry of private sector banks (9 licences since 1993), and liberal licensing of morebranches by foreign banks and the entry of new foreign banks.  With the development ofa multi-institutional structure in the financial sector, emphasis is on efficiency throughcompetition irrespective of ownership.  Since non-bank intermediation has increased,banks have had to improve efficiency to ensure survival.Second, the reforms accorded greater flexibility to the banking system to manageboth the pricing and quantity of resources.  There has been a reduction in statutorypreemptions to less than a third of commercial banks resources.  The mandatorycomponent of market financing of Government borrowing has decreased.  While directed4credit continues it is now on near commercial terms.  Valuation of banks' investments isalso attuned to international best practices so as to appropriately capture market risks.Third, the RBI has moved away from micro-regulation to macro-management.RBI has replaced detailed individual guidelines with general guidelines and now leaves itto individual banks’ boards to set their guidelines on credit decisions. A RegulationReview Authority was established in RBI, whereby any bank could challenge the needfor any regulation or guideline and the department had to justify the need and usefulnessfor such guideline relative to costs of regulation and compliance.Fourth, to strengthen the banking system to cope up with the changingenvironment, prudential standards have been imposed in a progressive manner.  Thus,while banks have greater freedom to take credit decisions, prudential norms setting outcapital adequacy norms, asset classification, income recognition and provisioning rules,exposure norms, and asset liability management systems have helped to identify andcontain risks, thereby contributing to greater financial stability.Fifth, an appropriate legal, institutional, technological and regulatory frameworkhas been put in place for the development of financial markets.  There is now increasedvolumes and transparency in the primary and secondary market operations.  Developmentof the Government Securities, money and forex markets has improved the transmissionmechanism of monetary policy, facilitated the development of an yield curve and enabledgreater integration of markets.  The interest rate channel of monetary policy transmissionis acquiring greater importance as compared with the credit channel.Regulatory EnvironmentPrudential regulation and supervision have formed a critical component of thefinancial sector reform programme since its inception, and India has endeavoured tointernational prudential norms and practices. These norms have been progressivelytightened over the years, particularly against the backdrop of the Asian crisis.  Bankexposures to sensitive sectors such as equity and real estate have been curtailed.  TheBanking Regulation Act 1949 prevents connected lending (i.e. lending by banks todirectors or companies in which Directors are interested).Periodical inspection of banks has been the main instrument of supervision,though recently there has been a move toward supplementary 'on-site inspections' with'off-site surveillance'. The system of 'Annual Financial Inspection' was introduced in1992, in place of the earlier system of Annual Financial Review/Financial Inspections.The inspection objectives and procedures, have been redefined to evaluate the bank’ssafety and soundness; to appraise the quality of the Board and management; to ensurecompliance with banking laws & regulation; to provide an appraisal of soundness of thebank's assets; to analyse the financial factors which determine bank's solvency and toidentify areas where corrective action is needed to strengthen the institution and improveits performance. Inspection based upon the new guidelines have started since 1997.A high powered Board for Financial Supervision (BFS), comprising the Governorof RBI as Chairman, one of the Deputy Governors as Vice-Chairman and four Directorsof the Central Board of RBI as members was constituted in 1994, with the mandate toexercise the powers of supervision and inspection in relation to the banking companies,financial institutions and non-banking companies.A supervisory strategy comprising on-site inspection, off-site monitoring andcontrol systems internal to the banks, based on the CAMELS (capital adequacy, asset5quality, management, earnings, liquidity and systems and controls) methodology forbanks have been instituted.  The RBI has instituted a mechanism for critical analysis ofthe balance sheet by the banks themselves and the presentation of such analysis beforetheir boards to provide an internal assessment of the health of the bank.  The analysis,which is also made available to the RBI, forms a supplement to the system of off-sitemonitoring of banks.Keeping in line with the merging regulatory and supervisory standards atinternational level, the RBI has initiated certain macro level monitoring techniques toassess the true health of the supervised institutions.  The format of balance sheets ofcommercial banks have now been prescribed by the RBI with disclosure standards onvital performance and growth indicators, provisions, net NPAs, staff productivity, etc.appended as 'Notes of Accounts'.  To bring about greater transparency in banks' publishedaccounts, the RBI has also directed the banks to disclose data on movement of non-performing assets (NPAs) and provisions as well as lending to sensitive sectors.  Theseproposed additional disclosure norms would bring the disclosure standards almost on parwith the international best practice.Structural Environment of BankingThe nationalized banks are enabled to dilute their equity of Government of Indiato 51% following the amendment to the Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer ofUndertakings) Acts in 1994, bringing down the minimum Government's shareholdings to51 per cent in PSBs. RBI's shareholding in SBI is subject to a minimum of 55 per cent.Ten banks have already raised capital from the market.  The Government proposed, in theUnion Budget for the financial year 2000-01 to reduce its holding in nationalised banks toa minimum of 33 per cent, while maintaining the public sector character of these banks.The diversification of ownership of PSBs has made a qualitative difference to thefunctioning of PSBs since there is induction of private shareholding and attendant issuesof shareholder’s value, as reflected by the market cap, representation on board, andinterests of minority shareholders.  There is representation of private shareholder whenthe banks raise capital from the market.The governance of banks rests with the board of directors.  In the light ofderegulation in interest rates and the greater autonomy given to banks in their operations,the role of the board of directors has become more significant. During the years, Boardshave been required to lay down policies in critical areas such as investments, loans, asset-liability management, and management and recovery of NPAs.  As a part of this process,several Board level committees including the Management Committee are required to beappointed by banks.In 1995, the RBI directed banks to set up Audit Committees of their Boards, withthe responsibility of ensuring efficacy of the internal control and audit functions in thebank besides compliance with the inspection report of the RBI, internal and concurrentauditors.  To ensure both professionalism and independence, the Chartered AccountantDirectors on the boards of banks are mandatory members, but the Chairman would not bepart of the Audit Committee.  Apart from the above, Board level committees that arerequired to be set up are Risk Management committee, Asset Liability Managementcommittee (ALCO), etc. The Boards have also been given the freedom to constitute anyother committees, to render advice to it.6Government introduced a Bill in Parliament to omit the mandatory provisionsregarding appointment of RBI nominees on the Boards of public sector banks and insteadto add a clause to enable RBI to appoint its nominee on the boards of public sector banksif the RBI is of the opinion that in the interest of the banking policy or in the publicinterest or in the interest of the bank or depositors, it is necessary so to do.As regards, appointment of Additional Directors on the Boards of private sectorbanks, since December 1997, the RBI has been appointing such directors only in such ofthose 'banks making losses for more than one year, having CRAR below 8%, NPAsexceeding 20% or where there are disputes in the management.Appointment of Chairman and Managing Directors and Executive Directors of allPSBs is done by Government.  The Narasimham Committee II had recommended that theappointment of Chairman and Managing Director should be left to the Boards of banksand the Boards themselves should be elected by shareholders. Government has set up anAppointment Board chaired by Governor, Reserve Bank of India for these appointments.More recently, in case of appointment of Chief Executive Officer of the PSBs identifiedas weak, the Government has formed a Search Committee with two outside experts.Appointment as well as removal of auditors in PSBs require prior approval of theRBI. There is an elaborate procedure by which banks select auditors from an approvedpanel circulated by the RBI.  In respect of private sector banks, the statutory auditors areappointed in the Annual General Meeting with the prior approval by the RBI.Self Regulatory OrganizationsIndia has had the distinction of experimenting with Self Regulatory Organisations(SROs) in the financial system since the pre-independence days.  At present, there arefour SROs in the financial system - Indian Banks Association (IBA), Foreign ExchangeDealers Association of India (FEDAI), Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI) andFixed Income Money Market Dealers Association of India (FIMMDAI).The IBA established in 1946 as a voluntary association of banks, strove towardsstrengthening the banking industry through consensus and co-ordination.  Sincenationalisation of banks, PSBs tended to dominate IBA and developed close links withGovernment and RBI. Often, the reactive and consensus and coordinated approachbordered on cartelisation.  To illustrate, IBA had worked out a schedule of benchmarkservice charges for the services rendered by member banks, which were not mandatory innature, but were being adopted by all banks.  The practice of fixing rates for services ofbanks was consistent with a regime of administered interest rates but not consistent withthe principle of competition.  Hence, the IBA was directed by the RBI to desist fromworking out a schedule of benchmark service charges for the services rendered bymember banks.Responding to the imperatives caused by the changing scenario in the reform era,the IBA has, over the years, refocused its vision, redefined its role, and modified itsoperational modalities.In the area of foreign exchange, FEDAI was established in 1958, and banks wererequired to abide by terms and conditions prescribed by FEDAI for transacting foreignexchange business.  In the light of reforms, FEDAI has refocused its role by giving upfixing of rates, but plays a multifarious role covering training of banks’ personnel,accounting standards, evolving risk measurement models like the VaR and accreditingforeign exchange brokers.7In the financial markets, the two SROs, viz., the PDAI and the FIMMDAI are ofrecent origin i.e. 1996 and 1997.  These two SROs have been proactive and are closelyinvolved in contemporary issues relating to development of money and governmentsecurities markets. The representatives of PDAI and FIMMDAI are members ofimportant committees of the RBI, both on policy and operational issues.  To illustrate, theChairmen of PDAI and FIMMDAI are members of the Technical Advisory Group onMoney and Government Securities market of the RBI.  These two SROs have been veryproactive in mounting the technological infrastructure in the money and GovernmentSecurities markets.  The FIMMDAI has now taken over the responsibility of publishingthe yield curve in the debt markets. Currently, the FIMMDAI is working towardsdevelopment of uniform documentation and accounting principles in the repo market.Assessment of Corporate Governance in PSBsA Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes wasconstituted to, inter alia, assess the status in India vis-à-vis the best global practices inregard to standards and codes. An Advisory Group on Corporate Governance (Chairman:Dr. R. H. Patil) made detailed assessment and gave recommendations of which thoserelating to PSBs is an important component.  The Report provides the mostcomprehensive set of recommendations on the subject, summarised in Box 1.Box 1Advisory Group on Corporate Governance• Currently in India, about four-fifths of the banking business is under the controlof public sector banks (PSBs), comprising the SBI and its subsidiaries and thenationalised banks. Corporate governance in PSBs is complicated by the fact thateffective management of these banks vests with the government and the topmanagements and the boards of banks operate merely as functionaries. Theground reality is such that the government performs simultaneously multiplefunctions vis-à-vis the PSBs, such as the owner, manager, quasi-regulator, andsometimes even as the super-regulator.  Unless the issues connected with thesemultiple, and sometimes conflicting, functions are resolved and the boards ofbanks are given the desired level of autonomy it would be difficult to improve thequality of corporate governance in PSBs. One of the major factors that impingedirectly on the quality of corporate governance is the government ownership. It isdesirable that all the banks are brought under a single Act so that the corporategovernance regimes do not have to be different just because the entities arecovered under multiple Acts of the Parliament or that their ownership is in theprivate or public sector.Box 1 (cont.)8Advisory Group on Corporate Governance• Even when the government dilutes its holdings to bring them significantly belowthe threshold limit of 51 per cent, efforts to institute good governance practiceswould remain at superficial level unless the government seriously redefines itsrole de novo.  The changes proposed in the composition of the boards as perlegislation under contemplation would result in government directly appointing 9out of the 15 directors including the 4 whole time directors.  Moreover, thevoting rights of any of the other shareholders will continue to be restricted,thereby negating the basic principle of equal rights to all the shareholders.   Therights of private shareholders’ of SBI/PSBs are abridged considerably, since theirapproval is not required for paying dividend or adopting annual accounts.  Thesubsidiaries of the SBI enjoy very limited board autonomy as they have to getclearance on most of the important matters from the parent even before puttingthem up to their boards.  Further, as things stand today, there is no equalityamong the various board members of the PSBs. Nominees of RBI andGovernment are treated to be superior to other directors.• Another major problem affecting banks has been the representation given to thevarious interest groups on the boards of the banks. The main objective behindthese representations was to give voice to various sections of the society at theboard level of the banks. Hence, a major reform is needed in the area ofconstitution of the boards of the banks. The Chairmen, Executive Directors andnon-executive directors on the boards of the PSBs (including the SBI and itssubsidiaries) need to be appointed on the advice of an expert body set up on thelines of the UPSC, with similar status and independence.  Such a body may be setup jointly by RBI and the Ministry of Finance.  There is also no need to havedirectors that represent narrow sectional and economic interests.  All theobjectives that the banks are supposed to achieve should become an integral partof the corporate mission statements of these institutions.• Although RBI maintains a tight vigil and inspects these entities thoroughly atregular time intervals, the quality of corporate level governance mechanism doesnot appear to be satisfactory.  In its role as the regulator, RBI need not haverepresentation on the bank boards, given the fact that it leads to conflicts ofinterests with its regulatory functions. This should apply even in the case of SBIwhere RBI is the major shareholder.  Further, any policy measures to protectbanks that are less careful in their lending policies at the cost of tax payers’money need to be tempered in such a way that they do not encourage profligatelending by banks.• Current regulatory provisions do not permit a bank to lend money to a companyif any of its board members is also a director on the board of that company. Thenegative impact of this rule has been that the banks are not able to get goodprofessionals for their boards. This archaic rule should be modified immediatelyso that the professionals who are on the boards of non-banking companies as9professional or independent directors do not suffer from any handicaps. Thecurrent rule may, however, be continued only in respect of directors ofcompanies who are their promoters and have a stake in their companies beyondbeing merely a director. In the interest of good governance, it is desirable thatgovernment directors should not participate in the discussion on such matters andalso abstain from voting.The Report of the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision (Chairman : Mr. M.S.Verma) has also made some recommendations on corporate governance, which aresummarised in Box 2.Box 2Advisory Group on Banking Supervision• The quality of corporate governance should be the same in all types of bankingorganisations irrespective of their ownership.  The process of induction ofdirectors into banks’ boards and their initial orientation may be streamlined.Banks need to develop mechanisms, which can help them ensure percolation oftheir strategic objectives and corporate values throughout the organisation.Boards need to set and enforce clear lines of responsibility and accountability forthemselves as well as the senior management and throughout the organisation.Linkage between contribution and remuneration/reward should be established.Compensation Committees of the board could be set up for the purpose.Nomination Committees to assess the effectiveness of the board and direct theprocess of renewing and replacing board members are desirable.  Disclosures inrespect of committees of the board and qualifications of the directors, incentivestructure and the nature and extent of transactions with affiliated and relatedparties need to be encouraged.  Finally, a provision on the lines of Section 20 ofthe Banking Regulation Act, 1949, which prohibits loans and advances todirectors and their connected parties, will have to be made in respect of largeshareholders also. Information on transactions with affiliated and related partiesshould be disclosed.Current ProposalIt would be evident that the Reports of Advisory Groups contain far reachingproposals to improve corporate governance and many, if not all, do require legislativeprocesses and they are necessarily time consuming and often realizable only in medium-term.  While proceeding with analysis and possible legislative actions, it may benecessary to consider and adopt changes that could be brought about within the existinglegislative framework.To this end, Governor Jalan in his Monetary and Credit Policy Statement of October2001 constituted a Consultative Group of Directors of banks and financial institutions(Chairman Dr. A.S. Ganguly) to review the supervisory role of Boards of banks andfinancial institutions and to obtain feedback on the functioning of the Boards vis-à-viscompliance, transparency, disclosures, audit committees etc. and make recommendationsfor making the role of Board of Directors more effective.  The Group made itsrecommendations very recently after a comprehensive review of the existing framework10as well as of current practices and benchmarked its recommendations with internationalbest practices as enunciated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, as well asof other committees and advisory bodies, to the extent applicable in the Indianenvironment.  The report has been put in public domain for a wider debate and its majorrecommendations are summarized in Box 3 :Box 3Report of the Consultative Group of Directorsof Banks/Financial Institutions• On appointment of Directors, due diligence of the directors of all banks – be theyin public or private sector, should be done in regard to their suitability for thepost by way of qualifications and technical expertise. Involvement of NominationCommittee of the Board in such an exercise should be seriously considered as aformal process.  Further, the Government while nominating directors on theBoards of public sector banks should be guided by certain broad “fit and proper”norms for the Directors.  The criteria suggested by the Bank for InternationalSettlements (BIS) may be suitably adopted for considering “fit and proper” testfor bank directors.• In the present context of banking becoming more complex and knowledge-based,there is an urgent need for making the Boards of banks more contemporarilyprofessional by inducting technical and specially qualified individual.  Whilecontinuing regulation based representation of sectors like agriculture, SSI,cooperation, etc., the appointment/nomination of independent/ non-executivedirectors to the Board of banks (both public sector and private sector) should befrom a pool of professional and talented people to be prepared and maintained byRBI.  Any deviation from this procedure by any bank should be with the priorapproval of RBI.• On the functioning, the independent/non-executive directors should raise in themeetings of the Board, critical questions relating to business strategy, importantaspects of the functioning of the bank and investor relations.  In the case ofprivate sector banks where promoter directors may act in concert, theindependent/non-executive directors should provide effective checks andbalances ensuring that the bank does not build up exposures to entities connectedwith the promoters or their associates.  The independent/non-executive directorsshould provide effective checks and balances particularly, in widely held andclosely controlled banking organizations.• As a step towards effective corporate governance, it would be desirable to take anundertaking from every director to the effect that they have gone through theguidelines defining the role and responsibilities of directors, and understood whatis expected of them and enter into a covenant to discharge their responsibilities tothe best of their abilities, individually and collectively.11• In order to attract quality professionals, the level of remuneration payable to thedirectors should be commensurate with the time required to be devoted to thebank’s work as well as to signal the appropriateness of remuneration to thequality of inputs expected from a member.  The statutory prohibition undersection 20 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 on lending to companies inwhich the director is interested, severely constricts availability of qualityprofessional directors on to the Boards of banks.  This would require a change inthe existing legal framework.  We need to move towards this goal. • It would be desirable to separate the office of Chairman and Managing Directorin respect of large sized public sector banks.  This functional separation willbring about more focus on strategy and vision as also the needed thrust in theoperational functioning of the top management of the bank.  The directors couldbe made more responsible to their organization by exposing them to an inductionbriefing need-based training programme/seminars/workshops to acquaint themwith emerging developments/challenges facing the banking sector.  RBI as theregulator, could take the initiative to organizing such seminars.  RBI may bringout an updated charter indicating clear-cut, specific guidelines on the roleexpected and the responsibilities of the individual directors.  The whole-timedirectors should have sufficiently long tenure to enable them to leave a mark oftheir leadership and business acumen on the bank’s performance.  All banksshould consider appointing qualified Company Secretary as the Secretary to theBoard and have a Compliance Officer (reporting to the Secretary) for monitoringand reporting compliance with various regulatory/accounting requirements.  • The information furnished to the Board should be wholesome, complete andadequate to take meaningful decisions.  A distinction needs to be made betweenstatutory items and strategic issues in order to make the material for directors‘manageable’.  The Reviews dealing with various performance areas could be putup the Supervisory Committee of Board and a summary of each such reviewcould be put up to the Main Board.  The Board’s focus should be devoted moreon strategy issues, risk profile, internal control systems, overall performance, etc.The procedure followed for recording of the minutes of the board meetings inbanks and financial institutions should be uniform and formalized.  Banks andfinancial institutions may adopt two methods for recording the proceedings viz., asummary of key observations and a more detailed recording of the proceedings.  • It would be desirable if the exposures of a bank to stockbrokers and market-makers as a group, as also exposures to other sensitive sectors, viz., real estateetc. are reported to the Board regularly.  The disclosures in respect of theprogress made in putting in place a progressive risk management system, the riskmanagement policy, strategy followed by the bank, exposures to related entities,the asset classification of such lendings/investments etc. conformity withCorporate Governance Standards etc., be made by banks to the Board ofDirectors at regular intervals as prescribed. 12• As regards Committees, there could be a Supervisory Committee of the Board inall banks, be the public or private sector, which will work on collective trust andat the same time, without diluting the overall responsibility of the Board.  Theirrole and responsibilities could include monitoring of the exposures (credit andinvestment) review of the adequacy of risk management process and upgradationthereof, internal control systems and ensuring compliance with thestatutory/regulatory framework.  The Audit Committee should, ideally beconstituted with independent/non-executive directors and the Executive Directorshould only be a permanent invitee.  However, in respect of public sector banks,the existing arrangement of including the Executive Director and nomineedirectors of Government and RBI in the Audit Committee may continue.  TheChairman and Audit Committee need not be confined to the CharteredAccountant profession but can be a person with knowledge on ‘finance’ or‘banking’ so as to provide directions and guidance to the Audit Committee, sincethe Committee not only looks at accounting issues, but also the overallmanagement of the bank.  It is desirable to have a Nomination Committee forappointing independent/non-executive directors of banks.  In the context of anumber of public sector banks issuing capital to the public, a NominationCommittee of the Board may be formed for nomination of directors, representingshareholders.  The formation and operationalisation of the Risk ManagementCommittees in pursuance of the guidelines issued by the RBI should he speededup and their role further strengthened.  With a view of building up credibilityamong the investor class, the Group recommends that a Committee of the Boardmay be set up to look into the grievance of investors and shareholders, with theCompany Secretary as a nodal point.• Finally the banks could be asked to come up with a strategy and plan forimplementation of the governance standards recommended and submit progressof implementation, for review after twelve months and thereafter half yearly orannually, as deemed appropriate.Tentative Issues and LessonsThe Indian experience shows recognition of (a) the importance of corporategovernance and the challenges in redefining institutional relations in the financial sectorin respect of PSBs; (b) the need for a broader view of enhancing corporate governance totake account of law and policy as well as the operating and institutional environment; and(c) the desirable changes in the composition and functioning of the board.  The processesby which some progress has been made so far and actions contemplated are alsoinstructive – needless to add that these issues and lessons have to be viewed as tentative,and of course, contextual.Corporate governance in PSBs is important, not only because PSBs happen todominate the banking industry, but also because, they are unlikely to exit from bankingbusiness though they may get transformed.  To the extent there is public ownership ofPSBs, the multiple objectives of the government as owner and the complex principal-agent relationships cannot be wished away.  PSBs cannot be expected to blindly mimicprivate corporate banks in governance though general principles are equally valid.13Complications arise when there is a widespread feeling of uncertainty of the ownershipand public ownership is treated as a transitional phenomenon.  The anticipation or threatof change in ownership has also some impact on governance, since expected change isnot merely of owner but the very nature of owner.  Mixed ownership where governmenthas controlling interest is an institutional structure that poses issues of significantdifference between one set of owners who look for commercial return and another whoseeks something more and different, to justify ownership.  Furthermore, the expectations,the reputational risks and the implied even if not exercised authority in respect of thepart-ownership of government in the governance of such PSBs should be recognized.  Inbrief, the issue of corporate governance in PSBs is important and also complex.The most important challenge faced in enhancing corporate governance and inrespect of which there has been significant though partial success relates to redefining theinterrelationships between institutions within the broadly defined public sector i.e.,government, RBI and PSBs to move away from “joint family” approach originallydesigned for a model of planned development. As part of reform the government had todifferentiate, conceptually and at the policy level, its role as sovereign, owner of banksand overarching supervisor of regulators including RBI.  The central bank also had tomove away from sharing the nitty gritty of developmental schemes with governmentinvolving micro regulation, to a more equitable treatment of all banks as regulator andsupervisor.  Furthermore, the bureaucracy of RBI is accountable to the RBI’s Board forFinancial Supervision. The large publicly owned non-financial enterprise had torecognize the need for a more commercial and competitive approach with banksincluding PSBs in raising of and deployment of funds.  Similarly, the PSBs had toreorient their approach to each other also with intensified competition engineered bypolicy while guarding against excessive risk taking as dictated by a supervisor seeking tomeet international standards.Another noteworthy aspect of enhancing corporate governance is the narrowing ofgap between PSBs and other banks in terms of the policy, regulatory and operatingenvironment, apart from some changes in ownership structures with attendantconsequences.  The PSBs as hundred per cent owned entities with no share value quotedin stock exchanges accounted for over three quarters of banking business seven yearsago, while they now account for less than a quarter.A third area where a few changes to enhance quality of governance have beenmade or are contemplated relates to the manner in which chief executives are selected,the board is composed in view of induction of some elected directors, and the constitutionof committees, including the Audit Committee.  In this regard, it is noteworthy thatrecently, the functioning of bank boards in the private sector seems to have attractedsignificant adverse notice, both from market and supervisor.  That the representation ofRBI on the Boards is not desirable has been conceded just as RBI has expressed interestin divesting all its ownership functions.The processes by which these changes have been and are being brought aboutmay also be of some interest.  First, RBI has taken initiative in bringing about changesrather than “keep aloof” from the regulated entities as pure theory may suggest.  Thedevelopmental role of RBI, which was in the nature of promoting and funding ofinstitutions or channeling credit to schemes under government approved plans hasyielded place to the role of developer of a more robust financial system, especially14banking structure and system.  Sometimes, closer involvement of RBI in sometransitional arrangements, such as in advising government on appointment of ChiefExecutives of PSBs was needed to bring about changes.  The professional inputs as wellas sensitising and creating opinion to enhance corporate governance was ensured by RBIthrough the Advisory Groups and Consultative Group mentioned.Second, as Governor Jalan in his National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM)Annual Day Lecture articulated, markets are more free and more complex now;  whathappens in banks is a concern for all since there is fear of contagion and above all we livein a more volatile and interlinked world where effects are instantaneous. (Jalan 2002).Hence, in the process of making markets more free as part of the reform, RBI had todischarge its responsibility of equipping the participants, especially the most dominantsegment viz., PSBs, to manage the complexities or simply to cope.  Hence, RBI had takeninitiatives in improving the competitive strengths as well as governance systems of PSBswhile pursuing its objective of distancing, as a regulator, from the operational closenesswith both government which is an owner of PSB, and PSBs which are the regulated.Thirdly, the path of reform of which corporate governance is one element had tobe considered carefully and evolved through a consultation and participation process atevery step. Thus, the basic framework was provided by Narasimham Committees 1 and 2in which all stakeholders were represented followed by a series of Committees andConsultation Papers to refine and redefine and apply the basic framework. Thecollaborative and consensual approach in the path of reform was adopted while the goalsof reforms were to the extent possible well defined.  The most recent example of thisapproach has been described in the Report of the Advisory Groups on variousInternational Standards and Codes.Fourthly, there was need to resist the temptation of demoralising the PSBs onpresumed inefficiency, and make every effort to enable and empower them to meet thechallenges.  There has been clear recognition that governance is not merely one ofstructures, but also one of culture and this requires careful nurture. This has been madepossible by a variety of mechanisms and through a variety of fora. One illustration wouldsuffice to reflect the changing attitude of the RBI in this regard.  The Governor, RBI whowas the Chairman of National Institute of Bank Management yielded the position to aformer Chairman of a public sector bank and the RBI distanced itself from the day to dayrunning of the Institute without withdrawing its interest and support.Fifthly, the importance of SROs in bringing about change has been recognisedand the orientation of pre-existing institutions, in particular, Indian Banks’ Association,has changed to meet new challenges.  Various mechanisms have been found to ensure anenvironment supportive of sound corporate governance mentioned in BIS Document (BISSeptember 1999) by not only pursuing legal and policy changes with the Government,but also close interaction with auditors and banking industry associations.Random ThoughtsThe Indian experience provokes some thoughts on a few fundamental issues inregard to PSBs and corporate governance.  First, is public ownership compatible withsound corporate governance as generally understood?   Since various corporategovernance structures exist in different countries, there are no universally correctparameters of sound corporate governance. Government ownership of a bank, unless15government happens to have such a stake purely as a financial investment for return,necessarily has to have the effect of altering the strategies and objectives as well asstructure of governance.  Government as an owner is accountable to political institutionswhich may not necessarily be compatible with purely economic incentives.  The mixedownership brings into sharper focus the divergent objectives of shareholding and theissues of reconciling them, especially when one of the owners is government.  In such asituation, one can argue that as long as the private shareholder is aware of the specialnature of shareholding, there should be no conflict.  In other words, the idea ofmaintaining public sector character of a bank while government holds a minorityshareholding is an intensified and modified version of “golden share” experiment of U.K.The question could still be as to whether such a mixed ownership is the most efficientform of organization, particularly for banks which are in any case generally under intenseregulation and supervision.Second, is corporate governance generally better in private sector, in particular,private sector banks?  In regard to old private sector banks (i.e. founded in pre-reformera, almost all of them continue to be closely held and many of them resist broadeningtheir shareholder base and thus avoid deepening of corporate structures.  More often thannot, takeover bids have been by equally closely held groups.  As regards new privatesector banks, which have been licensed after close scrutiny in the reform period, thepromotees were expected to dilute their stakes to below 40 per cent within three years.  Intwo of the cases, this is yet to happen, while in most cases, the banks continue to beidentified with effective controlled by promoter institutions.  Governor Jalan, made aninteresting observation on this in a recent lecture.  “By and large, the structure is veryweak in Co-operatives and NBFCs for historical reasons, local practices, and multiplicityof regulators and laws.  Old private sector banks also have very poor auditing andaccounting systems.  New private banks – generally good on accounting, but poor onaccountability. More modern and computerized, but less risk conscious.  One thing whichis common to all is that corporate governance is highly centralized with very little realcheck on the CEO, who is generally also closely linked to the largest owner groups.Boards or auditing systems are not very effective.”  (Jalan 2002)Third, how do the dynamics of insider and outsider models in terms of separationbetween ownership and management work in public vis-à-vis private sector banks?  Oneview is that there is not much difference between public and private sectors in India.“The literature on the governance deals mostly with the financial disclosures andrestrictions on the managements that remain within the corporation and the influence thatthe external stakeholder or shareholders can hold.  But in developing countries, theproblem is slightly the other way round.  In developing countries and more particularly inIndia, the major corporate issue is not how outside financiers can control the actions ofthe managers but also how outside stakeholders including the minority shareholders canexert control over the big inside shareholders; and this does not apply only to the publicsector, but it applies equally strongly or probably more strongly to the private sector aswell.” (Bhide 2002).There are, however, significant elements of subjectivity. Governor Jalan feels thatprivate sector has greater elements of insider model.  “Public sector banks/FIs, forexample, are more akin to the ‘outsider’ model with separation of “Ownership” and16“Management”.  Private sector banks/NBFCs/Co-ops - much more “insider” models withfamilies, inter-connected entities or promoters running the management.”  (Jalan 2002)The dominant view, backed by more recent research is that the issue in India oftenrelates to minority shareholder.  “Rather than conflict between owners and managers offirms, it is the conflict between the interests of minority shareholders and promoters (saybusiness groups) that is more relevant for India and that needs to be addressed. “  (NSE2001). In other words, if the governance structures are weak, the risks of privateownership of banks need to be assessed before embarking on large scale privatizations.Fourth, is the performance of PSBs vis-à-vis private sector demonstrably better?The evidence here is not conclusive, because comparison is beset with severaldifficulties.  Clearly, old private sector banks as a group do not perform well, while newprivate sector banks show good performance as a group better than the PSBs as a group.Given the size and variety of PSBs, it is possible to find banks that could equal the goodprivate sector banks as well as bad ones.  In addition, PSBs have to reckon the “legacy”problems, such as the non performing assets that they are saddled with.  Some PSBsoperate in relatively backward areas with limited discretion for management to pull outfrom such areas.  The question still remains:  whether there is a better pay off in enablingPSBs to improve their performance while promoting private sector banks compared totransfer of ownership and control from public to private sector?  Will greater scope formergers and acquisitions within and between public and private sector add to greaterefficiency than treating public and private in a watertight manner?Finally, what should be the most operationally relevant approach for enhancinggovernance in PSBs recognizing that the extent of public ownership is determinedpredominantly by considerations of political economy while the functioning ofinstitutions could possibly be influenced by techno-economic factors.  The Indianexperience so far, including identified agenda for debtate, seems to indicate that, clear cutdemarcation of responsibilities of various institutions and participants is critical since“joint family approach” needs to be ended with friendly but amicable “partition” ofassets, liabilities and activities.  This needs to be accompanied by transparency in dealingwith each other and proper accounting of transactions which would be significantly in theareas of managerial reporting and financial accounting.  Simultaneously, checks andbalances should be consciously put in place to replace the tradition of all pervadingbureaucratic coordination.In brief, central bank has a developmental role even in the period of reform but itis a different type of role, namely not directly financing development but help developsystems, institutions and procedures to enable a paradigm shift in public policy and in theprocess enhance corporate governance also in PSBs, in particular. While legislativechanges are necessary for an enduring improvement in corporate governance and suchlegislative changes are not easy to effect in a democratic multi-party Parliamentarysystem, it is reassuring to observe that significant improvements in corporate governancein the Indian financial sector are being effected even within the existing legislativeframework.17Select ReferencesBasel Committee on Banking Supervision, (September 1999), Enhancing CorporateGovernance for Banking Organisations, BIS, Basel.Bhide, M.G. (January 6, 2002), Address at NIBM Annual Day on the theme of CorporateGovernance in Banks and Financial Institutions, PuneCommonwealth Working Group on Corporate Governance in the Financial Sector,(November 2000), London.Commonwealth Secretariat, (January 2001), Corporate Governance in the FinancialSector : Checklist of Issues for Promoting Effective Corporate Governance, London.Jalan, Bimal, (January 6, 2002), Inaugural Address at NIBM Annual Day on the theme ofCorporate a Governance in Banks and Financial Institutions,Kakani, Ram Kumar, Biswatosh Saha and V.N. Reddy (November 2001), Determinantsof Financial Performance of India Corporate Sector in the Post-Liberalization Era: AnExploratory Study, NSE Research Initiative, Paper No. 5, NSE, Mumbai.Kamesam Vepa, (January 2002), “Corporate Governance”, RBI Bulletin, Volume LVINo.1 P 21 – 43.Iskander Magdi R. and Nadereh Chamlou, (  ) Corporate Governance : A Framework forImplementation, World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.Reddy, Y.R.K and Yerram Raju, (2000) Corporate Governance in Banking and Finance,Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New DelhiReddy, Y.V. August 1999, “Corporate Governance in Financial Sector”, RBI Bulletin,Vol. LIII No.8, PP. 993 - 1004Reddy, Y.V. (2001), “Reviving Confidence in the Indian Economy”, BIS Review, No. 78,Bank for International Settlements, Basel.Reddy, Y.V. (2002), “Indian Banking – Paradigm Shift in Public Policy”, BIS ReviewNo.3, Bank for International Settlements, Basel.Reserve Bank of India (1991), Report of the Committee on the Financial System(Chairman Shri M. Narasimham).Reserve Bank of India (1997), Report of the Committee on Banking Sector Reform(Chairman Shri M. Narasimham).18Reserve Bank of India (March 2001), Report of the Advisory Group on CorporateGovernance, (Chairman: Dr. R.H. Patil), www.rbi.org.inReserve Bank of India (May 2001), Report of the Advisory Group on BankingSupervision (Chairman Mr. M.S. Verma), www.rbi.org.inReserve Bank of India (April 2002), Report of the Consultative Group of Directors ofBanks/Financial Institutions, (Chairman Dr. A.S. Ganguly).Talwar, S.P. (July 1999), “Banking Regulation and Corporate Governance”, RBI Bulletin,Vol. LIII Number 7 P. 937-943* Paper presented by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at WorldBank, International Monetary Fund, and Brookings Institution Conference on FinancialSector Governance: The Roles of the Public and Private Sectors, on April 18, 2002 atNew York City, USA.
