1Transitioning from Student to Professional Lives: Some ReflectionsDr. M. Narendra, CMD, Indian Overseas Bank; Dr. (Smt.) P. Selvameenakshi, Principal,V.V. Vanniaperumal College for Women; Shri S.M.S. Manickavasagam, Secretary andSmt. M.M.N Jikki Mathavan, Joint Secretary, V.V. Vanniaperumal College for WomenManaging Board; distinguished members of the audience and dear students! It is,indeed, a great honour and pleasure to be here in your midst today to deliver theConvocation Address at this college of eminent credentials. I am proud of the fact that Ihave been handed this opportunity to deliver this convocation address at a college,which was inaugurated by one of the leading freedom fighters and statesmen of ourtimes- Bharat Ratna Hon. K. Kamaraj, someone whom I deeply admire.  The academicexcellence achieved by your college over the past five decades is a glowing tribute tothe vision of the man who introduced free mid-day meal scheme in schools and freetheducation upto 11 standard for poor children during the 1950s.2.  To be amongst bright young students is always a refreshing and feel-goodexperience and whenever such an opportunity comes up, I quite look forward to it. Letme begin by congratulating all the students of the College who have successfullygraduated in their respective academic disciplines and are receiving their degreestoday. Convocations are special as they simultaneously signify both - a conclusion asalso a commencement. They logically conclude a formal learning exercise and hence,provide an occasion for relief, fulfilment and joy for the graduating students as well asthe faculty members. They are, however, even more special, because they commencea lifelong informal learning as graduates step out into the University of the World – stepout with dreams, hopes and expectations into the terra incognita of life. In our days,when we passed out, it was not a dream but a nightmare, because of the difficulty ingetting employment. Though over time, considerable employment opportunities havecome up across various sectors, especially the services sector, finding a fulfilling job1 Convocation Address by Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the V.V. Vanniaperumal College forWomen, Virudhunagar on March 24, 2013. Assistance provided by Shri Suddhasattwa Ghosh in preparation of this address isgratefully acknowledged.1remains as big a challenge as ever. However, I am confident that this venerableinstitution has prepared you to face and surmount all challenges that life throws at you.I am privileged to share this special day with a bright set of youngsters, who, I hope,would turn out to be the highly successful financial and social entrepreneurs of thefuture.3.  This Convocation ceremony marks a major milestone in your career. It not onlyindicates the culmination of the hard work you have put in over the years, but alsomarks your transition from students to professionals. I know only too well the time, effortand dedication that are needed to acquire such important academic qualifications. Iwould also like to take this opportunity to congratulate members of your families whoare present here on this very important day in your lives. I am sure they havecontributed greatly to your success and fully share your moment of glory. You shouldalways remember that, but for the support and love of your parents and families and thededication and commitment of your faculty members here, it would not have beenpossible for you to reach this milestone in your lives.4.  In a country like ours, education is not only the key to a brighter future; it is, often,also a key to survival. Using education as a primary strategy, our visionaries andpioneers have aimed to harness, particularly the potential of girls and women, to learn,lead and act on their vision of change for themselves, their families, their communitiesand the nation. Pandit Nehru famously remarked, “You can tell the condition of a nationby looking at the status of its women”. The Beijing Declaration at the Fourth WorldConference on Women (1995) noted that, “Women’s empowerment and their fullparticipation on the basis of equality in all spheres of society, including participation inthe decision-making process and access to power, are fundamental for the achievementof equality, development and peace”. In India, there has been a perceptible increase inliteracy rate amongst women from 53.67 per cent (Census 2001) to 65.46 per cent(Census 2011). However, there is still a large gender gap in literacy at 16.68 per centwhich needs to be bridged. In this context, it is extremely gratifying to note that yourCollege has been doing a remarkable work in empowering women of this region by2providing them access to quality higher education ever since its inception about half acentury ago.  I am glad to learn that this institution has received the Best Women’sCollege Award consecutively for the last seven years. However, let me hasten to remindthat such accolades place even greater responsibility upon the college, its teachers,administrators and students to work harder and keep up the good name of this augustinstitution.5. For years, women in India have almost silently supported the stability of oursociety’s cultural institutions and the continuities and consistencies of their ethos.However, today, the contours of the world we live in are changing dramatically. Thespace for growing up and living has new co-ordinates. Educated, armed with knowledgeand skills, women are entering in a big way the world of occupation, career, profession,competition and achievements in their own right and are creating a space where theemphasis is on expressing themselves and being accepted as independent,autonomous beings.6. Our women are now more confident about their ability to discover and identifytheir personal capabilities as also to discover a vision of life beyond that defined bysocial structures and the network of relationships. Today, they encounter the possibilityof creating a world beyond their visible horizons and boundaries.7. Empowerment of women, gender discrimination and violence against womenhave become subjects of serious public discourse as also sociological research in Indiain recent times. Several attempts have been made through the years to study the statusof women in India and these studies have clearly brought out that the participation ratesthof women in economic activities are very low. The Draft 12 Five Year Plan documentreleased in December 2012 has noted that there has been a consistent decline inworkforce participation rate (WPR) of women since 1980s but the decline seems tohave accelerated between 2004–05 and 2009–10. The decline in female labour forceparticipation has occurred in both rural and urban areas, though the decline is muchsharper in rural compared to urban areas.38.  The Human Development Report, 2013 presents the Gender Inequality Index,which is a parameterized indicator of the inequality in status and opportunities for thewomen in the population. Its assessment is based on three parameters viz. LabourMarket, Empowerment and Reproductive Health. It is disappointing to note that on thestatus of gender inequality, the report places India at a lowly 132, which is a fall of threepositions from the previous report. Our ranking on gender inequality is in stark contrastto our claims to being a progressive society and a developing nation. It brings into sharpfocus the urgent need to implement effective measures for quickly reversing thisposition. Each one of us, cutting across professions and positions in life, have animportant role to play in making this transformation.9. Prior to independence, the gender divide within our labour force was an acceptednorm. Especially since the 1970s, scholars and activists have challenged theinequalities that had been established and have fought to reverse them. Theseinequalities included unequal wages for women, relegation of women to unskilledspheres of work, and restricting women as a reserve army for labour. These scholarsand activists have also sought to focus on class-consciousness in this discourse,recognizing the inequalities not just between men and women but also within socialstructures such as caste, tribe, language, religion, region or class. In recent years, thefocus of such deliberations has gone beyond treating women as useful members ofsociety and now also focuses on empowering them to decide the course of theirpersonal lives and the right of self-determination. I am glad that the V.V. VanniaperumalCollege is playing a transformational role by churning out a knowledgeable andempowered lot of women year after year, who can claim their rightful place under thesun.10. Lack of education and empowerment of women is also reflected in the extent ofdisparity between the proportion of financially excluded men and women. That womenin India are much more financially excluded than the men is evident from the fact that asof March 2011, only 21 per cent of total bank deposit accounts were held by women andthese accounted for just about 12 per cent of the total volume of deposits. Similarly,4women availed only 18 per cent of the total small credit from banks in 2011. Therefore,initiatives to empower women should, necessarily, include strategies to link them to theformal financial system by providing them access to deposit and credit accounts.11. However, considering the centrality of banks to the nation's economic order, theirrole in women empowerment cannot be restricted merely to linking them to the formalfinancial system. The banking and finance sector in India has emerged as a significantemployer of women, though related data suggests that there is still tremendous scopefor improving their presence in this sector. The financial sector, in specific, requires itsemployees to possess traits of passion, conviction and compassion that the womendisplay in abundance. The sense of empathy and understanding that the womenpossess enables them to earn respect and acceptability of their co-workers. Expertstudies highlight that women are more adapt in dealing with concerns of employees,shareholders and customers. They are not only good at collating and combininginformation, their better intuitive abilities also helps them to make informed decisions.As leaders, the women bring in an environment of strength, confidence, inclusivenessand trust.  It is no wonder then that women have risen remarkably to the top in thebanking sector in both - the public and private sector in India. I urge this bunch of youngwomen graduates today to choose finance and banking as their career option wherethey can really excel and serve the customers and society with distinction.12. As you must be aware, the Hon’ble Union Finance Minister Shri P. Chidambaramhas proposed in this year’s Union Budget that an all-women public sector bank will soonbe set up, which will predominantly employ and lend to women. This is, indeed, a verywelcome step and will also, in a sense; help take forward the Reserve Bank’s financialinclusion and financial literacy efforts, which also strongly focus on women’s awarenessabout and access to financial services.13. The world of banking has, in fact, been a mirror of history at large.  ‘Moneymakes the world go around’, the saying goes. Banking activities resemble a wheelturning continually. Banking in India too has gone through many phases. While5historians can slice the past into countless slivers, in terms of transformational change,there have been only a few inflexion points in post-independence banking in India.14. The first was the enactment of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which broughtin a comprehensive and formal structure of bank regulation and supervision in India.The nationalization of banks in our country in 1969 marked the second such point. Itgenerated forces that took banking beyond the elite class to the masses. It led to theestablishment of a very substantial infrastructure across the geographical expanse ofthe country and was, thus, a critical trigger for financial outreach of institutions andempowerment of the common man. The third inflexion point in banking was the financialsector reforms initiative that was launched in the early 1990s.15. These reform measures were initiated and sequenced to create an enablingenvironment for banks to overcome the external constraints – these were related toadministered structure of interest rates, high levels of pre-emption in the form of reserverequirements, and credit allocation to certain sectors. One of the major objectives ofbanking sector reforms has been to enhance efficiency and productivity throughcompetition. As you know, the Reserve Bank is currently considering issuing licensesfor establishment of new banks in the private sector.16. This changed environment and the internal compulsions arising from greatercompetition and the need to improve market shares and/or profitability is resulting in thebanks’ quest for greater efficiency and an effort to reposition themselves, given therealities of the environment and their internal strengths and weaknesses. This alsogenerates more possibilities and greater opportunities for young graduates and post-graduates like you. The Reserve Bank too now recruits a certain number of peopleevery year. It is a wonderful opportunity that aspirants like you can look forward to, andprepare for, every year.17. We live in an age of unprecedented opportunities. But, with opportunity comesresponsibility. It is for tomorrow’s managers to carve out their own place, to know whento change course and how to keep themselves engaged and productive throughout. To6do things well, one needs to cultivate a deep understanding of oneself - not only thestrengths and weaknesses but also how one learns, how one works with others, whathis or her values are and where he or she can make the greatest contribution.  Becauseonly when one operates from strength, can true excellence be achieved! It is, therefore,for all of you to keep on learning, understanding yourself and your environment, so thatyou always stay ahead of the curve as far as success in various life roles is concerned.18. The emerging challenges in the banking and finance sector call for a new, moredynamic, aggressive and challenging work culture to meet the demands of customerrelationships, product differentiation, brand values, reputation, corporate governanceand regulatory prescriptions. Understanding and dealing with difficult transitions wouldbe the key for youngsters like you while designing strategies for the organizations thatyou will be eventually joining. While leadership skills, the ability to multi-task andmanage competing imperatives will be the necessary ingredients of the new generationmanagers, the old-fashioned qualities of desire to learn, a strong sense of professionalethics, an enquiring mind, a strategic view, the qualities of humility and empathy, awillingness to embrace practical experience, and an eagerness to adapt to newexperiences would continue to be critical. I am personally convinced that the womenfolk enjoy a head start when it comes to being able to multi task and manage competingimperatives.19. Dr. Charles Eliot, the eminent educator at the Harvard University, was oftenasked, “How had Harvard gained its reputation as the greatest storehouse ofknowledge?” His reply used to be “it is because the freshmen bring in so much of it andthe seniors take away so little of it”. The witty professor had, of course, said it in a lightervein. I am sure all of you have made the most of what your College offered you and aretaking away a rich treasure-trove of learnings from here. The inputs that you havegleaned as part of your studies here would surely give you the foresight to see thingsbefore the curve, much before others do.20. Before I conclude, there are three basic messages that I always like to conveywhen I get to interact with students. All of you have completed your student life and7would be entering into professional lives shortly. With the academic credentials that youhave attained at this institution, I am sure all of you will be able to build up successfulcareers. My first message to all of you is to never be complacent in life, becausecomplacency is a short cut to failure. Plan wisely during your good times so that youhave enough resources to live through the bad times. My second message is thatthough bad times are inevitable, they are definitely not permanent. So, don’t bediscouraged and disheartened. Stay positive and keep on working hard and the goodtimes will return. My third message for success in life and in your professional careers isto be information literate. Retain the curiosity to seek and assimilate knowledge and touse this knowledge for taking decisions in an unbiased manner. This will help inensuring that the decisions you take are in your best interests and in the interest of theorganizations you work for.Conclusion21. We live in exciting times and as you stand on the threshold of a new life – I trustyou will continue to cherish the ideals and dreams of youth, after all, they are whatmake life worthwhile. While you must rejoice and celebrate your achievements, youmust also realize the enormity of responsibility that would now be cast upon you. Theknowledge and skills that you have acquired here and the values you have imbibed,must be utilized in not only carving a niche for yourself in the professional field that youchoose but also in making a difference within your homes, your society and the country.You must work with a commitment towards upholding the values that your teachers andyour Alma Mater has imbued within you. This would, perhaps, be the perfect‘gurudakshina’ to your teachers and to the institution.22. I wish all of you every success in all your future endeavours.Thank you.8
