October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006New Economic Geography and*Monetary Policy in a Flattening WorldRAKESH MOHANLet me first thank Tom Hoenig and his colleagues for economic activities in large urban agglomerations. Geneinviting me again to this symposium. It is always a treat Grossman and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg characterisedtoday’s trade pattern as trade in tasks in trying toto be here in more ways than one: to partake of the richfeast of insightful and interesting papers, illuminating understand the burgeoning off-shoring trends in productionand service activities. I would like to draw your attentioncommentaries and discussions, accompanied by the warmhospitality of the Kansas City Fed in this incomparable to some particular characteristics of Asian urbanisation thatsetting in the shadow of the majestic Tetons. have, in my view, contributed to the whole off-shoringprocess as we now know it – first in terms of merchandiseIt is difficult to provide an overview of this rathertrade in East and South East Asia and later in thedisparate set of sessions reflecting various facets ofoutsourcing of service activities for which India has comeglobalisation ranging from the new economic geographyto attention in recent years.to monetary policy. Only someone as skilled as MartinFeldstein can do that effectively. As it happens, however, To begin with, one may note that a key characteristicspeaking on a personal note, the sequencing of this of Asian urbanisation has been the heavy concentration1symposium coincidentally reflects my own evolution as a of economic activities in coastal based urban regions. Inprofessional economist. I started out in research and policy fact, Japanese economic growth in the 1950s and 1960sas an urban economist, made my way through policy owed much to the conscious strategy of concentratingmaking in industry, trade and fiscal areas; while finally economic activity in the 500 km Tokkaido urban corridorending up as a central banker in charge of monetary policy. stretching from Tokyo through Nagoya to Osaka. DouglasSo I will go through a similar sequence in my remarks in Irwin talked about the absence of policy effects inthis overview, but perhaps spending more time on my first Venables’, paper. The concentration of economic activitylove, urban economics, since that is central to in this corridor in Japan was policy driven through focusedunderstanding the new economic geography. Depending infrastructure investment in the region as typified by theon the time I may not be able to get past my first love Shinkansen - the bullet train. By 1970, 60 per cent oftoday. In any case I feel more comfortable with my first Japan’s urban population (and a larger proportion of thelove than my current marriage to monetary policy! economy) was concentrated in this region. This economicconcentration economised on infrastructure investment thatwould have been larger had it been spread out over aASIAN U RBANISATION: PROXIMITY P ROMOTINGlarger part of the country. The geographical proximity ofPRODUCTIVITYdifferent activities gave rise to agglomeration economiesAnthony Venables set the stage for this symposium that aided rapid productivity growth and also enabledinnovation in traditional production processes through thethrough his succinct presentation on the new economicgeography. Among other issues, he focused on the introduction of new systems such as Just-in-Time (JiT)modes of inventory management, great outsourcing ofproductivity promoting aspects of proximity through therealisation of agglomeration economies from clustering of components, and total quality control processes thatComments by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, as an Overview Panelist at a Symposium sponsored*by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24-26, 2006. All the papers presented in theSymposium are available at http://www.kansascityfed.org/PUBLICAT/SYMPOS/2006/Sym06prg.htm1For detailed discussion see Mohan (2006).1143October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006contributed to the drastic reduction in manufacturing costs and in Taipei/Kaohsiung in Taiwan. By the late 1970s/that was the foundation of Japan’s competitiveness. The early 1980s, 70 per cent of urban population in Southmore efficient inventory management resulting from JiT, Korea was concentrated in the Seoul and Pusan regions.overall supply management, total quality control systems This concentrated pattern of development later spread fromalso enabled significant reduction in corporate need for the tigers to the cubs, the Bangkok region in Thailand,bank financing, leading to significant change in bank Jabotobek (Jakarta and its environs) in Indonesia, andportfolios. Furthermore, the Japanese economy benefited Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia. It then moved on to the coastalfrom high savings and investment rates, in excess of 40 regions of China - specifically to Pearl River Delta Specialper cent of GDP by the late 1960s, a pattern repeated by Economic Zones and Shanghai. Once again even a largesome of the later star performers of East and South East country like China decided to concentrate economicAsia. Thus high economic growth has been achieved in activity in specified coastal regions.much of Asia, the main growth story of the latter part ofWhat were the common characteristics of all thesethe last century, without significant absorption of foreignregions? First, there was heavy investment in transportationsavings. It is no wonder then that Raghuram Rajan andlinks with rest of the world, such as, airports, ports andhis colleagues cannot find correlation between the use ofcommunication infrastructure. Second, export orientedforeign capital and economic growth.outward oriented labor using manufacturing gainedI describe this process at some length to essentially prominence while consistently ascending the technologymake the point that this was the precursor to today’s ladder over time.off-shoring of tasks. The idea of outsourcing componentsDid all these lead to a death of distance? Considerin the engineering industry, particularly the automobilethe following. An urban coastal corridor emerged fromindustry, originally emerged in the Tokkaido corridorTokyo to Sydney, through Seoul, Taipei, Shanghai, Hongof Japan where economic distance between suppliersKong, Kuala Lumpur, Singapore and Jakarta. If we extendand assemblers was reduced through investments inVenables’ argument on productivity enhancement throughefficient transportation and other infrastructure. Whatincrease in size of urban agglomerations, we can begin towas traditionally done at one plant location under theappreciate the productivity effects of this mega urbansame roof got outsourced to many distinct companiescorridor in East Asia. Business and production linkageslocated within striking distance in the same region. Thuswithin this corridor are intense: there is a great deal ofintra-regional trade in tasks arose: the way the productionoff-shoring and task trade within the corridor resultingprocess was organised in the region locally has now beenfrom the death of distance. It is the emergence of thisextended through to its logical conclusion across borderscorridor that has brought off-shoring into its own withthrough long distances. If task trade could be done withinthe grafting of these dense linkages within Asia to thea region, with the fall in transportation and communicationoutside, particularly to the US. These productivitycosts it can be done across borders and long distances aseffects have presumably contributed to the overallwell. As Venables mentioned, “the product market effectsdownward pressure on prices of products produced incan be long range – firms in New York may benefit fromthis multi-country Asian region: the globalisation effecta large market in California, and reductions in internationalon relative prices that Rogoff has talked about.shipping costs will increase market access for firms fromThe various examples given by Gene Grossman anda continent away”.Rossi-Hansberg on the one hand and by Friedman (2004)To the extent that a good deal of the off-shoringon the other, mostly concentrate on the interlinkageactivity is concentrated in Asia, there are good reasonsbetween these countries and with and within multi-nationalfor it. The strategy of concentrated spatial developmentcorporations (MNCs) from the US and Japan. Thein urban concentrations was emulated by the flying geesemanufacturing flat world essentially spans the Asian coastalof Asia mentioned by Venables. The focus of growth incorridor linked with the US. The dense inter-linkages havethe 1970s and 1980s shifted to the tigers like Singapore,also been possible because of an unusual degree ofHong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan. Singapore andopenness to external ideas that can be observed throughoutHong Kong being city states naturally exhibited strongthe region, particularly through receptivity to high levelnatural economic concentration. Furthermore, economicprofessionals. Even Beijing is now said to be host to aboutactivity got concentrated in Seoul/Pusan in South Korea,100,000 foreign citizens. It is the physical location of these1144October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006international professionals that has also promoted off excess of 45 per cent of GDP, and growing at about 20shoring and trade in tasks. per cent a year. This figure was just under 20 per cent in1990-91. There is perhaps no other country which has aWhat is interesting is how India is somewhatsimilar composition of merchandise and service exportsdifferent, but how this difference itself promoted the tradeand illustrates the large role of service off-shoring in thein services. First, the ethos in India was of dispersal offlattening world as it extends to India. The openness ofdevelopment. In fact, urban concentration was frownedthe Indian economy is quite high now, even on the capitalupon and discouraged. Second, as described by T.N.account as indicated by the large increase in gross capitalSrinivasan, the import substituting inward orientedflows, (i.e., both inflows and outflows), which are now inmanufacturing approach persisted till the 1980s. Third,excess of 25 per cent of GDP.investment in infrastructure, particularly urbaninfrastructure was of lower intensity - this includes ports, It is in this way that East and South East Asia have ledairports, railways, and highways. Furthermore, no attempt the way in facilitating the flattening of the world inwas made to concentrate activity in coastal areas. Imagine merchandise trade and trade in associated tasks, and India’swhat would have happened if India had developed her different pattern of development to the outsourcing ofEast coast in accordance with the East Asia miracle – a information technology activities that have enabled widerpoint similar to that made by T.N. Srinivasan. Interestingly, trade in services. The flat world therefore extends from themetros like Calcutta, Madras and Bombay slowed down United States through East and South East Asia to India.in the 1980s and 1990s and became Kolkata, Chennai and The distinction I have made between the merchandise tradeMumbai, while inland cities like Delhi, Pune, Bangalore, and that in services is now getting blurred as East AsianChandigarh and Hyderabad have prospered. Though countries also partake in information technology outsourcinginfrastructure investment in transportation hubs and and as Indian firms get their act together in manufacturing.logistics is finally receiving importance now, biases againstlabour using manufacturing continue and hence India hasWHERE DO WE GO IN THE FUTURE?still not followed the labour using export-orientedmanufacturing strategy that was in vogue in East and What of the future role of Asia in the flattening world?South East Asia. What are the features of the cities that What are the implications of on going Asian urbanisationhave prospered? They all exhibit affinity to highpatterns on the future direction of capital flows and worldtechnology, have concentration of higher education, culture real interest rates? Let me address some of these questionsof meritocracy, a high knowledge base and research &in a futuristic scenario.development laboratories. All that was needed wasAsian urban population is expected to double in thecommunication infrastructure, which appeared in the 1990snext 30 years; about 1.3 billion people, equivalent to aboutand Y2K was an added bonus. It was this very lack of60 per cent of total expected urban population growth ininvestment in transportation and communicationthe world, and equivalent to the urban population growthinfrastructure, both within the country and to the outsidein Asia that took place over the last 50 years, are likelyworld, that has ironically led to these inland citiesto be added to urban areas in Asia during this period. 12becoming software off-shoring concentrations. All that wasof 21 cities of over 10 million by 2015 will be in Asia.needed was investment in communication and electronicSo the doubling of the global labour force talked aboutinfrastructure that could enable information technologyby Venables will accelerate adding to the further flatteningtransmission at low cost across the world: again the deathof the world, especially if we take account of theof distance for services off-shoring.resurgence of Eastern Europe and Africa as talked aboutIf one looks at the pattern of outsourcing in India,by Svejnar and Collier. If large urban agglomerationsone finds that outsourcing of service activities got born promote productivity growth, as posited by Venables, thein Bangalore and then spread elsewhere. T.N. Srinivasanshift in the mega city fulcrum to Asia is itself suggestivetalked about the relatively slow growth of India’s of relatively higher productivity growth in this region.merchandise trade: what he didn’t mention is that grossSince Asia is still a technology follower, with muchIndian service exports are now almost equivalent to its catching up to do, the potential for further significantmerchandise exports. Gross exports and imports ofproductivity growth is high, and hence the likelihood ofmerchandise trade and services put together are now in continuing low inflation in the world.1145October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006Chairman Bernanke has earlier talked about the challenges that we, as monetary authorities, will face insavings glut. Since world savings haven’t really grown the years to come? How soon will this reversal take placesince the late 1990s, while investment has fallen, in global imbalances? Will they be gradual or sudden? Ifparticularly in Asia after the 1997 financial crisis, he could this scenario is correct, the commodity price boom thatperhaps have talked instead about the investment drought Paul Collier talked about will continue for some time; inin Asia. The relatively higher decline in investment in which case additional demand will arise from Africa asAsia, compared to savings rates, has probably contributed well. We should, therefore, expect an acceleration of crossto the emergence of foreign exchange surpluses, and border global capital flows, with the usual implication forconsequent rapid accumulation of foreign exchange exchange rate and monetary management in the recipientreserves, after the 1997 Asian crisis. The mirror image, countries.of course, is the US current account deficit, reflecting itsAnother interesting comment on off-shoring that theopposite savings/investment imbalance. The question isVenables and Grossman papers have talked about iswhether the Asian relative investment drought willoff-shoring low skill activities. What is intriguing is thatcontinue well into the future?great investment is taking place in human resources inThe expectation of urbanisation in Asia in the nextAsia as well: Tokyo has 113 universities, Beijing has 59,30 years in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Vietnam,and Hong Kong and Singapore are becoming educationalIndonesia and China would suggest that there will becentres. US and European educational institutions areunprecedented demand for investment in infrastructure incompeting with each other to off-shore their activities inthe coming decades in this region. Chinese infrastructureAsia. So where will this off-shoring stop?investment is shifting inward from the coast: this may be2less efficient than on the coast and hence the demand for CONTEMPORARY MONETARY PUZZLESresources could well be correspondingly higher. AlthoughMuch of discussion in this symposium has centeredIndia and other countries in South and South East Asiaaround the rearrangement of economic thinking to takemay concentrate investments more towards the coast, theaccount of the efforts of globalisation and the newbacklog of infrastructure investment in India is so higheconomic geography. What have the implications been forthat its demand for resources can be expected to becentral bankers? Rogoff has shown how monetary stabilitycorrespondingly higher.has been accompanied by price stability and outputThe question that I am concerned with is whetherstability, but not asset price and exchange rate stability.regional savings will be adequate for meeting this demandHe goes on to say that exchange rates do not really reflectas they have been in the last decade. Will the globalisingfundamentals and act more like asset prices. How do weworld face the opposite of a savings glut or investmentthen to look at exchange rates as equilibrating pricedrought? With the kind of urbanisation pattern that I havemechanisms? Does this mean that shifts in the Chineseoutlined for Asia in the next 30 years, and the associatedexchange rate determination will have no effect on otherdemand for enhanced resources for infrastructurevariables? Given the complexity of trade patterns and off-investment, it is likely that the demand for external savingsshoring of tasks, and complex production patterns behindwill re-merge. If we add the possible emergence of similarmany products, it would perhaps not be surprising thatdemand from Africa, the likelihood is that we will revertexchange rates are no longer to be seen to reflectto the traditional pattern of financial capital moving infundamentals. If a product consists of a large number ofthe right direction, from the rich to less rich countries incomponents that have been produced over a dozenAsia and also in Africa. If Raghuram Rajan repeats hisdifferent countries, and even assembled across twocorrelation exercises in 2030 he might emerge a happiercountries, how will any bilateral exchange rate changesman. This will, however, coincide with the adversebe expected to affect trade patterns? Moreover, with thedemographics of Europe and Japan contributing toproportion of value added in upstream (e.g., research andcontraction of world savings.development and design) and downstream (e.g., marketingVarious questions arise. Will we then see a hardeningand trading) activities increasing, the role of exchange ratesof world real interest rates? What will be the newin effecting trade flows becomes even more complex. In2  This draws on earlier research; see Mohan (2005).1146October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006fact we have seen low pass through of exchange rate foreign exchange reserves and excessive domestic liquidity,depreciation to inflation – both in developing and amplifying the Fed’s policy stance. Examination of thedeveloped countries. data clearly reveals a global glut of liquidity, which hasfacilitated highly leveraged positions, debt financedI would like to reflect on a few other contemporaryconsumption and booming credit growth, raising financialpuzzles as well.stability concerns. The great puzzle in current globaldevelopments is indeed the co-existence of abundantLOW C ONSUMER I NFLATION IN THE P RESENCE OFliquidity and low consumer inflation. Even soaring oilABUNDANT LIQUIDITY AND INCREASING ASSET PRICESprices and the elevated prices of non-fuel commoditiesFirst, we have been experiencing low global inflationhave yet to affect the overall price level significantly. Suchdespite abundant liquidity in the last few years, with littlelow levels of inflation have not been witnessed since thesign of change. Is this a result of globalisation or effectivepre-World War period. So I remain puzzled: is Asia notworldwide monetary policy?exporting deflation despite overall increases in globalKenneth Rogoff in his paper has argued plausibly thatmonetary aggregates? Or, will we inevitably see globalhigh productivity Asia, particularly China, could not haveinflation eventually because of this global glut of liquidity?exported deflation. As he says, “But hyper-competitiveOr, is the spill over essentially in asset prices?Chinese exports only affect the relative price. As long asthe central bank targets inflation in the overall price level, STRONG GLOBAL GROWTH DESPITE SOARING OIL PRICESwhich it can over sufficiently long horizons, cheap goodsThe second puzzle is the continuing strong globalfrom China simply imply that other goods must becomegrowth despite high oil and commodity prices. Can weexpensive. From this perspective, we might actually sayattribute this to increasing oil use efficiency along withthat China is exporting inflation to other sectors of theproductivity effect of globalisation alluded to earlier?global economies”. Whereas I naturally find Kenneth’sAfter the oil shocks of the 1970s, the first half of thetheoretical argument persuasive, is it borne out1990s witnessed deflationary pressures in terms of realempirically? The global economy is currently awash withoil prices. However, this lull in oil prices turned out to beliquidity. As we all know, around eight years ago, the USshort-lived. Soaring oil prices have characterised the periodFed responded to the `low probability but highly adversesince 2000. Oil prices are scaling new heights every dayevents’ (Blinder and Reis, 2005) leading up to the Russiandriven mainly by growing or unchanged demand, lowdebt default and the LTCM collapse by an emergency cutinventories, lack of spare capacity, and geo politicalin interest rates in September, October and Novembertensions and uncertainties. While the accommodating1998. Even though the reduction was just 25 basis pointsglobal monetary conditions have placed oil futures in theeach month, it shifted the monetary policy stance toclass of sought-after financial assets, the persisting highaccommodation. Later, prompted by a deflation scare, thelevels of oil prices increasingly indicate that a large partfed fund rate was cut over a 42-month stretch fromof the oil price hike has attained a permanent character.December 2000 to June 2003 to a 45 year low of 1 perYet, global growth remains remarkably on track. Indeed,cent, taking the real federal funds rate into negativethe growth momentum has only improved from the secondterritory. Thus, real policy rates were effectively zero orhalf of the 1990s to the first half of this decade. Thenegative until very recently in the US and perhaps remaingrowth in world trade volume (goods and services) hasbelow the “Wicksellian” long-term neutral rate. Real policyalso recovered after some slowdown in 2001 and 2002.rates in the UK and Euro area are also generally hoveringObviously, global activity has benefited from the stunningaround zero. Coupled with the benign policy rates, moneydecline in output volatility observed by Rogoff whichsupply growth has increased worldwide during this period.would have also cushioned the oil shocks.The policy accommodation pursued until recently by theUS and the European Central Bank has had a globalSLOWDOWN IN G LOBAL S AVING AND I NVESTMENT VSimpact, flooding the rest of the world with an abundanceSTRONG GLOBAL GROWTHof liquidity. Low interest rates in the US have encouragedThe third puzzle that I would like to mention is highcapital to flow into emerging market economies. For theglobal growth despite slow down in savings andcountries that prefer some form of managed parity againstinvestment.the US dollar this has resulted in a large build-up of1147October Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2006Global saving and investment rates have declined in Friedman, Thomas (2004): The World Is Flat: A Briefrecent years. Notwithstanding the declining saving and History of the Twenty-first Century, New York: Farrarinvestment rates, global growth has continued its surgeStraus & Giroux.from period to period. While consumption has arguablyGrossman, Gene and Esteban, Rossi-Hansberg(2006): “Theplayed a critical role in the industrial countries’ growthRise of Offshoring: It’s Not Wine for Cloth Anymore”,momentum, exports might have played a similar role inpaper presented at Symposium sponsored by the Federalthe emerging markets. The sustenance of consumption asReserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming,opposed to investment-led growth has thus given rise toon August 25, 2006.new controversies on present versus future allocation ofMohan, Rakesh (2005): “Some Apparent Puzzles forresources as also on the relevance of overlappingContemporary Monetary Policy”, key note address at thegeneration outlooks. Raghuram Rajan and his colleaguesConference on “China’s and India’s Changing Economicattempt to reconcile this phenomenon as they try to explainthe role of foreign capital in developing countries. Structures”, organised by the IMF, the China Society ofFinance and Banking and the Stanford Center forOnce again, this unusual phenomenon can presumablyInternational Development in Beijing during October 27-be explained by the productivity increasing pattern of the28, 2005, printed in Reserve Bank of India Bulletin,current Asian growth process, coupled with the positiveDecember 2005.Asian demographic effects promoting both consumptionand investment growth. Thus, high growth is continuingMohan, Rakesh (2006): “Asian Urban Century: Emergingfrom resource availability due to demographically effectedTrends”, Keynote address at the Conference on LandAsian savings patterns, along with positive productivityPolicies and Development at the Lincoln Institute of Landeffects. The resource diversion due to rising oil andPolicy and Development, Cambridge, Massachusetts oncommodity prices is accordingly being compensated.June 5, 2006, printed in Reserve Bank of India Bulletin,I therefore feel that, in whichever way we characteriseJuly 2006.the current new phenomenon: globalisation, the flat world,Prasad Eswar, Rajan Raghuram and Arvind Subramanianor as the new economic geography, economics faces now(2006): “Pattern of International Capital Flows and Theirquestions that still need to be answered. We central bankersImplications for Economic Development”, paper presentedhave benefited from “the great moderation” but we needby  Rajan Raghuram at Symposium sponsored by theto understand better to what extent we have beenFederal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole,responsible for this fortunate turn of events. I hope thatWyoming on August 25, 2006.the Kansas Fed will continue to organise such meetingsto address these continuing puzzles. Rogoff, Kenneth (2006): “Impact of Globalisation onMonetary Policy”, paper presented at Symposiumsponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,REFERENCESJackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 25, 2006.Blinder, Alan and Ricardo, Reis (2005): “UnderstandingVenables, Anthony (2006): “Shifts in Economic Geographythe Greenspan Standard”, paper presented at the Federaland Their Causes”, paper presented at SymposiumReserve Bank of Kansas City symposium, The Greenspansponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,Era: Lessons for the Future, Jackson Hole, Wyoming,Jackson Hole, Wyoming, on August 25, 2006.August 25-27, 2005.1148
