Indian Economic ScenarioYesterday – Today – Tomorrow *I am honoured to address this gathering which has been facilitating constructive interactionsand garnering public debate on various issues confronting India. The theme chosen for thisgathering ‘Indian Economic Scenario – Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow’ is one of the mostimportant issues requiring wide public debate as the Indian Financial system is passingthrough a phase of transformation and consolidation. It is time to build strategies for thechallenges that lie ahead in achieving the goal of a vibrant and internationally competitiveeconomy. The topics viz. agriculture, industry, banking & IT has been excellently chosen asthey are sine-qua-non for a healthy economy and any of these could become a source ofvulnerability to the economic set up of any country. Let me dwell upon the four topicsindividuallyBankingA strong and efficient financial system is critical to the attainment of the objectives ofcreating a market-driven, productive and competitive economy and to support higherinvestment levels and accentuate growth. Banking by far is the most dominant segment of thefinancial system and plays a pivotal role in the development of a sound economy. A healthybanking system, besides providing necessary architecture for facilitating economic growth,also serves as a strong repository of liquidity. The Indian banking system has traversed a longjourney to come to this phase where the health and quality of the banking system and thecontribution made by it in the economic development can be comparable to the Internationalstandards. If we look behind it is really heartening to note that the Indian banking system hasprogressed in every aspect from being a financial intermediary to the vehicle of economicgrowth. Before the financial sector reforms, which was initiated in 1991, Indian bankingoperated under structural rigidity and external constraints besides working under a protectedenvironment. The first phase of financial sector reforms, triggered by the recommendationsmade by the Committee on the Financial System under the Chairmanship of Shri M.Narasimham in August 1991, consisted of easing of various structural rigidities so as to fostercompetition in the banking sector. The first phase aimed at providing necessary platform tothe banking sector to operate on the basis of operational flexibility and functional autonomy,thereby enhancing efficiency, productivity and profitability.  The reforms brought outstructural changes in the financial sector and succeeded in easing external constraints in theirworking, introducing transparency in reporting procedures, restructuring and recapitalisingbanks and increasing the competitive element of the market through the entry of new banks.The policy initiatives taken since the onset of reforms has brought about remarkableimprovement in respect of various parameters determining banks’ performance ranging fromprofitability, credit management, corporate governance, human resource development, etc.The major agenda, triggered by the banking sector reforms initiated in 1992, has beenderegulation of the financial sector with greater autonomy in operations, consolidation ofbanking system and convergence to universal banking, restructuring of weak public sectorbanks, adoption of scientific tools for management of risks etc. Interest rate deregulation hasgiven necessary latitude to banks to price their products based on their commercialjudgement, which includes factors like liquidity, yield, risk exposures, capital requirement,interest rate outlook, etc. With a view to strengthening the financial position of banks, acapital to risk weighted asset system was introduced for banks in India from the year 1992-93more or less in conformity with international standards. An objective criterion of incomerecognition, asset classification and provisioning norms based on uniform period ofdelinquency and aging profile was introduced since 1992 in phases. Apart from the policyinitiatives mentioned above, several decentralising measures have been taken as a result ofthe first phase of the reforms, which are include permission to nationalised banks to reducethe Government’s equity from 100% to not less than 51%, greater operational freedom tobanks to open specialised branches such as industrial, international business, SSI, etc., off-site ATMs and administrative offices and announcement in 1997, a package of autonomy topublic sector banks fulfilling certain criteria.  The first phase of reforms had the desired effectwhich was seen in the improvement in the efficiency, productivity and profitability of banks,major changes took place in the macro economic environment, policy and institutionaldevelopments. These called for a critical evaluation of the policy initiatives alreadyundertaken. Accordingly, the Government of India set up in 1997 a Committee on BankingSector Reforms under the Chairmanship of Shri M. Narasimham to review the record ofimplementation of financial system reforms recommended by the earlier Committee and tolook ahead and chart the reforms necessary in future to make India’s banking system strongerand better equipped to meet the global competition. Whereas the first phase of financialsector reforms consisted of easing of various structural rigidities so as to foster competition inthe banking sector, the second phase of reforms, which is underway, relates to introduction ofsophisticated financial instruments and facilitating consolidation and rationalization ofbanking system. The policy initiatives taken as a result of the second phase of banking sectorreforms included strengthening  the capital base of banks, aligning prudential norms morecloser to international standards, removal of rigidities in the legal system and providing morecomfort level to banks in recovery of dues, reduction of Government Shareholding inGovernment owned banks, encouraging banks to adopt latest tools in mitigation of varioustypes of risks associated with their operations, enhancing transparency in banks’ balancesheet, entry of new private sector banks, etc.As a result of the focussed agenda and concerted implementation of the recommendationsmade by the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms, the face of Indian Banking System hasundergone a sea change as compared to a decade ago. The banking system now is subjectedto highest level of prudential regulations, accounting standards and disclosures, which arealmost comparable to the international best practices. Entry of more foreign banks andemergence of new private banks has made the banking environment more competitive. Thereform process has ensured that banking expertise/ technology competence exist in themarket to provide healthy competition and wider choice to the clients. Realizing the potentialof the Indian market, foreign investors have shown greater interests in Indian banks. A policyannouncement has been made to allow foreign banks to set up banking subsidiaries in India.Various measures like tightening of prudential norms for asset classification, incomerecognition, provisioning as well as prudential norms on capital adequacy has been carefullysequenced by RBI to ensure that in the process of achieving the goal of reform, there are nosystemic disruptions in the sector.  As a result of the careful sequencing of the reformprocess, it has been easier for the banks to adopt the new norms, which in turn has improvedtheir financial strength and has made them stronger. The financial indicators suggest thatbanking system has responded well to the reform process. The average CRAR of all bankshave increased from 9.23% as on March 31, 1994 to 12.76% as on March 31, 2003. Thisshows that the banks have been able to build up the capital cushion over the years to supportthe anticipated growth in their risk weighted assets. Further, on the NPA front, though thelevel of gross NPAs in absolute terms has been increasing over a period, the gross NPAs, as aproportion of gross advances, has been declining steadily and distinctly over the years sinceRBI introduced the objective criteria for identification of NPAs. The percentage of grossNPAs to gross advances for all banks, which was 14.4% in 1997-98, decreased to 9.50% as2on March 2003. There has been commendable improvement in the business indicators ofbanks i.e. in terms of profitability, Return on Assets, Business per Employee, etc.As a part of the new supervisory strategy, off-site monitoring system for surveillance overbanks (OSMOS) was put in place in RBI in March 1996 as an additional tool for supervisionover banks to supplement the on-site inspections. The system requires periodical reporting onsupervisory concerns such as capital adequacy, asset quality, operating results and largecredit exposures in respect of domestic operations by all banks in India. Data on connectedand related lending and profile of ownership, control and management are also obtained inrespect of Indian banks.Bank profiles containing bank-wide database on all important aspects of bank functioningincluding global operations are being updated annually on an on-going basis. The databaseprovides information on managerial and staff productivity areas besides furnishing importantratios on certain financial growth and supervisory aspects of the bank’s functioning.Analysis of financial and managerial aspects under the reporting system is done on quarterlybasis in a computerised environment in respect of banks and reviews are placed before BFSfor its perusal and further directions. The second tranche of returns covering liquidity andinterest rate risk exposures were introduced in June 1999.Trend analysis reports based on certain important macro level growth/ performance indicatorsare placed before BFS at periodical intervals.  Some of the important reports generated by theDepartment include half-yearly review of the performance of banks, half-yearly key bankingstatistics, analysis of impaired credits, analysis of large credits, analysis of call moneyborrowings, analysis of non SLR investments, etc.The analysis also provides details of peer group performance under various parameters ofgrowth and operations for the banks of a comparative business size to motivate them to doself assessment and strive for excellence.The Indian banks conducting overseas operations, report the assets and liabilities, problemcredits, maturity mismatches, large exposures, currency position on quarterly basis andcountry exposure, operating results etc. on an annual basis. The reporting system has beenrevised, in consultation with the banks and have been put in place in June 2000. The revisedoff-site returns focus on information relating to quality and performance of overseasinvestment and credit portfolio, implementation of risk management processes, earningtrends, and viability of the branches.A risk based supervisory regime as a means of more efficient allocation of supervisoryresources has been introduced on the pilot basis. The risk based supervision project, whichwas guided by international consultants with the assistance of Department for InternationalDevelopment (UK), would lead to prioritisation of selection and determining of frequencyand length of supervisory cycle, targeted appraisals, and allocation of supervisory resourcesin accordance with the risk perception of the supervised institutions. The Risk BasedApproach will also facilitate the implementation of the supervisory review pillar of the NewBasel Capital Accord, which requires that national supervisors set capital ratios for banksbased on their risk profile. To ensure smooth transition to RBS, banks were involved in aconsulted process to identify the support required by them. The risk profile templates have3been tried by banks for undertaking assessment risks. The pilot run of risk based supervisionof select banks has been undertaken during the current inspection cycle.To guard against regulatory forbearance and to ensure that regulatory intervention isconsistent across institutions and is in keeping with the extent of the problem, a frameworkfor Prompt Corrective Action has been developed. The PCA framework, which will linkregulatory action to quantitative measures of performance, compliance and solvency such asCRAR, NPA levels and profitability, has been introduced initially for a period of one yearafter which it will be reviewed.Having talked about the path traversed by the Indian banking system, let us now look into thefuture of the Indian banking system, the challenges that lie ahead and what roadmap would bemore appropriate. Charting out an appropriate Road Map for future reform process in thebanking sector is of paramount importance to ensure financial stability.  The road map is tobe drawn keeping in view the increasing complexity in the market place on account ofliberalisation, globalisation and technological advancement which has given rise toheightened and new forms of risks.  This is evident from the emergence of complexinstruments, financial conglomerate or similar structures, electronic and Internet banking,trend towards consolidation in financial sector evidenced by mergers and acquisitions andlarge capital flows. The future reform process of Indian Banking involves a long termstrategy for the banking system which would broadly cover areas like structural aspects,business strategies, prudential standards, control systems, integration of markets, technologyissues, credit delivery mechanism, information sharing and the role of regulator/ supervisor.The broad areas, which would receive the focus of the future reform agenda, would be asunder :• The structural aspects of the financial sector in India would address the issue ofconsolidation of the banking sector into international banks, national banks andlocal banks.   The consolidation of the banking system may not only cover thepublic sector banks but would also encompass the old private sector banks on aregional or zonal basis.• With increasing competition and globalisation the need for specialised onewindow service concept will grow. Banks would, therefore  be required to drawbusiness strategies keeping in view their risk bearing capacity, need for capital,maintaining profitability in a competitive environment, developing a properbusiness mix, management of NPAs, rationalisation of network of offices in Indiaas well as abroad and deployment of staff in the post VRS scenario. The bankswould also have to explore new markets and consolidation of overseas operations– expansion / relocation / exit policies on overseas presence with reference to theclient profile, business opportunities, etc.• One of the prime thrust areas for the future would be completion of branchcomputerisation and networking of banks enabling customers to performtransactions anywhere. On account of these developments, appropriate legal andsecurity systems would have to be put in place.Let me now come to the second theme of today’s discussion. You will agree that banks arebasically financial intermediaries. Industry, by far is the largest user of bank finance. Hence,4to what extent banking system has been successful in acting as financial intermediarydepends upon the extent of bank credit to the industrial sector.Industrial CreditThe RBI has come a long way from an era of tight regulation of banks to the present dayderegulated and liberalised environment.  Banks were earlier required to extend workingcapital to various categories of borrowers based on specific parameters laid down by theReserve Bank for individual sectors as suggested by Tandon and Chore Committees.  Further,the Credit Authorisation Scheme (CAS)which was famous in the yester years was appliedwhen ever large quantum of working capital finance had to be given out to borrowers andonly after a detailed scrutiny on several accounts were banks permitted to extend a particularlevel of working capital to the industry.  In due course CAS gave way to the CreditMonitoring Arrangement Scheme where the banks  were required to report the extent ofcredit given to large borrowal accounts, instead of forwarding the actual loan proposals.However, with effect from April 1997, such tight regulation of credit has been done awaywith.  The concept of maximum permissible bank finance introduced in November 1975 onimplementation of the recommendations of the Tandon Working Group to frame guidelinesfor follow-up of bank credit was liberalised over the years.  Consistent with the policy ofliberalisation greater operational freedom was provided to banks and RBI withdrew theprescription of  maximum permissible bank finance.  Banks are now free to determine  theworking capital requirements according to their risk perception of the borrower and his creditneeds; the only requirement which continues to this day is that the bank should lay down withthe approval of their Boards transparent policy and guidelines for credit dispensation for eachbroad category of economic activity.  Banks are also governed by exposure norms relating tosingle borrowers/group of  borrowers and other prudential norms which have been laid downby the RBI in tandem with global best practices.  Similarly, the mandatory norms relating toconsortium/ multiple/syndicate lending  were also withdrawn so much so the banks could befree to adopt the route and quantum of credit in a mutually acceptable manner.  Together withthis, the guidelines relating to issuance of and investment in Commercial Paper have beenactively liberalised.  In fact, it is observed now that more and more of the top corporates donot approach banks for working capital finance, but, instead resort to private placement ofdebt or floating of commercial paper to augment their working capital requirements.  Thus, itis observed that banks have moved from a stage of complete dependence on RBI instructionsto a scenario where individual and portfolio level decisions on dispensation of credit aremade by the banks based on their commercial judgement and prudential guidelines.RBI introduced Loan System of delivery of bank credit with prescription of minimum loancomponent in order to instill an element of discipline among the borrowers in relation to thecash management. From this scenario of mandating inclusion of loan component in theworking capital limits, the RBI has allowed  the banks offer flexibility to their borrowers indeciding the relative proportions of cash credit  and demand loan components  depending onthe specific and individual needs of the units.  The Bank has also made efforts to direct creditto sectors/areas where the flow of finance has been considered to be inadequate or wherefurther trust has been perceived to be required.  Thus, financing of infrastructure has receivedthe attention of the RBI over the past few years. There has been a process of continuousliberalization of the norms with a view to ensuring more efficient flow of finance to thissector. Right from enlargement of the scope of infrastructure, to the grant of additionalindividual/group exposure limits. Further, financing of promoters’ equity, which is not5generally permitted for banks financing has also been permitted subject to certain conditionsfor the infrastructure projects.Guidelines have also been issued to banks for financing Film industry since the latter were ofthe view that in the absence of guidelines from RBI, the flow of credit to Film industry wassorely lacking. Reserve Bank, therefore, issued the guidelines to the banks to finance filmproduction, which is considered most important part of the film industry.In April 2003, the guidelines restricting one institution providing bank finance to a borroweron the strength of the guarantee of another bank or financial institution has been relaxed as itwas perceived that the lending institution should conduct the appraisal  of the loan and takecredit risk rather than depending upon the assessment of another institution. This relaxationhas been permitted subject to 10 per cent fund-based participation of the guaranteeinginstitution and few other conditions.In view of the economic situation prevalent over the last few years, the sectors which havebeen especially hard hit due to the downturn in the economic conditions, we have permittedrestructuring of banks loans subject to certain conditions. The guiding factor behindinstructions issued was to address the temporary liquidity problems faced by the particularsector. The packages envisaged by us were mainly for restructuring/rephasing of theoutstanding loans. Banks were also instructed to provide fresh need-based working capital aspart of the restructuring package. Banks were permitted to extend such rehabilitationpackages to those units considered as viable by them. The above indicates that RBI has beenencouraging banks to extend credit to the industrial sector. The measures taken by RBI hasresulted in increased bank credit to the Industrial sector. Having said about role of banking inindustry, let us now dwell upon one of the most important sector of the economy whichserves as the backbone to the Indian economy.AgricultureAgriculture contributes 22.1 percent of the country's gross domestic product and providesemployment to nearly 65% of rural labour. The growth of agriculture and agriculturalproductivity are central to India’s economic development and poverty alleviation as nearlytwo thirds of our people are dependent on agriculture for sustenance & livelihood.  There is avital linkage between growth of productivity in the agriculture sector and the growth of theeconomy as a whole.  The linkage of agriculture with the rest of the economy is vital for foodsecurity, stable prices, control of inflation, financial stability and growth of gainfulemployment not only in agriculture, but also in agriculture-related industries and the servicessector. By improving production & productivity in agriculture, we will succeed in unleashinggrowth impulses in the Indian economy.Development of agriculture would depend to a great extent on improvement in infrastructureand credit delivery. The National Agriculture Policy adopted in July 2000 envisages annualgrowth in agriculture of over 4 percent per annum and highlights adequate and timely supplythof institutional credit to farmers. The 10 Five Year Plan has therefore, estimated that thecredit requirements for achievement of 4% and growth rate would be of the order of Rs.7lakh crore over the plan period.6The ground level credit disbursed to agriculture by all agencies (commercial banks,cooperative banks and RRBs) was estimated at Rs.70,800 crore during 2002-03. The sharesof commercial banks, cooperative banks and RRBs were 58%, 34% and 8% respectively.Agriculture credit constitutes an important part of priority sector lending by commercialbanks. A target of 18 percent of net bank credit has been stipulated for domestic scheduledcommercial banks for lending to agriculture. To ensure that the focus of the banks on creditflow to the direct category of agricultural advances does not get diluted; it has been stipulatedthat the lendings under the indirect category should not exceed one-fourth of the agriculturalsub-target of 18 percent, i.e. 4.5 percent of net bank credit for the purpose for computing theachievement of banks under the 18 percent target. However, all agricultural advances underthe categories 'direct' and 'indirect' are reckoned in computing performance under the overallpriority sector target of 40 percent of the net bank credit.Data relating to outstanding agricultural advances of public sector and private sector banksshow that the amount of outstanding advances to agriculture in absolute terms has increasedsubstantially over the years, although as percentage to net bank credit, it has been below thestipulated level of 18 percent. In fact, outstanding advances to agriculture by public sectorbanks had grown during the period 1991-2002 from Rs 15,857 crore to Rs 63,083 crore at anannual compound rate of 13.4 percent. In the case of Indian private sector banks, totalagricultural advances went up during the period from Rs.434 crore to Rs.8,022 crore atannual compound rate of 30.4 percent. The net bank credit of public sector and private sectorbanks had grown at annual compound rate of 12.8 and 26.4 percent respectively during thesame period.The problems relating to rural infrastructure have been addressed to a certain extent throughthe Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF). Since the year 1995-96, public sector andprivate sector banks having shortfall in lending to priority sector /agriculture are allocatedamounts for contribution to the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) establishedwith NABARD. So far, nine tranches of RIDF have been established with aggregate corpusof Rs 34,000 crore. The RIDF is utilized for assisting State Governments in completion ofrural infrastructure projects and this is expected to improve the credit absorption capacity inthe areas concerned, apart from providing the much-needed infrastructural support foragricultural production and development.In the case of RIDF-I to VI, the rate of interest on deposits placed by banks in the Fund wasuniform for all banks irrespective of the extent of their shortfall. Effective RIDF-VII, it wasdecided to link the rate of interest on RIDF deposits to the banks’ performance in lending toagriculture. Accordingly, banks receive interest from NABARD on contribution to RIDF atrates of interest inversely related to the shortfall in agricultural lending. In the case of RIDF-IX, these rates of interest ranged between Bank Rate + 1.5 percentage point to Bank Rate -1.5 percentage point.The Reserve Bank has taken several measures to improve credit flow to the agriculturesector. Under advice of RBI, public sector banks have been formulating Special AgriculturalCredit Plans (SACP) since 1994-95 by fixing self-set targets for disbursement during a year(April-March). With the introduction of SACP, the flow of credit to the agricultural sector bypublic sector banks has increased substantially from Rs.8,255 crore in 1994-95 to Rs.29,332.39 crore during 2001-02.7Another innovative measure has been introduction of the Kisan Credit Cards, which has beenwell received both  by banks and the borrowers. Cumulatively, 95.16 lakh KCCs have beenissued by public sector banks since inception of the scheme up to December 2002. Asannounced by the Union Finance Minister in his Budget Speech for the year 2001-2002, alleligible agricultural farmers are required to be covered under the KCC Scheme by March2004. Kisan Credit Card holders are also eligible for a personal accident insurance package.Other steps taken include expansion of the scope of lending to agriculture by commercialbanks to include lending through NBFCs, loans to agri-clinics and agri-business centres,loans for purchase of land by small and marginal farmers etc.The thrust for the development of the agriculture sector during the Tenth Five Year Plan(2002-2007) as indicated in the Approach Paper to the Plan, is on augmenting agriculturalproduction by bringing about improvements in productivity, value addition and exports. Asenvisaged in the National Agriculture Policy, progressive institutionalization of rural andfarm credit will be continued for providing timely and adequate credit to farmers. The ruralcredit institutions will have to gear up to meet the increasing credit requirement of theagriculture sector. The challenge before the banks would be to improve flow of credit toagriculture while ensuring viability of their operations.The role of the cooperative banks assumes significance in the context of provision ofagricultural credit. The co-operative credit structure in India is almost a century old andenjoys a unique position in the rural credit delivery system with its vast network covering theremotest parts of the country. The cooperative credit institutions are basically farmers’organisations set up primarily to meet the latter’s credit related requirements and they alsoprovide other credit linked services, like input supply, storage and marketing of produce, etc.,thereby influencing the all-round development of agriculture and the betterment of the life ofvillagers. The importance of co-operatives in dispensation of credit and allied services in therural areas has therefore been emphasised, time and again, by several Committees right fromthe All India Rural Credit Survey Committee in the early '50s and the policies of RBI,NABARD, Govts., both at the Centre and States, have been one of fostering the growth of thecooperative movement. The co-operatives have continued to play a crucial role in the ruralcredit scenario even after the entry of commercial banks and regional rural banks with theirvast rural branch network.One of the major issue being faced by the cooperative credit system is the high rate of interestat the beneficiary level. Whereas the NABARD lends the state cooperative banks at 6% bythe time credit reaches at the member level the rate of interest increases to 14 to 15%. Theefficiency in the system, therefore, needs to be further enhanced to reduce the rate of interest.It is with this view that the NABARD Act has been amended to enable it to refinance theDistrict Central Cooperative Banks directly with the caveat that state supports would be madeavailable to the institutions for increasing their efficiency.For historical reasons, two parallel wings of co-operative credit institutions have come intoexistence and developed; one for providing short-term and medium term credit to the farmersand the other for dispensing long term credit at first for debt redemption and subsequently forinvestment in agriculture. The short term credit structure obtaining in most parts of thecountry has been a federal one with a three tier system viz. the State Coop. Banks (SCBs) atthe apex level in each state, the Central Co-op. Banks (SCBs) at the district level and PrimaryAgricultural Credit Societies (PACS) at the village level.  In smaller states and Union8Territories having two tier structure, the credit requirements of the PACS are being directlymet by the SCBs.  As on March 31, 2003, there were 370 DCCBs and 30 SCBs operating inthe country. The number of PACS stood at around 99,000 as at March 2001.The organisational structure of long term co-operative credit is not of a uniform pattern allover the country. While in some states, it has a federal set up with the State Agricultural &Rural Development Bank (SCARDB) at the state level and the affiliated primary ARDBs atthe district or taluka level, in some states, the structure is of a unitary type with the State levelARDBs operating through their own branches.  In some states, there is a mixed structureincorporating both unitary and federal system. In Andhra Pradesh, an integrated structure ofcooperatives providing all types of agricultural credit (both short-term and long-term) under`Single Window’ credit system is prevalent.   In smaller states, there is no LT structure at alland the long-term credit needs are met by the State Coop. Bank in the State concernedtogether with other rural financial institutions. Various Committees have suggested eithermerger of the long term structure with the short term structure or conversion of the ARDBsinto full-fledged banks. However, several issues need to be addressed before such a move canactually materialize.The health of many SCBs and DCCBs is a matter of concern, as at December 2002, as manyas 137 out of 370 DCCBs and 8 out of 30 SCBs were not fulfilling the provisions of Section11(1) of the B.R. Act, 1949 (AACS) relating to minimum capital requirement. Thus, withmany cooperative banks experiencing grave problems threatening their very survival, theissue of good governance in the cooperative banks has assumed criticality. CapoorCommittee has gone into this issue of rehabilitation of cooperative credit system andsuggested various measures including recapitalistion, removal of dual control, cooperativegovernance issue and reduction in the role of state. These recommendations need to beaddressed in order to strengthen the system.As regards credit delivery to the weaker sections of the society, one of the issues that wouldneed focused attention is the provision of micro credit through the banking system. The SelfHelp Group (SHG)-bank linkage programme pioneered by NABARD which leverages thelarge network of bank branches in the country to provide micro credit to the rural poor, hasbecome an important mode of financing the weaker sections. The number of SHGs linked tobanks aggregated 7,17,360 as on March 31, 2003. This translates into an estimated 11.6million very poor families brought within the fold of formal banking services. About 90 percent of the groups linked with banks are exclusive women groups. Cumulative disbursementof bank loans to these SHGs stood at Rs.2048.7 crore as on March 31, 2003 with an averageloan of Rs.28,560 per SHG. With substantial increase in the number of SHGs linked withbanks, coordinated efforts are necessary among all agencies to further improve the flow ofcredit.The reform of the interest rate regime has constituted an integral part of the financial sectorreforms initiated in our country in 1991. In consonance with this reform process, the interestrates applicable to loans given by banks to micro credit organisations or by the micro creditorganisations to Self-Help Groups/member beneficiaries has been totally left to theirdiscretion. The banks have also been given complete freedom to formulate their ownmodel[s] or choose any conduit/intermediary for extending micro credit. Micro Creditextended by banks to individual borrowers directly or through any intermediary is reckonedas part of their priority sector lending.9The Reserve Bank has asked banks to include micro credit in all their credit plans right fromthe branch to the state level. While no target has been prescribed for micro credit, they havebeen asked to accord utmost priority to the micro credit sector in preparation of these plans.Our guidelines also make it clear that micro credit should form an integral part of the bank’scorporate credit plan and should be reviewed at the highest level on a quarterly basis.Savings mobilization being a major issue in micro finance provision, we have introducedcertain major relaxations regarding requirement of registration, maintenance of percentage ofassets and reserve fund for non-profit non-banking finance companies (NBFC)- MFIs. TheMFIs registered as not-for-profit NBFCs have been exempted from registration andprudential requirements. As for deposit-accepting profit-MFIs, the continued insistence onratings is primarily to ensure depositor protection, which, especially when it involves savingsof people, is an overriding concern.We have been taking reviews of how these guidelines have impacted provision of microcredit in the country. While the progress has been uneven across States, it is satisfying to notethat some significant strides have been made in upscaling the purveying of micro creditacross the country. A high level meeting on micro finance was held in RBI in October 2002to review the progress made, pursuant to which four Groups were set up to look into issuesrelating to: (i) Structure & Sustainability; (ii) Funding; (iii) Regulations; and (iv) CapacityBuilding of micro finance Institutions. The recommendations of the groups were discussed inanother meeting held recently in August, 2003 which was attended by senior executives ofselect public and private sector banks, RRBs, DCCBs, micro finance institutions, SIDBI andNABARD. As it was observed that greater public debate was required before a view could betaken, particularly on regulatory issues, the reports of the groups have been circulated amongall banks to elicit their responses within a month. After receiving the feed back from thebanks, RBI would segment the recommendations in three groups (I) those which areimplementable readily by banks (II) those which are difficult to implement and need furtherstudy and (III) grey areas which need further examination, including legal aspects.Both in matters relating to agricultural credit as well as issues involving cooperative banks,the role played by NABARD has been important. NABARD was established in terms of theNABARD Act, 1981 for providing and regulating credit and other facilities for the promotionand development of agriculture, small scale industries, cottage and village industries,handicrafts and other rural crafts and other allied economic activities in rural areas with aview to promoting integrated rural development and securing prosperity of rural areas and formatters connected therewith or incidental thereto.It serves as an apex refinancing agency for the institutions providing investment andproduction credit for promoting various developmental activities in the rural areas andexercises supervisory functions over cooperative banks and RRBs through both on-siteinspection and off-site supervision. Other functions of NABARD include taking measures forinstitution building for improving absorptive capacity of the rural credit delivery system,including monitoring, formulation of rehabilitation schemes, restructuring of creditinstitutions, training of personnel etc. NABARD administers the Rural InfrastructureDevelopment Fund (RIDF) and also monitors/ facilitates linkage of banks to Self HelpGroups (SHGs). NABARD also coordinates the rural financing activities of all institutionsengaged in developmental work at the field level and maintains liaison with Government ofIndia, State Governments, RBI and other national level institutions concerned with policyformulation and undertakes monitoring and evaluation of projects refinanced by it.10The above suggests that rural credit and in particular, agriculture has been receivingparamount importance in the economic development of the country with setting up of variousinstitutions and RBI has been constantly encouraging banks to extend finance to agriculture.Now I would like to come to the issue which is most relevant in today’s scenario ofcompetition and efficiency. Now, Information technology is the backbone for an efficientfinancial system.Technology and BankingOne of the most important challenges facing India now is the need for matching the urbandevelopment with rural development. The role played by rural credit in the process ofdevelopment has been significant. However, given the need for large scale rural sectordevelopment to address issues of rural unemployment and balanced growth, rural creditdelivery has assumed critical importance. It is also equally important to ensure that ruralsavings are channelised through organised financial sector, in particular the banks. It is in thiscontext the role that Information Technology can play needs to be viewed. Just as technologyis important for effecting a quantum improvement in farming techniques and in increasedagricultural production, Information Technology or IT in Banking is vital for sharp progressin financial intermediation and efficient payment system.One must, however, recognise at the outset that mere usage of computers would not by itselfherald IT revolution in the rural sector. There are many other tools of IT which need to beintroduced to act as catalysts in the process of transformation. With the geographical spreadof banking having penetrated to most parts of the country, it is vital that Automated TellerMachines (ATMs) are widely used. ATMs would provide the rural masses with theconveniences associated with retail payment systems. At present, ATMs are city-oriented.ATMs with the rural customer as focal points may have to be introduced. ATMs couldprovide cash drawals as also deposit facilities to the rural common man.Some sceptics would argue that the introduction of ATMs will not be necessary at this pointof time, nay even in the medium term of say the next 3-5 years. There is, on the contrary,evidence of rise in dependence on NRI inflows by rural families. These would be one of thetarget groups besides the rich farming-trading families which would not benefit fromdeployment of IT in rural areas.To illustrate this point further, multi-purpose cards could be a facility that IT could usher infor rural population. Of specific importance is the potential that SMART cards have in thisarea. SMART cards – which are basically cards using computer circuits in them therebymaking them ‘intelligent’ – would serve as multipurpose cards. SMART cards are essentiallya technologically improved version of credit and debit cards and could be used also as ATMcards. They could be used for credit facilities at different locations by the holders. SMARTcards could be used for personal identification and  for monitoring credit usage by smallfarmers very importantly from the point of view of a rural entity, they could be used foravailing of facilities such as subsidised seeds, fertilisers, in aiding in marketing the produce,in availing of medical facilities for both human beings as well as live-stock and also invarious requirements of co-operative functions that are characteristic of rural areas. The datafrom all the SMART card usage points could well form the repository of information fornational and economic indicators, which would be more scientific, latest and provideinformation for quick strategy formulation by the Government.11As affluence spreads in rural areas, there could be several schemes to tap savings. Forinstance, Gold deposit or Gold bond scheme for the rural folk could be actively promoted.The proliferation of IT essentially triggered by the awareness brought about by the advent oftelevision, could ensure participation of rural masses as investors in other instruments such asmutual funds schemes, equities, preference shares, etc.All these would, however, require certain minimum infrastructural requirements in the ruralareas. The most essential pre-requisite is the availability of electric power which is an area ofconcern at present. The entry of solar based power – possibly for small computers and forutilities such as SMART card reader outlets, however, could provide some relief in thisregard. Coverage of telecommunications is yet another area of concern, but recent experienceshows that there is room for optimism in the availability of uninterrupted means ofcommunication between and across villages and cities. The approach towards ITinfrastructure in the rural areas may have to be different from the one being adopted forcities. Conglomeration of facilities such as computers, SMART card facilities etc., at kiosks –possibly at telephone kiosks – could be thought of as feasible options with the participation ofthe educated unemployed rural youth in the setting up of such facilities.Having dwelled upon the usage of IT in banking for the rural masses, it would also beappropriate if I outline the measures which have been taken by the Reserve Bank for thecustomers of banks in the urban centres too. All of you must have witnessed the significantchange which has been sweeping over banking functions today. Large scale usage of IT bybanks has resulted in computerisation of many branches and their inter-connectivity by meansof safe and reliable networks. While the new private sector banks have all commenced asentities with fully computerised operations, the older banks too have embraced upon I T in alarge way. Today, all the public sector banks are on the threshold of achieving the status of100 per cent computerisation of their business. In fact the largest bank in the country has alsonetworked and inter-connected more than 3000 of its branches. This has meant three majorbenefits to the customer.  First, the customer is now treated as a customer of the bank as awhole, which  means that he is now capable of enjoying facilities such as ‘anywhere banking’as also ‘anytime banking’. Second, costs have come down. With hair thin margins being theorder of the day, banks have to look for ways and means to reduce their operating costs and IT has come as a saviour in this area. Third and most important is the impact on improvedcustomer service and overall efficiency of the bank as a whole.All the above have positioned customers of banks as the most important source of attentionby banks, thereby conforming to Mahatma Gandhi’s oft-told adage of the customer being theKing.The Reserve Bank too, has provided for many tools as part of improving systemic efficiencyof the Banking sector. The first major feat has been the setting up an exclusive, safe andsecure communication network for the use of the banking sector. Named the INFINET (forthe INdian FInancial NETwork), this network has been in operation for more than 3 yearsnow. And Hyderabad can boast of hosting this network which is set up, managed andoperated by the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT),situated at Masab Tank.Recognising that the best impact of technology would be felt only if it ultimately improvesthe efficiency of funds settlement, the Reserve Bank has also provided for many new12products – all of which are aimed at reforms in the existing payment and settlement systems,and providing for risk reduction, which is a major concern for central banks world wide.Commencing from the introduction of MICR based cheque clearing in the late eighties (withfour metropolitan centres being part of the chain), today, there are 27 cities where chequeclearing is performed using mechanised technology of reader sorters which process chequesat more than 2000 per minute. On similar lines, the Currency Verification and ProcessingSystems have been made operational at various offices of the Reserve Bank which hasresulted in the implementation of the ‘Clean Note Policy’, as far as currency notes areconcerned.The benefits of technology in the banking sector have been extended to cover transactionsundertaken in respect of Government securities transactions; the Negotiated Dealing System(NDS) has provided for an electronic platform for trading in Government securities whichhas stabilised well in its two years of operation. Further, the proliferation of IT has also setthe stage for improving and managing risks in payment systems, in the form of the following:• Electronic Trading Systems• DVP/PVP• RTGS• Secured Netting Systems• The growth of the Central Counterparty (CCP) as in the case of the ClearingCorporation of India Ltd (CCIL) and movement to Continuous Linked Settlement.Much as we envision, the outlook for improved financial services is bright, given the highdrive of IT in banking. If India is brought into the mainstream of real time payments system,the allocative efficiency of Indian Banking would be of top class by any standard.* Inaugural address by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a seminar on “Indian Economic Scenario –Yesterday-Today-Tommorrow – Banking-Agriculture-Industry-IT – New Hopes-New Challenges” organized by Telugu Vaibhavam atHyderabad on September 16, 200313
