I consider it a great privilege and an honour to be invited to deliver the 27Frank Moraes Memorial Lecture.  While I did not have the privilege of meeting Mr.Frank Moraes, I am an admirer of his writings, which are at once, objective,informative, illuminating, and inspiring.  I must compliment the United WritersI must also compliment the organisers for their tradition of inviting distinguishedpeople from various walks of life, public and private sectors, scholars andadministrators, scientists and statesmen to deliver these Lectures. The organisers hadkindly made available the copies of the Lectures and they make a fascinating reading.Among them, I found one by Dr. C. Rangarajan, then Member, Planning Commissionon “An Approach to Balance of Payments Problems”, delivered in June 1992.  In theexternal sector, our journey from problems of 1992 to comfort in 2000 has beenexciting, in which both of us have been, in different degrees, associated. My addressreflects the excitement of that journey and ponders over the future – to a path of self-reliance through greater openness combined with self-respect.  The title of the subject,“Capital Flows and Self-reliance Redefined” captures the growing significance ofcapital flows in managing the external sector, and the changing dimensions ofI am well a ware that in these days of international integration, it is no longerfashionable to talk about self reliance. I do, nonetheless, think that this concept needsIt is not easy to have a clear-cut definition of self reliance, t hough in thecontext of this address it relates to a country’s economy vis-à-vis the rest of the world,and not an individual or a community.  I would present, for convenience three broadthough overlapping approaches  to self reliance : “Restrictive self reliance” meaningself sufficiency; “cautious self reliance”, aimed at minimising exposure to externalFirst, restrictive self reliance could imply self sufficiency to the point ofself sufficiency may be attempted in respect of specific commodities(say, food or steel) or activities (defence) which would be in the nature of cautiouscautious self reliance could aim at minimising dependence on imports(import substitution) and / or self sufficiency to pay for all imports (or currentexpenditures) only with exports (or current receipts) or self sufficiency extended tocreate surplus on current account. To the extent there may be a gap between savingsand investments and/or between foreign exchange availability and needs in theprocess of development, such a gap could be met by debt provided such debt is keptFourthly, the dynamic self reliance aims at improving strengths of the economy to apoint that vulnerability to shocks from external sector is minimised and possiblyeliminated, even though the economy may have a greater interface with the rest of theworld.  Such  dynamic self reliance will have to have a non-ideological or neutralapproach to degree of openness in current and capital account.within reasonable limits.  This is yet another facet of self reliance.Thirdly, self reliance.Secondly, isolation or aversion to excessive exports (since terms of trade may be adverse).sector and "dynamic self reliance" which implies resilience against external shocks.to be contextually revisited.Self Reliance : A Frameworkexternal trade impinging on self reliance.Association for keeping alive his memory in a befitting manner.thMr. President and friends,Capital Flows and Self Reliance RedefinedSome explanatory remarks on the above frame work are essential. It isnecessary to recognise that the most relevant issue is risks and rewards in linkage ofan economy with the rest of the world, which are a function of several factors viz. sizeof economy; geopolitical considerations, commodity composition of exports/imports,and parameters of capital flows. It is clear that parameters of feasibility of a policy ofself reliance would take into account technological developments, bureaucraticrigidities to cope with changes, communications and information and mobility ofpeople. In brief, any approach to self reliance has to be both contextual to the countryWhile self reliance, as popularly understood, relates to trade, and to someextent current account, the surplus or deficit on current account is reflected in capitalaccount, with potential impact on future flows on current account.  Thus, the extentand nature of capital flows becomes subject matter of policy of self reliance. Thereare several important developments in regard to capital flows that impinge on theFirst, the volume and diversity of instruments of capital flows have increased.Second, the volatility of such flows has increased and such volatility may sometimeshave less to do with domestic policies.  Third, official flows which could play the roleof counter cyclical treatment at times of shock, whether on trade account or capitalperception to be less irreconcilable with self reliance, compared to equity flows,especially Foreign Direct investment, have in recent times, sometimes tended to bemore disruptive to an economy in times of crises. Thus, policy of self relianceimplying avoidance of non-debt creating flows to eliminate the adverse consequencesof presence of multinationals has been under review.  Fifth, maintaining adequatelevel of reserves is one way, though  not necessarily the only effective way inensuring  self reliance, provided it is in conjunction with other complementaryOver the first three decades of planned development, successive Plansemphasised the need for financing development largely from resources mobiliseddomestically. The external sector was treated as a handmaiden of the domestic sector.First, our planners shared the export pessimism then pervading the developing world.Secondly, the existence of a large domestic market provided scope for internalisingforward and backward linkages. Thirdly, the development strategy hinged upon aprogramme of industrialisation to break through the vicious circles of backwardness.Fourthly, the availability of foreign exchange was a major consideration, especially  Export pessimism permeated the policy stance throughout the early decades ofour Planning. This thinking was based on four premises. First, it was believed thatonly after industrialisation has proceeded some way that increased production wouldbe reflected in larger export earnings. Secondly, it was argued that given the largedomestic market, exports need not be an engine of growth. Thirdly, growth in externaldemand for India's products was likely to be inelastic because of the traditional natureof our exports. Finally, there was what was known as the Prebisch-Singer argumentthat primary commodity exports face a secular deterioration in the terms of trade.Accordingly, exports were regarded as a residual, a vent-for-surplus on those2occasions when such surpluses were available.after the dissipation of the sterling balances during the 1950s and 1960s.Our Policy of Self Reliance : A Shifting Perspectivepolicies.account are diminishing rapidly.  Fourth, debt flows which were considered in popularapproach to self reliance.Links with Capital Flowsand changing with times.Import substitution was the principal instrument of trade policy and wasregarded in the early years as not only the correct strategy but also inevitable in acontinental economy such as India. First, the need for a widely diversified andresilient industrial base was recognised as an imperative to break through theconstraints faced from the adverse international environment. Imports of capitalgoods, intermediates and technology were essential for building the industrial baseand for strengthening the expenditures of substituting imports.  Secondly, thepossibilities of expanding import purchasing power through exports were consideredextremely limited. Thirdly, the objective of self-reliance was interpreted in terms ofindigenising availability through domestic production rather than through the foreigntrade sector.By the mid-1960s, serious reconsideration of this strategy was warranted.First, while the industrialisation-oriented trade policy did result in a resilient anddiversified industrial base, it created a high cost economy reflected in a highincremental capital output ratio and declining productivity of capital.  Secondly, theregime infused a positive discrimination against exports.  Thirdly, policy makersunderestimated the import intensity of the industrialisation process and this putconsiderable strains on the balance of payment.  Fourthly, the policy of import andadapt imparted a technological lag to Indian industry.  The sheltered environment ofrestricted competition provided very few incentives for technological upgradation.Fifthly, import regulation was achieved not via the exchange rate and tariffs butthrough comprehensive licensing cum exchange control.  This in itself resulted ininefficiencies in allocation of resources, high cost of administration and diversion ofIt may be of interest to note that the ob jective of self reliance did not findexplicit commitment in the First, Second and Third Plans which were mainlyconcerned with generating the foreign exchange resource requirement of the Plans.The Third Plan reflected the first signs of rethinking in the policy strategy bydedicating itself to ‘self sustaining growth’ which required ‘domestic saving toprogressively meet the demand of investment and for the balance of payment gap tobe bridged over’.   While it envisaged that normal capital flows will continue, it setout the early indications of the concept of self reliance by foreseeing a steadyreduction in the reliance on special foreign aid programmes and dispensing with themafter a period of time.  The Third Plan also brought out the need for regarding exportsThe Fourth Plan contained quite an aggressive approach to achieving selfreliance. Export growth of 7 per cent per annum was considered an essential elementof the strategy.  It was envisaged that the dependence on foreign aid would be halvedduring the course of the Fourth Plan (1969-74) and PL480 imports would beeliminated. As a consequence, trade policy became the primary instrument forachieving a more dynamic concept of self reliance than what was prevalent in theWhile the Fourth Plan made a conscious effort to approach the goal of selfreliance through the active use of exports, it was in the Fifth Plan (1974-79) that selfthe strengthening of the impulses of modernisation for the achievement of bothThe Seventh Plan (1985-90) noted the conditions under which the concept ofself reliance was defined earlier, particularly in the preceding plan.  It conceptualised3economic and technological self reliance.reliance was recognised as an explicit objective. The Sixth Plan (1980-85) emphasisedearly decades.as the key instrument for achieving freedom from aid.transactions away from the banking channels.self reliance not merely in terms of reduced dependence on aid but also in terms ofbuilding up domestic capabilities and reducing import dependence in strategicmaterials.  The concept also encompassed the achievement of technologicalcompetence through liberal imports of technology in the areas of atomic energy,space, agricultural and medical research.  In the aftermath of the Gulf crisis,macroeconomic management undertook two sets of interrelated policy actions tosimultaneously achieve stabilisation and structural change. External sector policiesdesigned to progressively open up the Indian economy, formed an integral part of thepolicies for structural reforms. In this context, the High Level Committee on Balanceof Payments (Dr. Rangarajan Committee, 1993) recommended the instrumentality of  modulation of import demand on the basis of the availability of current elimination of the dependence on short term debtThe parameters of the external position adopted in the Eighth Five Year Plan(1992-97) were consistent with the approach indicated by the Committee. A currentaccount deficit of 1.6 per cent of GDP, volume growth of 13.6 per cent in annualThe Ninth Plan (1997-2002) viewed strengthening of efforts to build self-reliance as a specific objective. It  recognised export performance as critical to theachievement of this objective. It also viewed the ability to attract foreign investmentas promoting the objective of self reliance by providing access to technology and byavoiding a build-up of external debt. It also recommended cautious liberalisation ofthe capital account. Thus the Ninth Plan has unambiguously endorsed the dynamismembodied in the objective of self reliance with a clear recognition of the preferredinstruments to achieve it.An important element of external sector developments over the past fivedecades is the changing character of the capital account.  The first period from 1948-49 till the end-seventies represented the era of the dominance of external assistance inthe capital account. The second era began from 1982-83/1983-84 onwards when theECBs) and non-resident deposits together oreven individually shared equally with external assistance in external financing.  Thisperiod coincides with a surge in current account deficits.  From relatively modestlevels, India’s external debt rose rapidly during the eighties.  The debt/GrossDomestic Product ratio increased from 14 per cent in 1980-81 to 30 per cent in 1990-91.  There was also an increase in the debt service ratio from 10 per cent in 1980-81to a peak of 35 per cent in 1990-91.The third phase began from 1993-94 as foreign investment flows came todominate the capital account.  This was the result of the deliberate policy effort toreduce the dependence on debt creating flows in favour of non-debt creating flows.For instance, foreign investment inflows formed almost 46 per cent of net capitalreceipts during the recent four-year period 1996-2000 (as against negligible levels inearlier periods) with a concomitant decline in the share of debt creating flows.  This isreflected in a decline in the debt/GDP ratio and the debt service ratio to 18 per cent in41998-99 and 22 per cent by end December 1999, respectively.costlier external commercial borrowings (Changing Character of Capital Accountexports and import elasticity of 1.5  were treated as normative.(v)building up the foreign exchange reserves to avoid liquidity crises; and (iv)reduction in exceptional financing and the debt service burden; (iii)receipts and a sustainable level of net capital receipts;(ii)improvement in exports, both merchandise and invisibles; (i)the approach to self reliance:The balance of payments reflec ts the impact of diverse developments, bothinternal and external.  While these factors may affect specific components of thebalance of payments in varying degrees, the full impact on the external accounts isbest tracked through the behaviour of summary indicators of the external sector.Updating an article on “India’s External Sector Since Independence : FromInwardness to Openness”  by Muneesh Kapur, in the RBI Occasional Papers (June-September 1997), it is possible to   delineate co-movements and diverse pulls ofsummary indicators of India’s balance of payments since Independence into five clear(1) 1950-66, a period of deterioration; (2) 1966-80, transition andimprovement; (3) 1980-90, emergence and persistence of structural imbalances, and(4) 1991-96, stabilisation and strengthening; (5) 1996-97 onwards, resilience inaddition to strength.   Correspondingly and, in fact interwoven into this phasing aredevelopments associated with the planning strategy set in motion by the Second Plan,the terms of trade shocks of the seventies, incipient pressures of the 1980s stoked byinternal imbalances, the crisis of 1990 and structural reforms, and resilience to severalshocks. .( 1950-after Independence due to Partition, deficit was financed almost entirely by runningdown sterling balances, and the balance of payments position remained comfortableover the First Plan.  Signs of pressure came from the Second Plan onwards as importspurted on account of the basic and heavy industry led planning strategy.  The strainon the reserves was eased as external assistance picked up from 1958-89.  Improvedexport performance and a deceleration in import demand allowed for an improvementin the Current Account Deficit (CAD) to 1.8 per cent of GDP in the Third Plan periodfrom 2.4 per cent in the Second Plan; but the external balance continued to beunsustainable.  A step-up in flows of external assistance met the external financingrequirements of the Plan period and the overall deficit improved to near balance.  Thesummary indicators reflected the deterioration in the external payments positionduring 1950-65 period and exceptional financing support from the International(ii) 1966- 80 : The phase marked the onset of a degree of activism in external sectorendeavour to boost exports was signalled by the devaluationof the Rupee in 1966, which was also an attempt to rationalize the system of ad hocexport subsidies, which had grown up in lieu of a formal devaluation.  Nevertheless,the CAD widened in the period of the Annual Plans as the devaluation did notproduce the desired result on exports immediately. The period 1975-80, was one ofcomfort because of a continuous step-up in export growth coupled with animprovement in . As workers’ remittances surged in the wake of the demandfor the Indian labour in the oil rich countries, the current account deficit  declinedsharply in 1975-76 and, in fact, turned into a surplus over the following two years.The major exception was 1974-75 due to the full impact of the First oil shock, which1980- 90 : The second oil shock started another round of stress on the balance ofpayments in 1980-81.  As the current account deficit surged in the first three years(1980-83) of the Sixth Plan in the face of a deceleration in export growth, it wasfinanced partly by rising capital flows, partly by running down reserves and by aheavy recourse to Extended Fund Facility (EFF) of the IMF.  The limited (iii) 5was financed by recourse to various IMF facilities.invisiblesmanagement.  The policy Monetary Fund (IMF) during the Second Plan Period became necessary. Although the balance of payments came under pressure immediately 66 : i) sub-periods:Review of Balance of Payments Developmentsimprovement in the balance of payments over the Sixth Plan was due mostly to thereduction in the Petroleum Oil and Lubricants (POL) import bill dues to expansion inThe critical phase turned out to be the Seventh Plan period (1985-90)culminating in the balance of payments crisis of 1991.  The current account deficitaveraged more than two per cent of GDP as the period was marked by a surge inimports and a deterioration in net invisibles.  As flows of external assistance fell shortof the financing need, recourse to costly sources of finance in the form of externalcommercial borrowings (ECB) and non-resident deposits became relatively large.With persistently large CADs, even these flows were not sufficient and the(iv) 1990- 96 : The weaknesses in the Indian economy were exposed by the Gulfhostilities of 1990 and ensuing developments.  The Gulf crisis had multiple effects : itled to increased POL imports, partial loss of export markets in West Asia, a set backto remittances and tourist earnings while also involving some foreign exchangeexpenditure on repatriation of Indians from the affected  countries in the Middle East.The current account deficit, amounted to 3.2 per cent of GDP in 1990-91.  Around thesame time, credit rating of the country was lowered, restricting the country’s access tocommercial borrowings (in particular, the short term credits in the form of Bankers’Acceptance Facility).  There was a temporary loss of confidence leading to a flight ofNon Resident Indian (NRI) deposits. Exceptional financing measures becameinevitable, and the overall deficit in 1990-91 was financed almost equally by recourseto IMF and drawdown of reserves.  The import cover of foreign currency assetsdeclined to just one month of imports at end of 1990-91 and dipped further to lessthan half a month by July 1991 as reserve decline continued in the first half of 1991-92.With the onset of structural reforms in 1991-92 accompanied initially bysevere import compression measures and determined efforts to encourage repatriationof capital , there was a turnaround in the second half of 1991-92.  Over the next threeyears (1992-95), thanks mainly to foreign investment flows, robust export growth andbetter invisible performance, the balance of payments situation turned comfortableand reserves surged by US $ 14 billion. However, in 1995-96, an overall deficit wasrecorded, as capital flows ebbed and import requirements increased to meet the needsof strong industrial growth.(v) 1996-97 Onwards : Despite the financial crisis in Asia, Russia and Brazil,the impact of sanctions, developments in Kargil and finally, the recent sharp rise ininternational crude prices, the country's foreign exchange reserves increased in eachof the years from 1996-97 onwards proving the sustainability of the external sector.The CAD remained modest averaging 1.1 per cent of GDP during 1996-2000 (1.4 percent during 1990-96). The outcome was partly on account of officialisation of receiptsaccompanying the liberal policy on gold imports that earlier did not enter the systemand partly the result of the routing of current receipts through banking channelsresulting in  a buoyant growth in private transfers from NRIs and a robust growth insoftware exports. Another factor contributing to the containment of the CAD duringthe period 1996-2000 has been the sluggish growth in non-oil non-POL customsimports inspite of At the same time, the capital account has seen further restructuring anddiversification with foreign investment acquiring a pre-dominant role. Within foreigninvestment, while the period 1990-96 was dominated by portfolio investment flows ,6liberalisation of trade.cumulative impact was a reserve loss.domestic production of POL.the more recent period has seen a welcome pick-up in direct investment. Amongstother components of capital account, while external assistance and non-residentdeposit inflows have remained stable, the commercial borrowings have beenlacklustre in the recent past.With total capital flows exceeding the current account deficit in each of theyears, the foreign exchange reserves have increased by US $ 16.3 billion betweenreserves has increased from 6 months at end-March 1996 to over 8 months by end-March 2000. The ratio of short-term debt to reserves has almost halved from 23 percent at end-March 1996 to 13 per cent at end-December 1999. The ratio of short-termdebt and cumulative portfolio inflows to reserves declined from 71 per cent at end-March 1996 to around 60 per cent at end-March 2000.It is possible to argue though not conclusively that the dynamic perspective ofself reliance in the development strategy and the policy responses are to some extentbehaviour of selected indicators. An attempt has been made to compilea set of indicators and compare our changing policy perspectives and our performancesince the First Plan till date, and it is presented in Table attached.  The shift in thestance of trade policy from inwardness to outward orientation is reflected in theimprovement in the current receipts/current payments ratio which has occurred in the1990s in contrast to the deterioration witnessed during the second half of the 1950s,the 1960s and again in the 1980s. With liberalisation of trade policies in the 1990s,The proportion of domestic capital formation financed by foreign saving hasconventionally remained below 10 per cent except during the import hump associatedwith the industrialisation strategy of the Second Plan and  the drought and wardisruptions of the Third plan. The 1980s witnessed a rise in this ratio to around 11 percent  as the reliance on external saving was stepped up to accelerate the growthprocess.  In the 1990s, foreign savings have contributed less than 5 per cent of thedomestic investment. Reflecting these trends, the current account deficit has beenaveraging 1 per cent in the 1990s although it reached peaks of nearly 2.5 per cent inAid flows have been the major source of capital flows to India over the period1950 - 80. Their share in net capital flows has, however, declined from almost  100per cent The debt indicators are showing signs of consolidation and stability.  Thedebt- GDP ratio has declined from its peak of 41 per cent in March 1992 to around 22per cent at present. This healthy movement is mirrored in the behaviour of the debtservice ratio, which has fallen from 35 per cent during  1990-91 to around 18 per centThe indicators of reserve adequacy also point to resilience in the balance ofpayments. After falling to a precariously low level of one week of imports during thecrisis of 1990 - 1992, external sector policies have enabled a reconstitution of theforeign currency reserves to a level of eight  months imports at present in terms of theconventional norm. In the 1990s when capital flows have dominated the balance ofpayments, the adequacy of reserves is assessed in terms of the cover they provideagainst volatile capital movements.     The ratio of short term debt to reserves has alsomoved down from a peak in the Seventh Plan period to 13 per cent at end-December7in 1998-99.upto the 1970s to less than 10 per cent in the latter part of 1990s.the Second Plan period and again in the Seventh Plan period.the current receipts have financed more than ninety per cent of current payments.reflected in the Indicators of Self Reliance1996-2000 to US $ 38.0 billion at end-March 2000. In the process, the import cover of1999.  The total stock of portfolio investment accounts for about half of the level ofIf an indicator of self reliance is the capacity to withstand exogenous shocks,the statement attached would show how the different types of shocks were met in thepast.  The latest increases in oil prices, though not far different in magnitudecompared with the past, and other related events passed without a specific policy,  reflecting resilience of external sectorin late 1990s.   In fact, multiple shocks were absorbed without recourse to exceptionalAs mentioned, the Report of Rangarajan Committee gave an operationalframework as refinement to self reliance, but India has further changed since 1993 , interms of economic structure as well as growth expectations while globaldevelopments in trade and international financial architecture are also noteworthy.An exploratory redefinition of self reliance could be as follows : First, thereality of global trends in trade in goods and services warrants internationalcompetitiveness as a key to a sustainable trade regime. In other words ,  a differentialapproach to export sector and import of goods or services is becoming increasinglydifficult to operationalise. Consequently ,  barriers to efficiency, especially physicaland institutional infrastructure would operate against economic strength and thusagainst self reliance. It must be recognised that large scale poverty and illiteracy andSecond, as Governor Bimal Jalan has been emphasising, adequacy of level ofreserves is a key component for managing our external sector. Furthermore ,  anappropriate exchange rate policy, coupled with price stability as a component ofmacroeconomic policies is also critical to maintain competitiveness of economy bothto facilitate exports and fine-tune imports.front and it relates to food (for which there is a more than adequate  buffer stock); fuel(POL on which imports are still large); and fertilisers (which are essential). Policyinitiatives to ensure economies in managing such  potential shocks, taking advantageof emerging instruments of hedging would add to a sense of comfort and thus to selfFourth, on capital account, there are several developments in regard tointernational trade in goods and services, international business, technology, crossborder flows of capital, etc. that would necessitate a more active management ofcapital account, with a view to continuously assessing the costs and benefits ofIn this context, management of the capital account involves management ofcontrol, regulation and  liberalisation. Gradualism in liberalisation implies that themix between controlled, regulated and liberalised capital transactions keeps changinggradually in favour of the latter.  In fact, if the option of re-imposing controls to meetan emergency is contemplated, the management of capital account should alwaysFifth, as an economy becomes more sophisticated, we need to recognise thatas other countries find it profitable to invest in India, we too can benefit fromselective investments abroad. It is in this context that we have to view Indianinvestments abroad. It is erroneous to equate all capital outflows with capital flight. In8and  liberalisation options. contain control, regulatory liberalisation vis-à-vis control or regulation.reliance.Third, the remotely possible vulnerability on trade account is mainly on importmalnutrition undermine a nation's capacity to achieve and maintain competitiveness.self reliance. These dynamics would warrant a review of the concept of Self Reliance Redefinedfinancing and the external sector has continued the strengthening trend.response except raising Resurgent India Bondsreserves.fact, selective investments abroad which are being progressively liberalised couldSixth, there is a need to recognise the resource and other limitations onmultilateral and other official bodies to extend adequate support if a large economylike India were to face a highly vulnerable situation. The resource and otherconstraints on international financial institutions and systems have been demonstratedin the recent Asian  crises and hence India has to take extra precautions to Finally, it is clear that while several initiatives are proposed at the global level,the task of preventing a crisis is essentially a national responsibility though anenabling international environment is sought to be put in place to facilitate action byindividual countries.   No doubt, in today’s globalised world, prevention of crises aswell as mitigating the effects require multilateral efforts, but the social consequencesof such crisis are to be met by the national governments concerned.  In this sense, theultimate responsibility in regard to crisis prevention and management rests primarily,  the concept of self reliance can no longer be defined in terms of degreeof openness but in terms of competitive strength in trade in goods and services on theone hand, and managing balance of payments (supply shocks on trade account andcapital flows) to avoid vulnerability on the other.Briefly stated, currently, self reliance of a country lies in its economic strengthThere are several aspects of self reliance, and managing capital account isindeed one of them.  Some of the important challenges that need to be addressed by usFirst, do we need enhanced capital flows?  It would depend essentially on theabsorptive capacity of the economy and the level of CAD  that could be consideredsustainable, in the light of global developments.  Currently, the flows appear adequateto meet a CAD not exceeding 2 per cent of GDP and also add reasonable amounts toreserves.  However, the impact of possible increased investment activity in the future,particularly in infrastructure on the level of current account would have to beassessed.  In doing so, the fact that the combined share of exports and imports hasgone up from about 13 percent of GDP in the latter half of eighties to over 20 percentin the recent period as well as the sharp increases in capital flows and the level ofreserves could be kept in view.  In this background, and on the assumption ofsustainable level of non-volatile capital flows, the possibility of an acceptable band ofSecondly should there be further liberalisation of capital outflows other thanthose related to inflows?  While outflows will have to continue to be permitted prudential regulatory requirements for financial intermediaries, there is a case forprogress in liberalisation and automatic approvals with regard to overseas ventures.At an appropriate time in the future, we can also consider permitting a modicum ofoutflows on individual account for residents within prudential limits commensuratewith the very reasonable limits allowed for individuals for comfortable currentaccount transactions.  These measures would clearly demonstrate sign of strength ofThird, whether composition of capital flows needs to be changed keeping inself reliance as protection against vulnerability?  Clearly, the emphasis9view redefined self reliance. the economy and in no way compromises the overall strategy of withsustainable current account deficit may need to be conceptualised.in this context are worth flagging.Reliance : Challenges Managing Capital Account for Self and resilience to potential vulnerabilities.Thuson the policy makers of the countries concerned.vulnerability and continue to be risk averse in this area.minimiseultimately make a significant contribution to the resilience of Indian industry.on non-debt creating flows and avoidance of short term debt has served us well.  Thegreater thrust on FDI appears clearly warranted.  As regards portfolio investment,similar to short term debt, there is usually a concomitant need to add to foreigncurrency reserves to avoid vulnerability.  Thus, there is an  international opinion thatabout 30 to 40 per cent of incremental portfolio flows need to be ideally added toreserves to provide cushion against vulnerability.  Thus, the real addition toinvestment in the country through the portfolio investment route may be significantlyless than what such flows indicate.Fourth, whether official flows, from multilateral and perhaps bilateral sourcespaid  the last instalment amount of about US $ 25 million to the IMFin June, 2000.  In fact, by pursuing appropriate policies, we have been able torepurchase all our obligations to the Fund. Besides, during the 1990s, we have builtup our foreign exchange reserves to over $ 36 billion as of date, while maintainingexternal debt almost constant. So long as macro policies continue to be sound toensure progress in desirable directions of efficiency and stability, there will be noWith a comfortable external sector position, significant reduction in theGovernment’s fiscal deficit should help the Government to phase out its dependenceon  International Development Association (IDA) whose level of resources is in anycase getting depleted.Over the medium-term, it should also be possible to earmark all loans fromIBRD for utilisation in long gestation but commercially viable projects such as thosein infrastructure, in the quasi-Government sector.As regards bilateral sources, there is clearly aid fatigue and there are manyIn brief, I believe that an initial step in managing capital account may be, notFreedom from AidDr. I.G. Patel, former Governor of Reserve Bank of India in his fifteenth  PantMemorial Lecture delivered in New Delhi on September 20, 1992 elaborated thetheme “Freedom from Foreign Debt”. Referring to the contours of freedom, heindicated that “foreign indebtedness comes in many forms and that it is certainly nothis preference was not to shun them but warned severely against any concession orincentive, particularly government guarantees for private capital flows – direct orportfolio, loan or Reiterating the dangers of sovereign guarantees to any form of capital flows,he mentioned ”it certainly needs  to be emphasised that as a long-term policy, thesequence of independence must be from international institutions first and privateOn bilateral aid, Dr. Patel was even more forthright when he said “when itcomes to indebtedness to foreign governments, the case for seeking complete freedomfrom it is perhaps the strongest. An enduring relationship of borrowers and debtorsamong sovereign states is not a healthy one to sustain, and it is doubtful if publicopinion at home or abroad will support this vexatious and debatable relationshipdecade after decade.”10financial markets later, if at all”.deposit .necessarily desirable to seek freedom from all of them.”  On private-investment flows,multilateral aid.merely preferring non-debt creating flows but phasing out official debt or bilateral andimprobables that add to the cost of such flows.need for us to approach the Fund for any assistance.India has encouraged ? should be As mentioned by me earlier in this address, the policy-objective of reduceddependence on aid was already articulated in the Third and Seventh Five Year Plans,From a technical point of view, I personally believe that our domesticeconomic strengths especially those relating to external sector as well as  internationalfinancial environment facilitate a decision to phase out, as explained in this lectureand in a time bound manner, bilateral as well as multilateral aid and this could bepursued without giving up our right to access facilities available to us in internationalThe description and analysis of changing character of capital flows andFirst, in view of global technological developments, larger role of privatecapital flows, membership of World Trade Organisation, subscription to Article VIIIof the International Monetary Fund on Current Account Convertibility etc., self-reliance in external sector has to be viewed increasingly in terms of managing capitalSecond, in the present context, self-reliance relates more to the of the economy and building a capacity to withstand  vulnerabilities to external ordomestic shocks, rather than merely concentrating on achieving self-sufficiency. Inother words, self reliance now acquires an outward looking bias rather than the earlierThird, policy-develo pments in our country have reflected to a perceptibledegree, the changing dimensions of self-reliance and management of capital account.A review of these developments clearly shows that, dynamic self-reliance defined toreflect resilience to face shocks and increasing economic strength is made possiblemore by cautious open-ness in the Indian economy. Self-reliance and openness of theand  complementary.Fourth, our economy can sustain strengths and resilience, thus assuringdynamic self-reliance mainly by a combination of efficiency-enhancing and sociallyFifth, dependence in normal times on non-commercial sources of funding suchas aid, bilateral or multilateral is incompatible with the spirit of self-reliance.Government guarantees in the external sector should be abjured and the next steptowards self-reliance should be freedom from aid while continuing carefulmanagement of current and capital account to ward off any need for  exceptionalfinancing in future.Twenty Seventh Frank Moraes Lecture delivered by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bankof India at Chennai on July 13, 2000. Dr.Reddy is grateful to Dr.M.D.Patra, Dr.A.Prasad and11Kapur for their assistance. Mr.Muneesh sensitive policies of higher growth and rapid reduction in poverty and illiteracy.economy are not conflicting, rather they are compatible inward looking orientation.strengtheningflows.changing perspectives on self-reliance leads us to some conclusions:Conclusioninstitutions of which we are a member.in pursuit of self-reliance.Service(%) #85.13 4.63 -0.10 127.78 2.05 N.A. N.A. N.A.58.19 19.31 -2.40 67.70 8.06 N.A. 3.29 N.A. N.A.60.88 14.84 -1.80 103.00 N.A. N.A. 2.61 N.A. N.A.``63.53 14.91 -2.10 108.38 18.65 N.A. 3.86 N.A. N.A.(1966-69)83.49 6.94 -0.30 105.62 13.59 21.15 4.16 N.A. N.A.84.10 1.46 0.20 152.03 13.37 14.375 9.66 N.A. N.A.67.81 4.00 -0.40 50.89 11.74 11.35 7.30 12.6 N.A.(1978-80)46.46 8.49 -1.60 56.27 15.47 13.78 4.65 52.6 N.A.62.66 11.21 -2.30 31.33 30.40 28.38 1.85 189.3 N.A.84.62 8.91 -1.90 47.04 41.00 31.8 5.4 76.7 2.614#ANNUAL7th PLAN (1985-90)6th PLAN (1980-85)ANNUAL PLANS5th PLAN (1974-78)4th PLAN (1969-74)ANNUAL PLANS3 rd PLAN (1961-66)2nd PLAN (1956-61)1st PLAN (1951-56)Ratio(%) # (months) Ratio (%) Ratio (%) Ratio (%) Ratio (%)Reserves Ratio Debt-Reserves Imports Ratio (%) Capital Flows (%) Deficit-GDP Total Investment Current PaymentsInvestmentPorfolio Short Term Reserves- Debt Debt-GDP Net Aid-Net Current Account Foreign Saving- Current Receipts- INDICATORSSELECTED INDICATORS OF SELF RELIANCE91.60 4.94 -1.20 19.21 26.20 26.76 6.5 23.2 47.993.25 4.95 -1.1 9.11 17.77 8.2 12.2 @ 48.6Statement1. Second Plan period (1956-58)2. Third Plan period (194-65) Drought, War Aid, PL480 Food3. First Oil Shock (1973-74) Terms of Trade – 4. Second Oil Shock (1979- Terms of Trade – 80)5. Third Oil Shock (1990-91) Terms of Trade – Confidence – Capital Flight2000)*13multilateral support (WorldUK), Exceptionalbilateral Assistance (Japan,CFF, Standby), ExceptionalIMF ( Reserve Position, PoLIMF (EFF) PoLAid, IMF(CFF, Oil Facility) PoLIMF, DevaluationAssistance,Consortium)Aid Flows (Aid IndiaSterling Balances, Industrial Import HumpPolicy Response Type of Shock Period. : Not Available. 3.N.A2. @  relates to end December 19991. # relates to end of periodNotes:22.1@ 9th PLAN(1997-8th PLAN(1992-97)PLANS(1990-92)2000)Border Tensions - Terms of Trade - external sector : India Development BondsPoLNo adverse impact due to14 : Petroleum Oil LubricantsIDBsEFF : Extended Fund FacilityCFF : Compensatory Financing FacilityAll dues to IMF repaidfinance. Strengthening of PoLto exceptional No approach Kargildynamic policy response. Pokhran Sanctions - Asian Crisis 6. Multiple Shocks (1997-Structural reformStabilisation, Devaluation, IDBs, Immunities scheme,Bank, ADB), gold pledge,
