1Random Payment System Issues of Systemic Relevance for the New YearIt is always a pleasure to be in God's own country to welcome the New Year.  I amthankful to the Bankers Club of Thiruvanathapuram for affording this opportunity byinviting me over. I also deem it a privilege to be addressing the Bankers of the statewhich recently captured the imagination of the nation when one of the districts -Ernakulam- was declared as the first financially included district in the country. I amaware of the enormous efforts put in by the bankers in the State under thestewardship of our Regional Director Shri. Salim Gangadharan. Congratulations tothe entire banking community of the State.2. The year that went by was quite challenging for the financial sector. Theworsening of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe and the unsteady recovery in theUSA had posed significant risks to emerging markets like India, with domestic factorsplaying a major role-perhaps in balance a more decisive role in shaping the courseof Indian financial markets which remained volatile. As current account deficitburgeoned and reached a record high, debate on the contributory role of goldimports intensified. Without getting into the thick of the debate, let me state twothings. First, the argument that a central bank which had diversified its own assetsinto gold has no moral right to preach against investment/import of gold is missing animportant point. A central bank diversifying its dollar reserves into gold is entirelydifferent from private agents in a country having capital controls investing in gold asit has the same effect of allowing such assets to be held in foreign currency! It has tobe clearly recognised that the Central bank undertakes the onerous responsibility ofmanaging the forex reserves of the country with the objectives of safety, liquidity andreturn in that order and investment in gold is in pursuit of these objectives! In thecase of private savers, by stashing away his savings in gold, the economy stands tolose the benefit of accumulated savings which can go a long way in adding to theGDP of the country. Second, given the insatiable lure for gold in the country, it isimperative that we introduce gold linked products which results in the existing gold inbank lockers getting converted as financial products rather than unabated import ofgold, if we are to find a sustainable solution for our current account problems.1 Keynote address by Shri G Padmanabhan, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India, to the Bankers' Club,Thiruvanathapuram on January 2, 2013. Assistance provided by Smt C S Kar and Saswat Mahapatra in thepreparation of the address and the comments/suggestions on the draft  by S/Shri G Mahalingam, SGaneshkumar, A Madhavan and Smt Radha Somakumar gratefully acknowledged.3. Moving on, as we welcome what appears to be another year of turbulence for themarkets, and when the Indian banking system is readying to adopt Basel III normseven in the face of growing NPAs, I thought it fit to discuss certain important issuesrelating to payment systems. You will appreciate that the payment systems all overthe world including in our country functioned efficiently even while the crisis wascrippling the markets. The issues that I propose to flag are of relevance to all stakeholders using the Indian payment system.Decline of cheques – a myth or a must?4.  The growth in electronic payments (in volume terms), in recent years is quiteheartening when one sees that the share of electronic payments as a percentage oftotal payments have grown from 15% in 2003-04 to 48% in 2011-12. Despite this, inabsolute terms cheque volume continues to be high (52% of total payments), eventhough the growth is showing a declining trend. While this high cheque volume couldbe attributed to overall growth in the economy and the consequent growth in financialtransactions, it is nonetheless desirable that transactions in electronic form increasesat an increasing rate rather than being contended with transactions through chequesincreasing at a decreasing rate. It would also be desirable to migrate the existingcheque usage to an electronic form in view of the benefit which would accrue to boththe payer and payee of the cheque which in turn has a positive impact on theeconomy as a whole.5. In fact, the “Payment Systems in India- Vision 2012-15” talks about drawing up astrategy for disincentivising usage of cheques above a certain threshold limit bycustomers and corporates which may include prescribing a cut off limit for chequescleared through clearing house arrangements. As announced in the “Second QuarterReview of Monetary Policy” we are in the process of preparing a Discussion Paperon the methods aimed at disincentivising the issuance and usage of cheques in Indiaand placing this paper in the public domain for comments.6. Before coming to the challenges and strategies for moving paper basedtransactions to electronic mode, let me touch upon the need for doing so. As we allknow, cheques when compared to electronic payments are less e?cient for variousreasons - it has high printing and processing costs, requires manual interventions inthe form of encoding and keying in cheque details, poses significant reconciliationchallenges in terms of payables and receivables, needs to be preserved for longerperiod as per legal and regulatory requirements, has longer clearing and processingcycle etc., in addition to having inherent liquidity and credit risks. In contrast,electronic payments eliminate these inefficiencies and provide a faster, efficient,secured mode of transactions at a fraction of the cost. Electronic payments, wherethey are ‘credit-push’ based imply that credit, liquidity and systemic risks aresubstantially reduced, and there is also adequate certainty on funds availability to thebeneficiary. Despite these perceived virtues, physical instruments are still preferredby people as they can be 'seen' and therefore more 'trustworthy' as compared tounseen electronic transactions happening in seconds! Here the challenge for thebankers is to change this mindset through training and education of customers.7. Several studies have been undertaken on the cost and benefits of cheques vis-à-vis electronic payments. A study undertaken by the Reserve Bank of Australia in2007-08 pegged the average payment cost of cheques (for consumers, merchantsand ?nancial institutions) at AUD7.69, as compared to AUD1.21 for credit cards and2AUD 0.67 for EFTPOS. The UK Payment Council in its report “The Future ofCheques in UK” (2009) has indicated that the costs of electronic alternatives are atleast one third lower than the cost of cheques. The report also estimates that theclosure of the cheque clearing could lead to cost savings for the UK (for financialinstitutions and corporates) up to £1 billion per annum by 2018.Studies by3Humphrey, Willesson, Bergandahl & Lindblom (2003) found that migration awayfrom paper-based payment methods was one of the key factor that contributedtowards reduction in bank operating costs (a 24 per cent reduction, accounting for$32bn) across Europe from 1987 -1999. Back home, studies by the Indian Banks’Association have also revealed that the costs relating to paper based instrumentsare relatively higher than electronic modes although the former is less efficient as2 Reserve Bank of Australia-  "Payments Costs In Australia"( page 117)3 Quoted in “Cheques Working Group Report” November 2006, Office of Fair Trading, UK4well. To summarise, the key conclusion from several studies is that there is a socialbusiness case for moving away from paper based instruments. That’s why severaljurisdictions such as UK, Canada, Ireland and Australia have drawn or are in theprocess of drawing the roadmaps for managing declining cheque usage in theirjurisdictions.8. However, this is easier said than done. Consumer habits which have beeningrained over the years do not change as quickly as changes in technology takeplace. So, even if newer electronic forms of payments are introduced, widespreadadoption of such modes takes time. Many users – including the Government – mayalso be apprehensive of using a ‘new’ mode of payment and as such may resist themovement from their ‘comfort zone’ (of using cheques).Issuing of cheques does notcost money (most banks offer some number of cheques leaves free of cost),whereas some charges have to be paid for initiating electronic payments. Given thelack of awareness, cost considerations may override safety and speedconsiderations.9. Recognising the complexity of the challenge, any strategy to discourage the use ofcheques by individuals as well as institutional users has to have a multi-prongedapproach encompassing cost and time considerations, incentives for use ofelectronic modes of transactions and disincentives for the use of paper-basedinstruments. However, the decline of cheque usage has to be carefully managed sothat the unwarranted ramifications such as slippage to cash based transactions andinconvenience to vulnerable segments of the customers having no access toalternative electronic modes of payments are avoided.Why expand CTS if cheques are to be discontinued?10. As you may be aware, gird CTS in Chennai now covers 43 clearing locationsencompassing the states of Tamilnadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, WestBengal and the Union Territories of Puducherry and Chandigarh. Pan-India roll out ofCTS is expected to be completed by December 2013. Questions are being raised onthe need for expansion of grid CTS for improving the efficiency of paper based4Some of the studies have been quoted in the report “Target 2013: Modernising Payments in Ireland”prepared by National Irish Bank.clearing given the focus of the Vision Document towards electronic payments. Letme try to address these questions.11. First, the paper-based clearing continues to be the dominant mode of retailpayments in the country constituting 52% in terms of volume. It is also widelyaccepted that consumer behaviour does not change as quickly as changes intechnology. This being the case, despite our objective of electronification ofpayments, requirements for safety and efficiency enhancements in paper-basedclearing cannot be ignored.12. Second, even though Speed clearing hastens the process of cheque collectionas compared to outstation cheque collection, it pre-supposes the presence of thedrawee bank (at least one branch) in the clearing house location which could be alimitation. In comparison, grid-based CTS, is a superior system as it encompasses alarger geographical area and the chances of drawee bank not having presence in thegrid location is significantly reduced.13. Third, grid CTS would provide significant cost savings both to the systemoperators as well as the system participants. From a systemic perspectiveconsolidation of clearing locations into a few grids would minimise the cost ofreplacement of aging MICR machines and the related AMC costs. Banks will benefitfrom economies of scale as the grid CTS obviates the need for establishing inwardcheque processing infrastructure at various clearing locations. Further, once localclearing houses are subsumed into the grid, the settlements which are now spreadacross clearing locations would be subsumed into a single settlement, therebysignificantly reducing the liquidity requirements (opportunity cost included) for thebanks. The CTS will also result in other benefits in terms of reduction in the chequeprocessing fee, reduction in operational overhead, elimination of clearing differencesand reconciliation issues etc.14. Fourth, as long as physical instruments cannot be realistically wished away evenin the medium term scenario, it is economically sensible to leverage on technology toreduce the recurring processing costs, though it might involve a onetime capitalexpenditure.15. There are a few challenges as well. The CTS implementation and the modeladopted in India do not have a parallel elsewhere in the world and the featuresaimed at security and safety need to be addressed optimally. This is the reasonbehind the directive to all banks to migrate to the use of a uniform standard for theCTS cheques. Further, there is an increase in the responsibilities of the collectingbanker when compared to the non-CTS scenario. A change in the mindset of thestaff of banks is also a vital necessity, and this would transcend to the ultimatecustomer too. While it is heartening to note the positive outcomes in all these areas,we must recognize that full scale achievement of these would take time.Entry of non-banks in payment system- A mirage or a threat?16. It is quite discernible in many payment services that non-banks have made in-roads into an area that was once considered the exclusive domain of banks.Traditionally, banks alone played an important role in holding deposit funds (store ofvalue) and providing payment services (medium of exchange). With significantdevelopments in technology going hand-in-hand with the growing demand for fasterand more efficient payment services by users, banks no longer find it possible, viableor even necessary to offer the whole range of payment services (end-to-end) bythemselves, when the same could be outsourced and offered more cost-effectively.These reasons coupled with  the growth potential have led to the entry of non-banksinto the payment services area.17. Some of the reasons for the almost ubiquitous presence of non-banks in thepayment services area could be (a) the changing consumer behaviour withincreasing demand for more efficient and faster systems (b) advancements intechnology which has greatly facilitated innovations in payment services (c) trend forout-sourcing – possibly due to objectives of reduction in capital investment by bankswhen the same task can be outsourced on a fee-basis (d) financial inclusion driveswhere non-banks are also playing a significant role especially in the field of mobilebanking etc.18. Given the fact that this trend is gaining strength, particularly in retail payments,the role of banks vis-a-vis non-banks merits some closer examination. Especially,the aspect of cooperation between the two or the lack of it needs some introspection.In India, despite the poster-product of M-pesa in Kenya and other African countrymodels led by MNOs, we have consciously chosen the path of a bank-led model.Further, it would also be interesting to debate whether outsourcing is in itself a typeof cooperation or is it just a paid service? Is there a level-playing field or is onepartner the dominant one? And how would systemic risk be addressed when thereare players whose core business may only be relating to the payment system offeredby them and any misdemeanor in this area may well affect the entire customer baseof the entity concerned?19. I am raising these issues here because they are very pertinent for the future andalso raise concerns for regulation. While healthy competition between banks andnon-banks could have positive repercussions on the provision of cost-effective andefficient payment services to users, it could also have negative impact in case ofnon-transparent processes and charges structure as well as issues pertaining to thecontinued sustenance of the services offered. Further, increased risks, if any, due topresence of non-banks in payments area also needs to be better understood andmanaged.Is the time ripe to review the role of the payment intermediaries?20. RBI has been aware of the critical role played by the ‘intermediaries’ in the e-commerce arena. The intermediaries provide ‘platform’ for acceptance andprocessing of payments across multiple electronic payment channels.  They offerpayment aggregation services to a large number of businesses (small to large),governments, utilities, banks, insurance companies, etc. They act as paymentaggregators by obviating the need for a merchant/ organization to set-up andmanage a multiplicity of relationships with different financial institutions – viz. banks,networks, wallets, prepaid issuers, etc. for accepting payments. Over the years thevolume and value of transactions handled by the intermediaries have grownmanifold. Reportedly, there are the intermediaries who handle daily volumes of 6-7lakh transactions for values Rs 150 to Rs.200 crore.21. Though these entities at present are not authorised, they have been advised tofollow directions on protection of customer funds.  The growing importance ofintermediaries warrants a review of the extant oversight mechanism. Some of theareas which need attention are the need for intermediaries to provide complete andtransparent information to the customers on the success/failure of transactions;uniform and standard practice for refunds to the customers for failed/cancelledtransactions and related customer service issues. Another area of concern is theoperational risk that such entities may pose. As the customers, merchants andfinancial institutions depend on the intermediaries for payments/ collections anydisruption can negatively impact the payment system. While some of the bigmerchants have “substitutability’ or “interoperability” arrangement in the form ofpayment gateway switching system, others fully depend on one intermediary. Thisunderscores the importance of the operational risk being effectively addressed bythe intermediaries.22. Given the above, the need to continue with the existing light touch regulationsvis-a-vis a focused oversight including authorisation for such of those entities whichhave a significant presence in the market would need to be explored. Further, theintermediaries perform certain niche functions which may not qualify to be part of thecore businesses of banks. When specialization and efficiency are existent, it wouldbe appropriate to allow such intermediaries to play their roles, but with the addedcovenants relating to safety, business continuity, risk reduction and sustenance.Do we need a Payment Industry Council/Association encompassing allstakeholders?23. The payment landscape in India was for long primarily dominated by banks.Legislation of Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007 paved the way for entry ofnon-bank payment system operators. The payment system milieu covers an entiregamut of stakeholders like banks, non-bank payment system operators, technologyproviders, outsourcing agencies, network providers, intermediaries, customers,government etc. The increasing complexities in payment system demands that allthe stakeholders work in tandem and collaborate. In the Indian scenario, the co-operation and co-ordination among stakeholders is more critical considering the factthat a significant section of the society is under-banked or unbanked. For examplefor mobile banking to leapfrog it is essential that banks and MNOs co-operate.Similarly, growth of PoS transactions would require co-ordination among merchants,banks, card networks etc.24. Against this backdrop the need for an industry-level association open to allstakeholders needs to be evaluated. There are several such association/paymentcouncils like European Payment Council (EPC), UK Payment Council, AustralianPayments Clearing Association (APCA) Payments Association of South Africa(PASA), to name a few,  which provide the necessary platform for partnerships,collaboration, advocacy, and awareness around payments eco-system in theirrespective domains. In the Indian context, the Indian Banks Association representsthe banks but does not have representations from non-banks and otherstakeholders. It is true that there are small associations such as in the cards sector,but these are not all-pervasive across payment systems as a whole.25. Industry-wide payments council/association will provide an excellent platform tobrainstorm, collaborate and drive new technology proliferation, and thereby bringforth innovative solutions to create a robust payments infrastructure. The need forsuch a co-operative platform was touched upon in the “Payment Systems Vision2012-15” which stated that the feasibility of forming a standard setting body underthe overall guidance of RBI with representation from IBA, IDRBT and otherstakeholders would be examined and taken forward.How will the White Label ATM (WLA) scheme help expand ATM network inIndia?26. Deployment of ATMs in India is witnessing a 30% y-on-y growth in the last fewyears. However, the deployment is largely restricted to the urban/metro areas whilelocations in Tier III to VI areas have not witnessed much ATM presence. Further,when compared to other countries the per capita ATM deployment in India continuesto lag. Given the recent policy initiatives in Financial Inclusion, it is expected that alarge number of bank accounts would be opened in Tier III to VI centres triggering ademand for basic banking services including convenience banking through ATMs.Thus, there is a need for expanding deployment of ATMs to increase availability andaccess especially in the rural areas.27. Some of the reasons that were being attributed to the low deployment asindicated above were high cost of deployment and operation, inadequate supportinfrastructure, large requirement of human resources etc. The WLA conceptexemplifies the benefits of partnership between banks and non-banks in building thepayment infrastructure. The banks need not lock their funds since the capitalinvestment is undertaken by the WLA operator and the operator gets a fee plus othercharges for every transaction from the bank which has issued the card. RBI is in theprocess of authorising the first set of non-bank entities for operating WLAs.28. WLA scheme is a watershed initiative for bank and non-bank partnership inpayment space. However, the success would depend on how well the   banks andnon-bank entities complement each other. The efforts of non-banks to create ATMinfrastructures need to be complemented by banks by bringing the financiallyexcluded into the ambit of banking and issuing them cards, besides providing amutually beneficial cash management and settlement of transactions services.Further, banks and non-banks need to act in tandem in redressing customergrievances relating to failed transactions. RBI would be closely monitoring theprogress and proactively intervening when warranted.Consumer protection in electronic payments – a peek through the lookingglass or a Pandora’s Box?29. Having raised the issues of discouraging the use of cheques, moving toelectronic platforms of payments, and the entry of non-banks into the paymentdomain, I also need to discuss one other important issue regarding ‘consumerprotection and rights’ in payments. Just as it is well-understood that consumerbehaviour does not change easily or quickly, it is also a moot point that some of themain underlying factors influencing customer choice relates to how transparent andsecure the system is and how confident the customer is about getting a fairtreatment in case of complaints / grievances. Often, the doubts the customer hasabout getting a ‘raw deal’ tilts the scale towards traditional payments – cash orcheque – just so that the customer wants to ‘avoid the hassles’ about failedtransactions occurring in a media (online, electronic) that is unfamiliar to him/her.30. Consumer protection issues mainly revolve around fraudulent and/orunauthorised transactions, unauthorised or excessive charges, failed transactions –non-delivery and rejections, late delivery of transactions, and disputes arising out ofany or all of the above and complaint redressal. The catch is, as any banker wouldvouch for, while good consumer experience may not necessarily make for a secondor repetitive use of the medium, bad consumer experience certainly creates a bitterfeeling.31. Even globally, it can be said that the need for and the discussion aboutconsumer protection in electronic payments is a relatively new phenomenon ascompared to cheques. Under cheques, consumer protection is provided by thenature of the banker-customer contract, which is not imposed by either of the partiesbut has been historically defined by ‘practice’ as a series of common law cases(which is true in most countries). However, with the introduction of electronic fundstransfer systems and also the entry of non-bank entities, many contractual terms andconditions began to be imposed on consumers who often ended up bearing all thelosses for unauthorised transactions. Gradually, many regulatory developments havetaken place with the objective of enhancing consumer trust in online paymentsincluding addressing the issue of disproportionate charges for services rendered,limiting consumer liability etc. For instance, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform andConsumer Protection Act, 2010 requires the Federal Reserve to establish standardsfor interchange fees that are reasonable and proportional to the cost of processingdebit card transactions, the EU Directive on Payment services in the internal market(Directive 2007) provides rules on transparency, timing of payments and informationrequirements (including rights and obligations of users and providers of paymentservices, liability rules etc.), EU Directive on Consumer Rights 2011 (to beimplemented by December 2013 by all member states) aims to harmonise consumerprotection in particular relating to purchase of digital content products and in crossborder transactions.32. How are we placed in terms of consumer protection and responsibilities of banksand customers in an electronic banking environment where physical transaction isreplaced by electronic transaction, physical trail is replaced by electronic trail, and aphysical signature is replaced with a digital one? How can we define the roles andresponsibilities of banks and customers in such an environment to achieve a win-winsituation for all? Is the customer really aware of his/her rights and responsibilities, ordoes the ‘fine print’ put all the liability on the customer? Does the regulatoryrequirement of ‘authorisation’ provide a sufficient safeguard for users of electronicpayments? Are the existing Consumer Protection Act, Banking Ombudsman Act, andother grievance redressal mechanisms really up to handling issues arising out ofpayments systems arena which is increasingly getting electronic? Or does the lawneed to be strengthened further while focussing exclusively on consumer protectionissues arising out of electronic transactions? Is there a need to dovetail Consumerprotection with Consumer awareness as well since there is a lot of synergy betweenthese two requirements? For instance, even as the RBI is taking steps to make CardPresent transactions more secure, customer awareness can go a long way inenhancing customer protection while using Magstripe cards at a POS terminal. Asimple case in point is how many of us really pay attention to the fact whether themerchant is checking the signature on the card during a transaction at the POSterminal? Today, matching the signature on charge-slip with that on the card isperfunctory. Should not this become a more serious exercise?  I would encouragethe Bankers' Club to arrange a Round Table to debate on these issues and come upwith a technical paper.33. As I conclude, let me also take this opportunity to provide some inputs on twoother areas which will see vast improvements in large value payments as well asbring in additional messaging avenues – I am referring to the Next-Gen RTGS andthe proposed entry of SWIFT for domestic messaging in India.34. The existing RTGS system was commissioned in 2004. The volume of RTGStransactions have grown over the years and currently settles approximately a volumeof around 3 lakh transactions a day. This raised issues of scalability of the existingRTGS system which was developed to handle a volume of 50,000 per day. Further,it is a well known fact that RTGS, being a gross settlement system, is liquidityintensive system.35. The next generation RTGS (NG-RTGS) is structured to be equipped with liquiditysaving features, an advanced gridlock resolution mechanism, increased securitymeasures, operational reliability, business continuity and be compliant withinternational standards. It would encourage inter-operability with alternative systems.The new system would endorse (a) the latest technology; (b) high scalability andflexibility to adapt to changes in the financial environment and other requirements;and (c) enhance accessibility to cope with changes in the financial environment,such as globalisation of financial transactions and networking of settlementinfrastructures. It has been decided to adopt ISO 20022 message formats in the NG-RTGS system.36. Currently, there is only one messaging solution – SFMS available for domesticmessaging. In order to have an alternate messaging infrastructure, SWIFT has beenaccorded an in-principle approval for domestic messaging with specific terms andconditions. The participants would have the option to choose multiple channels toroute the transactions to the central server in the Bank. The multiple channels areINFINET / SFMS, SWIFT and the Internet.37. One must recognise that payment systems have become a dominant factoraffecting our day to day lives and has the potential to spur economic growth as well.Coupled with its capability to be omnipresent and have a plethora of players withvaried backgrounds and interests, the need to ensure safe, secure and efficientpayment systems gains importance. It is this task which the Reserve Bank is nowconcentrating upon. Like effective teams which achieve success in their efforts, thevarious players in the payment systems space also need to work in unison, with theultimate objective of ensuring customer satisfaction. It may be good to pause andexamine in an unbiased manner whether this has been achieved or not. If the levelof achievement is not substantial enough, then we need to work out strategies forensuring that they are achieved. For instance, how do we move away from cashtransactions? Can we for instance try this at petrol bunks across the country? Canwe implement wireless POS/mobile POS across the country for replacing all cash-on-delivery payments to electronic payments, be it cooking gas or pizza delivery? Irecall that more than two decades ago, it was this state which witnessed theintroduction of new players in transferring payments from the Gulf – the privateexchange houses which played a very specific role which was required at that pointof time. Today, as the country is looking with great expectations for innovations inpayment systems, can we look forward to an encore from the southernmost state ofthe country? Can the payment system operations in the God's own country functionqualitatively and in terms of customer delight invoke even God's envy?Thank you for your attention. Once again, wish you all a wonderful New Year.*********
