I must compliment the organisers for convening this Conference and thank them for invitingme to be here.  Perhaps, you could not have chosen a better moment to have an inauguralannounced earlier this week is aHowever, recognising the contemporary interest in the implications of the borrowingAs per the latest estimates for 1999-2000, in the Budget, the future borrowing requirementsof the Central Government till this month end are in the range of Rs.4000 to Rs.5000 There have also been speculations that all this remaining borrowing needs of the Centralelement of private placement. RBI sees no basis for such assumptions, when the actualOn the borrowing programme for next year, i.e. 2000-2001 ,  the net borrowing is marginallyless than the current year, though the gross amount to be raised is somewhat higher. Giventhe recent experience of significant slippages in the budgeted programme, the first issue thatarises relates to how realistic the estimate is.  Both, in the previous and current year, therehave been political and economic uncertainties, be it in global or domestic scene – such aselections, Asian crisis, sanctions, Kargil, etc.  There is now reason to believe that suchuncertainties are behind us.  We observe that some analysts have already described the nextyear’s borrowing programme as based on realistic estimates.  Operationally, therefore, theFurther, since the RBI has equipped itself with several innovative instruments andinstitutional arrangements, the functioning of Government securities market should be farmore efficient and smoother than it has been so far, especially if there are no unforeseenis a landmark for fixed income market dealers.  These are worth exploring since theirpolicy and regulation of the financial system”.  In this context, he said that he intended toup an Internal Group to identify the legislative changes that are desirable at this stage ofeconomic reform.  You will recall that a few months back, in a  Assembly at, I had stated that the RBI intends to move towards the statutory minimum withreference to CRR in the medium term as also bring amendments to lower the statutoryup.Kathmanduforexbring to Parliament proposals for amending the relevant legislation.  The RBI had already setbecome necessary to accord greater operational flexibility to the RBI for conduct of monetaryThe Finance Minister has expressed that “in the fast changing world of modern finance it hassignificance is perhaps, yet to be fully appreciated.As mentioned, at the beginning of this address, there are several reasons as to why this budgetuncertainties.tasks could be less daunting in the future than it has been so far.requirements of Government of India as well as instruments and methods are yet to be firmedGovernment in the current fiscal year will be raised through auction only, thus excluding anyCentre or States should not be met as smoothly this month as it has been until now. the The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) sees absolutely no reason as to why the borrowing needs ofcrore.programme of Government as announced in the budget, I will spend a few minutes on it.of the latest Budget for fixed income markets.market reform in India.  The main focus of today’s address would, therefore, be on the impactof healthy fixed income markets in India.  The Budget ushers in the most comprehensive debtlandmark and, indeed a watershed, in heralding an enabling environment for the developmentmeet of dealers in Fixed Income markets.  The latest Budget Friends,Budget 2000 and Fixed Income Markets*minimum itself in respect of both CRR and SLR.   Naturally, this will be one of thedefining it in terms of exclusion of items; vesting  with RBI  the power to declare securitieseligible for SLR purpose; making of enabling provision for a future separation of monetaryand debt management functions and empowering the  RBI to notify institutions for inclusionThe Budget has also indicated the replacement of the old Public Debt Act, 1944  with aGovernment Securities Act.  The proposal seeks to recognise electronic mode of transfer oftitle of Government Securities.  It would also facilitate pledging of securities without actualtransfer.  In other words, the proposal seeks to be consistent with modern trading practicesand technological development including RTGS (Real Time Gross Settlement).  SubstantialThough not strictly a part of Budget, you are aware of day before yesterday’s announcementregarding the repeal of the 1969 Notification, which had banned forward trading. I  hadreferred to this issue a number of times in the past.   The Government had recently amendedof responsibility between the RBI and SEBI.  Follow-up notifications by RBI and SEBI havealready been issued yesterday. These developments have paved the way for introduction ofwhen-issued market for PDs in the near future.  We should be in a position to issue detailedThe Budget made a reference to Credit Information  Bureau. This is based on therecommendations of a Working Group set up by RBI.  There are already reports of interestfrom some banks and institutions to set up such a Bureau and the RBI also had informalsoundings on the subject.  The Bureau will improve the transparency regarding theThe Finance Minister also stated that a portion of disinvestments proceeds would beearmarked for retiring Government debt.  The modalities of this proposal are yet to beworked out in detail, and possible link with a proposal for Sinking Fund is yet to beThe withdrawals of  interest tax in this Budget is also a significant measure as it leads toreduction in the transaction cost of banks, and the price, to the extent the tax is passed on toborrowers through interest rates. The Government has foregone a revenue of over Rs.1000crore as a result of this measure.  Gains to the financial system as a consequence would besignificantly higher than Rs.1000 crore because of savings on account of transaction andClarification regarding  Stamp Duty  on dematerialised debt instruments has been longoverdue and is reported to have been fully resolved in the latest Finance Bill introduced withNow, a word on Fiscal Responsibility Act (FRA).  A statement of paramount importance inthe Budget is `For medium term management of the fiscal deficit we also need the support ofa strong institutional mechanism embodied in a Fiscal Responsibility Act’.  The WorkingGroup on FRA met in the RBI yesterday to discuss the draft legislation.  The matter is likelyto be considered in a couple of weeks by Dr.Sarma Committee, the Committee to which2expeditious processing of this matter.reference  in the Budget speech. We should expect high priority and Finance Minister made a clarification  is bound to give a fillip to secondary market debt trading. the Budget.  Such a compliance costs.examined.  In any event, this is a noteworthy development.creditworthiness of market participants and thus facilitate healthy financial markets.guidelines on some of these matters very soon.the Securities Contract Regulation Act and it has now issued a statement delineating the areasSecretaries, we expect the Bill to be passed in the Parliament soon.work has already been completed on this front.  In the light of discussions with State Financein the banking system for computation of liabilities of a banking company/cooperative bank.include  empowering the RBI to define constitution of demand and time liabilities rather thanlegislative changes that will be sought.  Other major recommendations of the Working GroupIn brief, the RBI has reason to be highly appreciative of the Budget initiatives on financialmarkets and we propose to complete submission of all necessary draft legislative proposals,as a follow-up of the  Budget within six to eight weeks to enable early enactments in theParliament. Hence, it will be deeply appreciated if market participants may please makeIn this background, let me briefly mention what we in the RBI expect to benefit from thisSecond, of immediate significance, we seek your views on budget related issues that Imentioned, in particular, the contemplated legislative changes and appropriate regulatoryThird, several policy changes such as Liquidity Adjustment Facility; changes in institutionalas  clearing and settlement systems; changes in debt market operations ofRBI such as two way  quotes; and procedural aspects of repo market; etc. are underFourth, and the most significant, relates to retailing of Government Securities on which weThe next monetary policy statement is due in April.  Obviously, while we are not in aposition to state what it would be like, you are in a position to advice and we are willing tolisten.  I hope this Conference will give an opportunity to exchange views - informal, well* Inaugural address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, at the First Annual Conference – Action Plan2000 – organised by FIMMDA and PDAI at Goa on March 4, 2000. He is thankful to Dr.A.Prasad for his3valuable assistance.Thank youinformed and in a professional manner.We value your views on all these matters.are still groping.contemplation and we need your inputs on all these.arrangements such from  RBI. These may be deliberated here and views communicated to us soon. notifications for future annual conferences.fora for interaction through this, and prepare modalities establish  an effective First, we could Conference.suggestions as soon as possible.
