India’s Foreign Exchange Reserves :Policy, Status and IssuesMr. Chairman and friends,I am thankful to the National Council of Applied Economic Research, (NCAER)and in particular, to Dr. Suman Bery, for giving me this opportunity to make apresentation on the foreign exchange reserves.  There are several reasons for speaking onthis subject before this august gathering in the capital.First, the subject is receiving renewed global interest among policy makers andacademicians against the backdrop of increasing globalization of emerging economies,acceleration of capital flows, and integration of financial markets domestically as well asglobally.  The debt crisis in some of the developing countries in the early nineties, theEast Asian crisis in 1997 and more recently the currency crisis of Argentina have posedseveral dilemmas to policy makers on forex reserves.Second, multilateral bodies, especially, the Bank for International Settlements(BIS) and International Monetary Fund (IMF) are attempting several initiatives in regardto international financial architecture in the context of the debt-banking-financial crisis inseveral countries, and matters relating to forex reserves have become an importantcomponent of this initiative, encompassing issues on policy, management andtransparency.Third, there is some interest within India on our level of forex reserves, asevidenced by several articles in financial dailies, economic journals and research papers.There are also some differences among academics on the direct as well as indirect costsand benefits of the level of forex reserves, from the point of view of macro-economicpolicy, financial stability and fiscal or quasi-fiscal impact.Fourth, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been adopting a proactivecommunication policy, particularly under the leadership of Governor Bimal Jalan, andaccordingly it is appropriate that the relevant issues are also presented from theperspective of RBI.Finally, there is some personal involvement and excitement for me in this subject.The period 1990-2002 has been a journey from agony to comfort in matters relating toforex reserves; for in 1990-91, sitting in North Block in Ministry of Finance in Delhi, Iwas one of those who had to ensure that given the very low level of forex reserves andthe manner in which they happened to be deployed, there was enough cash balance topermit day-to-day forex payments of even a million U.S. dollars.  In such a predicament,the threat of national humiliation as well as discomforting relations with foreign agenciesobviously touched on personal pride.  Furthermore, in crafting a liberalized forex regimein the last decade, those of us involved in the process of reform have been acutely awareof the judgements and risks involved at every step in forex reserves policy and2management. Over the period, without adding much to the stock of external debt, therehas been a quantum jump in forex reserves. This position needs to be contrasted with the1980s, when external debt, especially short term debt, mounted while the forex reservesgot depleted.  In fact, it is often held that, between 1956 and 1992, India faced balance ofpayments constraints in all but six years, while during the last ten years, there has neverbeen a feeling of constraint on this account, eventhough the period coincided withliberalization of external account, global currency crisis and domestic politicaluncertainties.This presentation attempts to capture the basic concepts, theory and practice withorientation on issues relevant to India.  The questions addressed are; What are forexreserves?  Why hold forex reserves and how did the policy evolve?  What is theappropriate level of reserves?  How does the current status appear in terms of indicatorsof adequacy of reserves?  The presentation proceeds further to focus on several aspects offorex management, such as the implications for quasi fiscal deficit and communicationpolicy of the RBI.  The issues in regard to policy and management of forex reserves inIndia are posed in some detail while the concluding part contains my random thoughtsfrom a futuristic perspective. Given the broad canvass and well recognized complexity,the presentation, for most part, touches on the broad contours without going into abstrusetechnical and academic details.The subject of forex reserves may be broadly classified into two inter-linkedareas, namely, the theory of reserves, and the management of reserves. The theory ofreserves encompasses issues relating to institutional and legal arrangements for holdingreserve assets, conceptual and definitional aspects, objectives for holding reserve assets,exchange rate regimes, and conceptualization of the appropriate level of foreign reserves.In essence, a theoretical framework for reserves provides the rationale for holding forexreserves. Reserve management is mainly guided by the portfolio managementconsideration i.e., how best to deploy foreign reserve assets? The portfolio considerationstake into account inter alia, safety, liquidity and yield on reserves as the principalobjectives of reserve management.  The institutional and legal arrangements are largelycountry specific and these difference should be recognised in approaching the criticalissues relating to both reserve management practices and policy making.What are Forex Reserves?Conceptually, a unique definition of forex reserves is not available as there havebeen divergence of views in terms of coverage of items, ownership of assets, liquidityaspects and need for a distinction between owned and non-owned reserves  Nevertheless,for policy and operational purposes, most countries have adopted the definition suggestedby the International Monetary Fund (Balance of Payments Manual, and Guidelines onForeign Exchange Reserve Management, 2001); which defines reserves as external assetsthat are readily available to and controlled by monetary authorities for direct financing ofexternal payments imbalances, for indirectly regulating the magnitudes of suchimbalances through intervention in exchange markets to affect the currency exchangerate, and/or for other purposes.3The standard approach for measuring international reserves takes into account theunencumbered international reserve assets of the monetary authority; however, theforeign currency and the securities held by the public including the banks and corporatebodies are not accounted for in the definition of official holdings of internationalreserves. In India, the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934 contains the enabling provisions forthe RBI to act as the custodian of foreign reserves, and manage reserves with definedobjectives. The powers of being the custodian of foreign reserves is enshrined, in the firstinstance, in the preamble of the Act.  The ‘reserves’ refer to both foreign reserves in theform of gold assets in the Banking Department and foreign securities held by the IssueDepartment, and domestic reserves in the form of ‘bank reserves’. The composition offoreign reserves is indicated, a minimum reserve system is set out, and the instrumentsand securities in which the country’s reserves could be deployed are spelt out in therelevant Sections of the RBI Act.In brief, in India, what constitutes forex reserves; who is the custodian and how itshould be deployed are laid out clearly in the Statute, and in an extremely conservativefashion as far as management of reserves is concerned.  In substantive terms, RBIfunctions as the custodian and manager of forex reserves, and operates within the overallpolicy framework agreed upon with Government of India.Why Hold Forex Reserves?Technically, it is possible to consider three motives i.e., transaction, speculativeand precautionary motives for holding reserves. International trade gives rise to currencyflows, which are assumed to be handled by private banks driven by the transactionmotive. Similarly, speculative motive is left to individual or corporates. Central bankreserves, however, are characterized primarily as a last resort stock of foreign currencyfor unpredictable flows, which is consistent with precautionary motive for holdingforeign assets. Precautionary motive for holding foreign currency, like the demand formoney, can be positively related to wealth and the cost of covering unplanned deficit, andnegatively related to the return from alternative assets.From a policy perspective, it is clear that the country benefits through economiesof scale by pooling the transaction reserves, while subserving the precautionary motive ofkeeping official reserves as a ‘war chest’. Furthermore, forex reserves are instruments tomaintain or manage the exchange rate, while enabling orderly absorption of internationalmoney and capital flows.  In brief,  official reserves are held for precautionary andtransaction motives keeping in view the aggregate of national interests, to achievebalance between demand for and supply of foreign currencies, for intervention, and topreserve confidence in the country’s ability to carry out external transactions.Reserve assets could be defined with respect to assets of monetary authority as thecustodian, or of sovereign government as the principal.   For the monetary authority, the4motives for holding reserves may not deviate from the monetary policy objectives, whilefor government, the objectives of holding reserves may go beyond that of the monetaryauthorities. In other words, the final expression of the objective of holding reserve assetswould be influenced by the reconciliation of objectives of the monetary authority as thecustodian and the government as principal. There are cases, however,  when reserves areused as a convenient mechanism for government purchases of goods and services,servicing foreign currency debt of government, insurance against emergencies, and inrespect of a few, as a source of income.What are the dominant policy objectives in regard to forex reserves in India?  It isdifficult to lay down objectives in very precise terms, nor is it possible to order allrelevant objectives by order of precedence in view of emerging situations which aredescribed later.  For the present, a list  of objectives in broader terms may beencapsulated viz.,  (a) maintaining confidence in monetary and exchange rate policies, (b)enhancing capacity to intervene in forex markets, (c) limiting external vulnerability bymaintaining foreign currency liquidity to absorb shocks during times of crisis includingnational disasters or emergencies; (d) providing confidence to the markets especiallycredit rating agencies that external obligations can always be met, thus reducing theoverall costs at which forex resources are available to all the market participants, and (e)incidentally adding to the comfort of the market participants, by demonstrating thebacking of domestic currency by external assets.At a formal level, the objective of reserve management in India could be found inthe RBI Act, where the relevant part of the preamble reads as ‘to use the currency systemto the country’s advantage and with a view to securing monetary stability’.  Thisstatement may be interpreted to hold that monetary stability means internal as well asexternal stability; implying stable exchange rate as the overall objective of the reservemanagement policy.  While internal stability implies that reserve management cannot beisolated from domestic macroeconomic stability and economic growth, the phrase ‘to usethe currency system to the country’s advantage’ implies that maximum gains for thecountry as a whole or economy in general could be derived in the process of reservemanagement, which not only provides for considerable flexibility to reserve managementpractice, but also warrants a very dynamic view of what the country needs and how bestto meet the requirements.  In other words, the financial return or trade off betweenfinancial costs and benefits of holding and maintaining reserves is not the only or thepredominant objective in management of reserves.Evolution of Reserve Management Policy in IndiaIndia’s approach to reserve management, until the balance of payments crisis of1991 was essentially based on the traditional approach, i.e., to maintain an appropriatelevel of import cover defined in terms of number of months of imports equivalent toreserves. For example, the RBI’s Annual Report 1990-91 stated that the import cover ofreserves shrank to 3 weeks of imports by the end of December 1990, and the emphasis onimport cover constituted the primary concern say, till 1993-94.  The approach to reserve5management, as part of exchange rate management, and indeed external sector policyunderwent a paradigm shift with the adoption of the recommendations of the High LevelCommittee on Balance of Payments (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan). The Report, ofwhich I had the privilege of being Member-Secretary, articulated an integrated view ofthe issues and made specific recommendations on foreign currency reserves.  Therelevant extracts are:“It has traditionally been the practice to view the level of desirable reserves as apercentage of the annual imports-say reserves to meet three months imports or fourmonths imports. However, this approach would be inadequate when a large number oftransactions and payment liabilities arise in areas other than import of commodities.Thus, liabilities may arise either for discharging short-term debt obligations or servicingof medium-term debt, both interest and principal. The Committee recommends  thatwhile determining the target level of reserve, due attention should be paid to the paymentobligations in addition to the level  of imports.  The Committee, recommends that theforeign exchange reserves targets be fixed in such a way that they are generally in aposition to accommodate imports of three months. (Paragraph 6.3)In the view of the Committee, the factors that are to be taken into consideration indetermining the desirable level of reserves are: the need to ensure a reasonable level ofconfidence in the international financial and trading communities about the capacity ofthe country to honour its obligations and maintain trade and financial flows; the need totake care of the seasonal factors in any balance of payments transaction with reference tothe possible uncertainties in the monsoon conditions of India; the amount of foreigncurrency reserves required to counter speculative tendencies or anticipatory actionsamongst players in the foreign exchange market; and the capacity to maintain thereserves so that the cost of carrying liquidity is minimal.” (Paragraph 6.4)With the introduction of market determined exchange rate as mentioned in theRBI’s Annual Report, 1995-96 a change in the approach to reserve management waswarranted and the emphasis on import cover had to be supplemented with the objective ofsmoothening out the volatility in the exchange rate, which has been reflective of theunderlying market condition.Against the backdrop of currency crises in East-Asian countries, and in the lightof country experiences of volatile cross-border capital flows, the Reserve Bank’s AnnualReport 1997-98 reiterated the need to take into consideration a host of factors, but isnoteworthy for bringing to the fore the shift in the pattern of leads and lags inpayments/receipts during exchange market uncertainties and emphasized that besides thesize of reserves, the quality of reserves also assume importance. Highlighting this, theReport stated that unencumbered reserve assets (defined as reserve assets net ofencumbrances such as forward commitments, lines of credit to domestic entities,6guarantees and other contingent liabilities) must be available at any point of time to theauthorities for fulfilling various objectives assigned to reserves.As a part of prudent management of external liabilities, the RBI policy is to keepforward liabilities at a relatively low level as a proportion of gross reserves and theemphasis on prudent reserve management i.e., keeping forward liabilities withinmanageable limits, was highlighted in the RBI’s Annual Report, 1998-99.The RBI Annual Report, 1999-2000 stated that the overall approach tomanagement of India’s foreign exchange reserves reflects the changing composition ofbalance of payments and liquidity risks associated with different types of flows and otherrequirements and the introduction of the concept of liquidity risks is noteworthy.“The policy for reserve management is built upon a host of identifiable factorsand other contingencies, including, inter alia, the size of the current account deficit andshort term liabilities (including current repayment obligations on long term loans), thepossible variability in portfolio investment, and other types of capital flows, theunanticipated pressures on the balance of payments arising out of external shocks andmovements in repatriable foreign currency deposits of non-resident Indians.”  (Paragraph6.30)While focusing on prudent management of foreign exchange reserves in recentyears, RBI’s Annual Report 2000-01 elaborated on ‘liquidity risk’ associated withdifferent types of flows. The Report stated that with the changing profile of capital flows,the traditional approach of assessing reserve adequacy in terms of import cover has beenbroadened to include a number of parameters which take into account the size,composition, and risk profiles of various types of capital flows as well as the types ofexternal shocks to which the economy is vulnerable.Governor Jalan’s latest statement on Monetary and Credit Policy (April 29, 2002)provides, an up-to-date and comprehensive view on the approach  to  reservemanagement  and of special significance is the statement :“a sufficiently high level of reserves is necessary to ensure that even if there is prolongeduncertainty, reserves can cover the “liquidity at risk” on all accounts over a fairly longperiod.  Taking these considerations into account, India’s foreign exchange reserves arenow very comfortable.” (Paragraph 23)….“the prevalent national security environmentfurther underscores the need for strong reserves.  We must continue to ensure that,leaving aside short-term variations in reserves level, the quantum of reserves in the long-run is in line with the growth of the economy, the size of risk-adjusted capital flows andnational security requirements.  This will provide us with greater security againstunfavourable or unanticipated developments, which can occur quite suddenly.”(Paragraph 24).7The above discussion points to evolving considerations and indeed a paradigmshift in India’s approach to reserve management. The shift has occurred from a singleindicator to a menu or multiple indicators approach.   Furthermore, the policy of reservemanagement is built upon a host of factors, some of them are not quantifiable, and in anycase, weights attached to each of them do change from time to time.What is the Appropriate Level of Forex Reserves?Basic motives for holding reserves do result in alternative frameworks fordetermining appropriate level of foreign reserves. Efforts have been made by economiststo present an optimising framework for maintaining appropriate level of foreign reservesand one viewpoint suggests that optimal reserves pertain to the level at which marginalsocial cost equals marginal social benefit.  Optimal level of reserves has also beenindicated as the level where marginal productivity of reserves plus interest earned onreserve assets equals the marginal productivity of real resources and this frameworkencompasses exchange rate stability as the predominant objective of reservemanagement.  Since the underlying costs and benefits of reserves can be measured inseveral ways, these approaches to optimal level provide ample scope for developing ahost of indicators of appropriate level of reserves.It is possible to identify four sets of indicators to assess adequacy of reserves, andeach of them do provide an insight into adequacy though none of them may by itself fullyexplain adequacy.  First, the money based indicators including reserve to broad money orreserves to base money which provide a measure of potential for resident based capitalflight from currency. An unstable demand for money or the presence of a weak bankingsystem may indicate greater probability of such capital flights.  Money based indicators,however, suffer from several drawbacks.  In countries, where money demand is stableand confidence in domestic currency high, domestic money demand tends to be largerand reserves over money ratios, relatively small. Therefore, while a sizable money stockin relation to reserves, prima facie, suggests a large potential for capital flight out ofmoney, it is not necessarily a good predictor of actual capital flight. Money basedindicators also do not capture comprehensively the potential for domestic capital flight.Moreover, empirical studies find a weak relationship between money based indicator andoccurrence and depth of international crises.Secondly, trade based indicators, usually the import-based indicators defined interms of reserves in months of imports provide a simple way of scaling the level ofreserves by the size and openness of the economy. It has a straightforward interpretation-a number of months a country can continue to support its current level of imports if allother inflows and outflows cease. As the measure focuses on current account, it isrelevant for small economies, which have limited access and vulnerabilities to capitalmarkets. For substantially open economies with a sizable capital account, the importcover measure may not be appropriate.8Thirdly, debt based indicators are of recent origin; they appeared with episodes ofinternational crises, as several studies confirmed that reserves to short term debt byremaining maturity is a better indicator of identifying financial crises. Debt-basedindicators are useful for gauging risks associated with adverse developments ininternational capital markets. Since short-term debt by remaining maturity provides ameasure of all debt repayments to nonresidents over the coming year, it constitutes auseful measure of how quickly a country would be forced to adjust in the face of capitalmarket distortion. Studies have  shown that it could be the single most importantindicator of reserve adequacy in countries with significant but uncertain access to capitalmarkets.Fourthly, more recent approaches to reserve adequacy have suggested acombination of current-capital accounts as the meaningful measure of liquidity risks. Ofparticular interest, is the Guidotti Rule, which has received wide appreciation form manycentral bankers including Alan Greenspan, postulates that the ratio of short term debtaugmented with a projected current account deficit (or another measure of expectedborrowing) could serve useful an indicator of how long a country can sustain externalimbalance without resorting to foreign borrowing. As a matter of practice, the GuidottiRule suggests that the countries should hold external assets sufficient to ensure that theycould live without access to new foreign borrowings for up to twelve months. Thisimplies that the usable foreign exchange reserves should exceed scheduled amortisationof foreign currency debts (assuming no rollover during the following year).Alan Greenspan suggests a ‘Liquidity at Risk’ Rule that takes into account theforeseeable risks that a country could face in the event of (a) near absence of a purelynon-interventionist exchange rate policies and (b) cost-benefit trade-off in the quantity ofreserve accumulation. Accordingly, a country’s liquidity position could be calculatedunder a range of possible outcomes for relevant financial variables such as exchange rate,commodity prices, credit spreads, etc. While the concept of ‘Liquidity at Risks’ has beenbroadly discussed at different fora, it appears that no specific methodology has beenoutlined. It has been left to institutions and countries to develop their own approaches.Level of Forex Reserves in IndiaThe Indian approach to determining adequacy of forex reserves has been evolvingover the past few years, especially since the pioneering Report of the High LevelCommittee on Balance of Payments, culminating in Governor Jalan’s exposition of thecombination of global uncertainties, domestic economy and national securityconsiderations in determining liquidity at risk and thus assessing reserve adequacy.  It isappropriate to submit stylized facts in relation to some of the indicators of reserve-adequacy described here without making any particular judgment about adequacy.The foreign exchange reserves include three items; gold, SDRs and foreign currencyassets. As on May 3, 2002, out of the US $ 55.6 billion of total reserves, foreign currencyassets account the major share at US $ 52.5 billion. Gold accounts for about US $ 3billion. In July 1991, as a part of reserve management policy, and as a means of raising9resources, the RBI temporarily pledged gold to raise loans. The gold holdings, thus haveplayed a crucial role of reserve management at a time of external crisis. Since then, Goldhas played passive role in reserve management.The level of foreign exchange reserves has steadily increased from US$ 5.8 billion asat end-March, 1991 to US$ 54.1 billion as at end-March 2002 and further to US$ 55.6billion as at May 3, 2002.  The traditional measure of trade based indicator of reserveadequacy, i.e., the import cover (defined as the twelve times the ratio of reserves tomerchandise imports ) which shrank to 3  weeks of imports by the end of December1990, has improved to about 11.5 months as at end-March 2002.In terms of money-based indicators, the proportion of net foreign exchange assets ofRBI (NFA) to currency with the public has sharply increased from 15 per cent in 1991 to109 per cent as at end-March 2002. The proportion of NFA to broad money(M3) hasincreased by more than six fold; from 3 per cent to 18 per cent.The debt-based indicators of reserve adequacy show remarkable improvement in the1990s. The proportion of short term debt (i.e., debt obligations with an original maturityup to one year) to foreign exchange reserves has substantially declined form 147 per centas at end-March 1991 to 8 per cent as at end-March 2001. The proportion of volatilecapital flows defined to include cumulative portfolio inflows and short term debt toreserves has lowered from 147 per cent in 1991 to 58.5 per cent as at end-March 2001.As part of sustainable external debt position, the short term debt component hasdecreased from 10 per cent as at end-March 1991 to 3 per cent as at end-March 2001.Similarly, the size of debt service payments relative to current receipts has decreasedfrom 35 per cent in 1991 to 16 per cent in 2001.Management of International ReservesIn the recent years, for several reasons, increasing attention is being paid tomanagement of international reserves.  First, advent of the Euro as an alternate currencyto US dollar; second, movement of many central banks out of gold; third, changes inexchange rate regimes; fourth, changing views on reserve adequacy and its role in crisisprevention; and fifth, operational use of “reserve targets” in calculating financing gaps byIMF.  The attention to the subject is evidenced by increasing emphasis on transparency,accountability in various fora, and more recently, the issue of IMF guidelines on thesubject.Operationally, reserve management is a process that ensures that adequate officialpublic sector foreign assets are readily available to and controlled by the authorities formeeting a defined range of objectives for a country.  A reserve management entity isnormally made responsible for the management of reserves and associated risks.Invariably, the reserve management entity is the central bank and hence the objectives of10reserve management tend to be critical as they would encompass the objectives of themonetary authority and the objectives of a portfolio manager or the custodian of reserves.As a monetary authority, a central bank’s primary objective is to ensure macroeconomicfinancial stability in general and external stability in particular. As a custodian, thecentral bank’s main objectives are to ensure liquidity, safety and yield on deployment ofreserves.In considering management of reserves, the benefits and costs of holding reservesare constantly assessed.  On the benefits, recent international financial crises have shownthat holding and managing sufficient reserves and disclosing adequate information tomarkets helps a country to prevent external crises, especially those stemming from thecapital account.  The growing appreciation of the role of reserves in crises prevention andas a buffer to manage exchange market pressures has given reserve management a morecentral role, now than before, in national economic policies. Maintaining high level ofreserves to tide over external shocks, however, involves opportunity cost. Theopportunity cost of holding reserves is the foregone investment because resources havebeen used to purchase reserves instead of increasing domestic capital. The marginalproductivity of domestic capital is the opportunity cost of holding reserves and reservesmanagement seeks to minimize the opportunity costs against the benefits that accrue fromholding reserves.The objectives of reserve management vary across countries, and a recent surveyof reserve management practices of select countries (IMF guidelines, 2001) provide goodinsights on the subject.  First, most countries hold reserves to support monetary policy.While ensuring liquidity in foreign exchange market to smooth out undue short-termfluctuations in exchange markets constitutes the primary objective, some countries take acautious approach to intervention. Smaller countries, hold reserves mainly forconsideration of transaction motives to meet external payment imbalances as well as astore of wealth. Precautionary motive of holding reserves to mitigate adverse externalshocks is implicit in most countries’ objectives though among a few, it finds explicitmention. Few countries explicitly use international reserves as the backing for monetarybase and to maintain the stability and integrity of the monetary and financial system.From a policy perspective, the objective of holding reserves to support monetarypolicy is common to most countries and the objective of holding reserves in regard tomany emerging economies is primarily to maintain international confidence about itsshort-term payment obligations as well as confidence in monetary and financial polices.Secondly, most countries have informal coordination between debt managementand reserve management policies. As part of informal coordination, most countries takeinto account external debt indicators, particularly the maturity composition of short-termand long-term debt, as part of reserve management.Thirdly, in regard to transparency and disclosure standards, many countriesadhere to the IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) requirement. Most11countries publish data on  external debt and reserves on an annual basis in either theircentral bank annual reports or other reports of Government.Fourthly, liquidity and safety (low risks) prevail upon reserve managemententities in most countries as part of objective of reserve management. The yield objectiveis secondary to most countries in reserve management.Fifthly, most countries use benchmarks for managing currency composition ofreserves though information to the public about the benchmarks for the underlyingcurrency composition of reserves is generally not made available. Information about theunderlying norms for adopting the benchmarks are, however available in a number ofcountries.Management of Forex Reserves in IndiaIn India, legal provisions governing management of forex reserves are set out inthe RBI Act and Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 and they also govern the openmarket operations for ensuring orderly conditions in the forex markets, the exercise ofpowers as a monetary authority and the custodian in regard to management of foreignexchange assets.In practice, holdings of gold have been virtually unchanged other than occasionalsales of gold by the government to the RBI.  The gold reserves are managed passively.Currently, accretion to foreign currency reserves arises mainly out of purchases by RBIfrom the Authorised Dealers (i.e. open market operations), and to some extent incomefrom deployment of forex assets held in the portfolio of RBI (i.e. reserves, which areinvested in appropriate instruments of select currencies).  The RBI Act stipulates theinvestment categories in which RBI is permitted to deploy its reserves.  The aid receiptson government account also flow into reserves.  The outflow arises mainly on account ofsale of foreign currency to Authorised Dealers (i.e. for open market operations).  Thereare occasions when forex is made available from reserves for identified users, as part ofstrategy of meeting lumpy demands on forex markets, particularly during periods ofuncertainty. The net effect of purchases and sale of foreign currency is the mostdetermining one for the level of forex reserves, and these include such sale or purchase inforward markets (which incidentally is very small in magnitude).While operationally the level of reserves is essentially a result of sale andpurchase transactions, the level is also one of the objectives of exchange rate policy, andthe issue needs to be considered in the overall context of exchange rate management.The exchange rate is determined by the market, i.e. forces of demand and supply.  Theobjectives and purposes of exchange rate management are to ensure that economicfundamentals are reflected in the external value of the rupee as evidenced in thesustainable current account deficit. Subject to this general objective, the conduct ofexchange rate policy is guided by three major purposes: first, to reduce excess volatilityin exchange rates, while ensuring that the movements are orderly and calibrated; second,to help maintain an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves and third, to help12eliminate market constraints with a view to the development of a healthy foreignexchange market.  Basically, the policy is aimed at preventing destabilizing speculationin the market while facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market rates for allpermissible purposes.  RBI makes sales and purchases of foreign currency in the forexmarket, basically to even out lumpy demand or supply in the thin forex market; largelumpiness in demand is mainly on account of oil imports, leads and lags and external debtservicing on Government account.  Such sales and purchases are not governed by apredetermined target or band around the exchange rate.The essence of portfolio management of reserves by the RBI is to ensure safety,liquidity and optimization of returns.  The reserve management strategies arecontinuously reviewed by the RBI in consultation with Government.  In deployingreserves, attention is paid to the currency composition, duration and instruments.  All ofthe foreign currency assets are invested in assets of top quality while a good proportionshould be convertible into cash at short notice.  The counterparties with whom deals areconducted are also subject to a rigorous selection process. In assessing the returns fromdeployment, the total return (both interest and capital gains) is taken into consideration.Circumstances such as lumpy demand and supply in reserve accretion are counteredthrough appropriate immunization strategies in deployment. One crucial area in theprocess of investment of the foreign currency assets in the overseas markets, relates to therisk involved in the process viz. credit risk, market risk and operational risk.  While thereis no set formula to meet all situations, RBI utilizes the accepted portfolio managementprinciples for risk management.Forex Reserves and Quasi-fiscal ActivitiesCentral Banks perform a number of Quasi Fiscal Activities (QFAs).  QFAs can bedefined as an operation or measure carried out by a central bank with an effect that can,in principle, be duplicated by budgetary measures in the form of an explicit tax, subsidyor direct expenditure and that has or may have an impact on the financial operations ofthe central bank.  In a broader sense, QFAs also include certain activities, such as, thoserelating to exchange rates, open market operations and cash reserve ratio, which havefiscal implications but cannot be obviously duplicated in terms of explicit taxes andsubsidies in the budget.  Central banks’ QFAs broadly arise from their role as a regulatorof the financial system, as a banker to the government, and as a regulator of the foreignexchange system.QFAs of the central bank as a regulator of the foreign exchange often pertain toexchange rate and sterilized operations to offset the effect of unusual cross border capitalflows.Impact of QFAs is difficult to quantify.  First, the impact of QFAs is merged withthe impact of other operations and thereby is reflected in the consolidated picture in thebalance sheet of the central bank.  It has not been possible to separate in the balancesheets the impact emerging exclusively from the QFAs from other operations. Secondly,market clearing rates cannot be accurately predicted in an administered interest rateregime and therefore, it would be difficult to estimate the element of subsidy/tax involved13in such operations.  Thirdly, the QFAs are performed on an ongoing basis coveringinnumerable transactions and, therefore, their measurement is virtually impossible.Fourthly, the impact of certain QFAs like credit ceiling and exchange related measuresare not certain.On a very general plane it can be argued that sterilised intervention by the centralbank to contain the liquidity impact of capital flows often involve a trade-off betweenlow return assets and high return assets as far as the Central Bank is concerned.  Earningfrom the deployment of foreign exchange is understandably lower than the interest losson account of open market sale of government securities essentially due to interest ratedifferentials.Communications PoliciesIssues in transparency and disclosure constitute an important aspect of reservemanagement, within the broader framework of monetary, fiscal and financial polices.Thus, the policy as well as all relevant information are articulated through a variety ofmeans from time to time, the most significant being the Monetary and Credit PolicyStatements by Governor, RBI.  The speeches of Governor and Deputy Governors areimportant sources of policy analysis, actions and intentions.  The Annual Reports of RBIprovide authentic version of RBI’s perspective as approved by its Board.  The Report onCurrency and Finance provides research output from the professionals in RBI.  Theperiodical publications, Press Releases and Discussion Papers are also important sourcesof information.The RBI has been providing, on a regular basis, appropriate data directly relatingto foreign exchange market operations.  The RBI publishes daily data on exchange rates,forward premium, foreign exchange turnover etc. in the Weekly Statistical Supplement(WSS) of the RBI Bulletin with a time lag of one week, the movement in foreignexchange reserves of the RBI on a weekly basis are also published.  The RBI publishesdata on nominal effective exchange rate (NEER) and real effective exchange rate(REER), RBI's purchases and sales in the foreign exchange market along withoutstanding forward liabilities on reserves, etc., in the RBI Bulletin with a time lag of onemonth. A 5-country and a 36-country trade based NEER and REER is published in theRBI Bulletin. The RBI has all along, been ahead of many developing and industrialcountry central banks, been  publishing the size of its gross intervention (purchase andsale) per month and its net forward liability position. The daily reference rate of USdollar and Euro as well as the middle rates for four major currencies, viz., US dollar,GBP, Euro and Japanese yen are also available in the RBI website.As a part of the Special Data Dissemination Standards, IMF prescribed a datatemplate for disclosure of the International reserves and foreign currency liquidity inrespect of countries, which have subscribed to SDDS.  India’s approach to reservemanagement closely follows international standards and codes, especially with regard totransparency, disclosure, accountability and data dissemination of foreign reserves.  Indiais among the 49 countries, which have adopted the SDDS template for publication of14detailed data on forex reserves. The data template provides some information on anumber of parameters including currency composition, deployment of forex reserves andforward positions.  These data are made available on monthly basis in the RBI website aswell as the country section of the IMF SDDS site, from the month of October, 2001.IssuesIt is proposed to consider five sets of issues covering policy matters; adequacy;costs and benefits; management aspects; and dissemination of information.Policy MattersFirst, a critical issue is whether all the external assets are readily available for use.The management of foreign currency assets in India ensures such availability though inrespect of a large part of gold which is a small part of official reserves, the quality is notin a form that is readily accepted in international financial markets.  There is nolikelihood of use of gold in reserves in the foreseeable future. Nevertheless, India hasdevised mechanisms by which a part of the gold holdings of RBI could be converted intousable foreign currency.  An incidental issue relates to the policy on enhancement orotherwise of gold component in the foreign exchange reserves and the way it is managed.The proportion of gold in our reserves is coming down in view of accretion to foreigncurrency reserves and the policy in regard to both holdings and management has beenpassive.Secondly, an issue common to many central banks is the advantage in clearlyspelling out policy objectives in regard to forex reserves.  The mandate as well as thepractice in India clearly indicate that maintaining stability is an overriding objective butthe detailing of objectives has to reckon the changing circumstances.  As explained in thepresentation on evolution of policy in India, a very dynamic view, based on multipleindicator approach has been adopted.  In this background, the practice of detailing of thecontext and objectives as is being done in the recent Monetary and Credit PolicyStatements of Governor Jalan appears to be very appropriate; since such statementsindicate the objectives ex ante, supplementing the earlier practice of reporting the policyand management, ex post in the Annual Report.  The major objective as articulated inrecent Policy Statements appears to be to infuse and sustain confidence in the financialmarkets on our liquidity position and operate therein as appropriate, with a view tocontaining volatility in forex markets and contributing to financial stability.Adequacy or Appropriate LevelFirst, the dominant concern of policy is maintaining confidence in our ability toprovide liquidity and, there is no precise way of defining at what level the confidencefactor would be undermined.  In practice, policy makers should make judgements on (a)the difficulties in reviving confidence once it starts getting eroded; (b) the focus ofmarket participants on incremental changes more than total size; and (c) demonstration ofwillingness to use the reserves when warranted without committing to do so and getting15locked into a straight jacket situation.  The issue of managing the level of reserves thusbecomes, in many ways, as important as the level itself.Secondly, there are judgements involved in assessing whether the level of forexreserves provides comfort in the face of some weakness in domestic fundamentals.  Sucha comfort will perhaps not be forthcoming if the current account deficit is not sustainableor exchange rate is highly overvalued.  For example, it has been argued that high level ofreserves could, under some circumstances, give comfort against weaknesses in thefinancial sector or high public debt or encourage laxity in financial and fiscal policies.Thirdly, many indicators of adequacy of reserves do, to a significant extent,capture the potential for drawdown by non-residents while the factors governingdrawdown by residents through capital flight are not easily assessed.  Hence, thedomestic perceptions of level of reserves add to the comfort in withstanding drawdownthrough capital flight, and experience indicates that crisis of confidence in currency oftenoriginates among residents.Fourthly, the leads and lags in trade and even invisibles can significantlyinfluence supply and demand in markets, particularly when markets are not fullydeveloped.  How should reserve adequacy be assessed with reference to prevalence ofsuch leads and lags?  If the leads and lags can be demonstrably impacted by discretionaryadministrative measures, the amount of reserves needed to moderate such leads and lagsmay be reduced.Fifthly, where there is lumpiness in demand and supply as is the case in India, theforex reserves have to be used for meeting the temporary mismatches in forex markets.In such a situation, the incremental changes in the level of forex reserves may also becorrespondingly large.  There is a tendency among the analysts and media to reactnegatively to erosion in a more intensive way and positively to addition to reserves in aless intensive way.  A higher level of reserves may possibly give greater scope forchanges by making them appear marginal.Sixthly, it was widely felt that contingent credit lines from private sector could benegotiated and thus actual level of forex reserves to be maintained may becorrespondingly brought down.  The Contingency Credit Line (CCL) from theInternational Monetary Fund could also have similar effect.  India had not accessed thisfacility, and in any case, experience of other countries has not been very satisfactory onthis.Seventhly, bilateral or multilateral relations at government level do provide someindications, though on a judgemental basis, of the forex resources that may be readilyaccessed in case of difficulties.  In other words, geopolitical factors do give differentlevels of comfort of ready availability of forex resources from official sector throughbilateral or multilateral channels.  India has to constantly make and review its assessmentof such access, noting that adequacy of forex reserves needs to be assessed with referenceto changing perceptions of the economy in the market place as well as among16governments or the official sector.  In brief, a practical issue is, how much ofjudgemental, non-economic, and non-market considerations are relevant in assessingadequacy of forex reserves?Cost and BenefitsFirst, a major question on the level of reserves relates to the scope for measuringoverall economic costs and benefits of holding reserves.  While concepts of marginalsocial costs, or opportunity costs are useful for analytical purposes, computation isdifficult though assessments are not impossible.Second, if it is assumed that the direct financial cost of holding reserves is thedifference between interest paid on external debt and returns on external assets inreserves, such costs have to be treated as insurance premium to assure and maintainconfidence in the availability of liquidity.  The benefits of such a premium are not merelyin terms of warding off risks but also in terms of better credit rating and finer spreads thatmany private participants may get while contracting debt.  The costs of comfort level inreserves are often met by some benefits, but both are difficult to measure, in financial oreconomic, and in quantitative terms.Third, if the level of reserves is considered to be significantly in the high comfortzone, it may be possible to add greater weight to return on forex assets than on liquiditythus reducing net costs if any, of holding reserves.Fourth, such calculations of costs of holding reserves by comparing return onforex reserve with costs of external debt may imply that addition to reserves has beenmade by contracting additional external debt.  In India, almost the whole of addition toreserves in the last few years has been made while keeping the overall level of externaldebt almost constant.Fifth, the costs and benefits of adding or not adding to reserves should be assessedwith a medium-term view.  For example, in case there is uncertainty about capacity toacquire needed reserves at a later date, a country may prefer to acquire them sooner thanlater.  Indeed, an inter-temporal view of the adequacy as well as costs and benefits offorex reserves may be in order.Finally, it is necessary to assess the costs of not adding to reserves through openmarket operations at a time when the capital flows are strong.  In other words, the costsand benefits of forex reserves may have something to do with the open marketoperations, both in money and forex markets than merely the level itself.  In brief, thecosts and benefits arise as much out of open market operations of the central bank as outof management of levels of reserves.Management Aspects17First, sound legislative framework and institutional arrangements are fully inplace, with RBI being the owner and custodian of reserves, but operating in consultationswith government as necessary.  There is no particular need for any changes in this regard.Second, RBI does not have the legal authority to borrow or draw against externalcredit lines from the non-official sector.  Should there be enabling changes in the law?Similarly, there are severe legal limitations on active management of gold reserves tooptimise returns and should they be relaxed?  Deep seated conservatism is reflected inhesitancy to alter the legislative framework.Thirdly, there is close co-ordination between the RBI and Government withregard to magnitudes, composition and maturities of external debt, both in official andprivate sector.  Such co-ordination as it exists today is clearly enhancing the effectivenessof reserve management.Fourthly, co-ordination between monetary, exchange rate and reservemanagement is extremely important and it is ensured operationally and articulatedpublicly through the Monetary and Credit Policy Statements, in a comprehensive manner.Random ThoughtsFirst, there are important factors that contributed to the comfortable accretion toreserves in the last five years but often go unnoticed in any review of external sectorpolicies in India.  (a)  The liberalisation of imports of gold has brought a large segment ofunofficial imports and forex market into the official sector and reduced large transactioncosts incurred in foreign exchange. In fact, meaningful development of forex markets wasenabled by this measure and consequently effectiveness of intervention in forex marketsenhanced. (b) Furthermore, abolition of automatic monetization, and marketisation ofGovernment borrowings provided opportunities to sterilize the capital inflows.  In otherwords, large capital flows could be absorbed into the forex reserves without seriouslyimparting volatility in forex or money markets because of simultaneous actions taken todevelop these markets.  In fact, there are occasions in recent years when RBI convertednon-marketable government securities (ad-hoc treasury bills) in its portfolio intomarketable ones by appropriate arrangements with government, to enhance its capacity toconduct open market operations.  The criticality of the state of financial markets in themanagement of capital flows and forex reserves needs to be appreciated.Second, it is justifiable to ask about the prospects for reserve levels increasing infuture.  It must be recognised that two factors are responsible for significant addition toreserves in the recent past viz., a far lower level of current account deficit (CAD) than theexpected sustainable level of about 2 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) eachyear, and continued inflow of capital especially of non-debt creating flows as more orless planned.  In this background, financing of an average CAD of about 2.8 per cent ofGDP as projected in the approach paper to the Tenth Five Year Plan, would require aminimum of two-fold increase in the size of annual capital flows from the present level.As indicated in the RBI Annual Report 2000-01, this would imply that the net capital18flows would have to increase from about US $ 10 billion in the initial year of the TenthPlan to about US $ 40 billion in the terminal year or an average of US $ 20 billion perannum during the Tenth Plan period.From a policy perspective, there are two facets of this coordination.  To mobilisecapital flows of this order, international investor confidence is critical.  In order tomaintain international confidence in the ability of the country’s payment position,accumulation of reserves at a higher level is an important prerequisite.  Moreover, in theevent of capital flows of this order, the concern would be on absorption of such flows andits associated monetary impact.  Policy coordination has to be put in place to synchronisethe sustainable current account deficit with sustainable economic growth and maintainadequate forex reservesThird, in this regard, an interesting issue is whether there are circumstances whenexternal borrowings need to be resorted to, merely to add to forex reserves.  Review ofliterature certainly provides justification for such actions, especially when the issue ofrestoring or maintaining confidence in credit rating in external debt is involved.Similarly, such actions may be needed if sentiment in market needs to be influenced bythe process.  Finally, given the overall impact of increases in both forex reserves andexternal debt, it is possible to visualize circumstances when such operations are optimal.Fourth, are there alternatives to managing liquidity through maintaining reserves?In this regard, further explorations on the concept of “national liquidity” articulated inBIS Policy Papers No. 8, September 2000 appear to be useful.  Recent crises have shownthat countries can be faced with liquidity problems not only because of the foreign assetsand liabilities of the government and central bank, but also because of the foreigncurrency liabilities of the banks and even the corporate sector.  A crucial differencebetween domestic and foreign currency debt is that the authorities can provide virtuallyunlimited domestic currency liquidity, but are tightly constrained in their provision offoreign currency liquidity.  This has led to consideration of a broad concept of “nationalliquidity”, though the relevance of a national balance sheet for policy purposes iscontroversial.  One polar view is that the external deficits and debt that are the result ofdecisions of the private sector – and not due to government borrowing – are of littleconcern to policymakers.   Such a view may be taken by industrial countries since theiraccess to international liquidity at zero risk spreads is normally assured.  However, foremerging economies there are some arguments in favour of national balance sheet andnational liquidity.  Large net borrowings by some entities in the economy tend to increasecountry risk premia and thus raise the interest rate charged to all borrowers.  One solutionthat has been suggested to counter any such externalities would be to internalise themthrough some form of tax on foreign borrowing or to impose some controls.Furthermore, the exchange rate would overshoot if a country’s access to capital marketsdried up and it were suddenly forced to repay its foreign currency obligations, and thiswould cause a deep recession.  Private sector external debt decisions have, in fact,impinged on fiscal management and balance sheets of official sector in several ways inthe context of recent crises.  Thus, an important  policy aspect is the question of whetherand how the official sector should take account of the maturity and currency mismatchesof the private sector in structuring its own foreign assets and liabilities.19The concept of a national balance sheet, of course, raises several tricky questionsrelating to private sector foreign assets offsetting liabilities, and the extent to which theirforeign exchange exposures fully capture vulnerability.   In spite of all these complexitiesthat are involved in the national balance sheet approach, there is merit in exploring suchan approach to provide guidance to policy relating to reserves, both in terms of adequacyand management.Finally, an idea which received some attention recently (March 2002) during thegathering on ‘Finance for Development’ in Monterrey, Mexico, is that, instead of holdingtheir reserves in dollars, a new form of global money viz., ‘global greenbacks’ could beissued, which countries could hold in reserves.  The amount of money held by countriesin ‘global greenbacks’ could be given to developing countries to finance theirdevelopment programmes as well as global public goods like environmental projects,health initiatives, humanitarian assistance and so on.For countries that receive less than the amount that they need to put into reserves,the new ‘global money’ would go into reserves freeing dollars that these countries wouldotherwise set aside.  Countries that receive more than they must put into reserves couldexchange the new money for conventional currencies.  Eventually, all the new moneywill find its way into reserves, which in effect represent a commitment by countries tohelp each other in times of trouble.  It has been argued that the greenbacks proposalenvisages flow of funds to poor countries according to their need while contributing toglobal economic growth, stability and equity. Perhaps, as part of ongoing exercisesrelating to international financial architecture, this idea deserves to be deliberated.ConclusionTo conclude, the theory and practice of foreign exchange reserves is as complexas any other contemporary economic issue. While it is not easy to provide answers to allthe questions raised in the recent debate on foreign exchange reserves managementpolicy, we in India have had Such a Long Journey from the Agony of 1991 to theComfort of today and this has come about only by dint of hard work and implementationof Prudent Policies which has made India, a respected model in the Emerging World.? Special Lecture by Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, atNational Council of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi on May 10, 2002.  Dr.Reddy is thankful to Dr. R.K. Pattnaik for his assistance.
