Finance and Development – Which Way Now?The Annual Foundation Lecture of this famous College is an important event in our country’sacademic calendar.  Several of our most distinguished economists, public administrators andthinkers have shared their thoughts with you on this occasion.  I feel privileged to have beeninvited to deliver this year’s lecture.  My happiness in being able to join you today has beenimmeasurably enhanced by the presence of Shri M. Narasimham at this function. Narasimham’s substantial contribution to monetary economics, public administration,academic institutions, the financial system, and international agencies are well known, and Ido not wish to embarrass him by recounting these.  Permit me only to say that if, in theaftermath of the East Asian crisis, we are able to take some comfort in our relative stabilityand the resilience of our financial system, it is in no small measure due to the guidanceprovided by him, particularly in his capacity as Chairman of two high level committees onfinancial sector reform. My personal association with him goes back nearly 30 years.  I havelearnt much from him and I have always admired his unfailing commitment to public serviceand his unflinching confidence in our country’s future.  Thank you, Mr. Narasimham, for2. Since I received this invitation, I have been thinking about what I should talk about.  Aftersome consideration, and a great deal of trepidation, I have chosen to speak about finance and1development, particularly where we are and where we should be going.  The role of financein development has, of course, always been recognised.  However, I believe that in the lastfew years, there has been a fundamental change in the way we think about the financialsystem and its role in development.  Part of this change is due to the changing role beingassigned to Government and public sector in the allocation of nation’s savings fordevelopment. A more dramatic and recent reason for this change is due to the East Asiancrisis. This crisis, and its aftermath, have brought to the fore the critical role of the financialsystem in determining the stability and sustainability of the real economy. As a result, thereform of the financial system, and the rules and the codes that should govern the conduct offinancial business, figure high on the domestic agenda for reform as well as the international3. I propose to begin this lecture with some reflections on the paradigm shift that has takenplace in the literature as well as economic policy making on the role of finance indevelopment.  This will be followed by a discussion of some of the lessons emerging fromthe Asian crisis.  I would then touch upon the evolution of the Indian financial system, andKrugman has noted in a2standards of living did not.”Western countries, particularly, England, Germany, France and the United States. During thiswhere per capita incomes were increasing on a sustained basis for any length of time were the Up to about the end of the 19th century, the only countriesovertaken by population growth; the number of people slowly increased, but their averageessentially Malthusian. Improvements in technology and capital investments were alwaysmodern invention.  From the dawn of history to the eighteenth century, the world wasrecent book, “economic growth, at least economic growth that raises living standards, is arecall just how recent is the story of economic growth.  As Paul reflect on the history of human civilization in the millennium just ending, it is surprising to4. In less than four weeks, we will be celebrating the dawn of a new millennium. As weI. Finance and Development – The Shifting Paradigmend with some reflections on future directions.agenda for global co-operation.inviting me here.Shri5. The development strategies of the newly independent and developing countries in mid-19century were framed against this background.  The central and the leading role for breakingaway from the colonial legacy and for speeding up the process of industrialisation wasassigned to the State. The need for the Government to occupy the commanding heights and tolead from the top received further support from the astounding success of the Soviet Union inemerging as a rival centre of political and industrial power within a very short period.  India,at that time, played a pioneering role in giving expression to the aspirations of the newlyindependent Third World countries in the economic field.  Thus, in 1956, India’s Second “ The pattern of development and the structure of socio-economic relations should be soplanned that they result not only in appreciable increases in national income andemployment but also in greater equality in incomes and wealth. Major decisionsregarding production, distribution, consumption and investment – and in fact allsignificant socio-economic relationships –must be made by agencies informed by socialpurpose.”6. In practice, that meant, that all allocation decisions were to be made by the Government orits agencies.  The importance of raising resources for development was, of course, consideredimportant.  However, the primary emphasis was to be on increasing the domestic savings rateby suppressing consumption, high taxation, and appropriating profits through ownership ofcommercial enterprises.  Accelerated capital accumulation through these means wasconsidered to be the key to development.  In a celebrated observation which guided many aplanner and policy maker in developing countries, Professor “The central problem in the theory of economic development is to understand theprocess by which a community which was previously saving and investing 4 to 5 percent of its national income or less, converts itself to an economy where voluntary savingis running at about 12 to15 per cent of national income or more.  This is the centralproblem because the central fact of economic development is rapid capital accumulation37. In the process of capital accumulation, the role of financial system was essentially limited,as allocation decisions were to be made by the central planning authorities and not by thefinancial markets.  To a large extent, financial system also had a limited role in providingincentives for savings and capital accumulation as interest rates were controlled, andgenerally “repressed”, and household savings were pre-empted through high levels ofstatutory reserve and liquidity ratio.  New banks and financial institutions were set up, andold ones were taken over, in order to act primarily as deposit taking agencies and providers ofcredit and finance for designated and centrally determined purposes.8. The above development paradigm has, of course, shifted rather sharply in recent years.Almost all developing countries are moving towards a more market-determined strategy ofdevelopment.  There are several factors which have contributed to this change in perception.(including knowledge and skills with capital).” W.Arthur Lewis observed that:Year Plan outlined the goals of development strategy in the following terms:Fivethincome stagnation - was not missed by their leaders and intellectuals.Western powers, and the connection between these two situations – the colonial state andcases, declining per capita incomes.  A large number of them were also colonies of theexporters of primary products and importers of industrial products with stagnant, and in someentire period, the then so-called under-developed or Third World countries continued to beFirst and the foremost reason for questioning the earlier strategy was the simple fact thatactual results in terms of growth of incomes or industrial development were well belowexpectations.  Despite substantial increase in the domestic savings rates in several countries,including India, rate of growth of incomes was relatively low. While saving rates were rising,so were capital-output ratios because of inefficiencies in the allocation and use of resources.The period of relatively low growth also coincided with a period of virtually persistent andrecurring balance of payments crises.  Thus, paradoxically, a strategy which was expected toreduce dependency on foreign aid and foreign trade, actually resulted in greater dependenceon aid and emergency assistance from abroad.9. An equally important factor contributing to the change in perceptions was the astonishingsuccess of Japan and the East Asian countries in accelerating their rates of growth by relyingon market oriented pattern of industrialisation (with, of course, varying degrees of “guidance”by the State).  Japan’s per capita rate of growth of 8 per cent per annum during 1953 – 1973was unprecedented in the history of economic development.  No economy had ever grownthat fast before, and Japan emerged from the ruins of  war to become the world’s secondlargest economy. Similar was the record of industrialisation in East Asia particularly incountries like Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan and South Korea.  In the 50s, their per capitaincomes or the degree of industrialisation was no different from those of the rest of Asia.However, within a period of 30 years, they were able to catch up with the countries of the West. A final and decisive development leading to the demise of the oldstrategy was the collapse of the Soviet Union and the acceptance of market-led developmentstrategies by all countries of Eastern Europe.10. The change in the development paradigm also led to a change in the perception about therole of the financial system in development. It became clear that liberalisation of productmarkets also requires a well functioning financial system for mobilisation and allocation ofsavings.  Banks, capital markets and financial institutions were no longer seen as mereconduits for channelling savings in predetermined directions, but as important instruments for11. In the more recent period, after the onset of the East-Asian crisis in mid-1997, there hasbeen a further change in the perception about the role of the financial system in development.Earlier, the real economy was supposed to lead and shape the financial system.  Today, it isthe real economy which is supposed to have become a prisoner of a weak financial system.In other words, proper development of the financial system is no longer regarded as an“ancillary” or an adjunct to the development of the real sector, but as a necessary pre-condition for growth.13. The change in the perception about the role of financial system in development has beengrowth by raising the level of saving and investment and the productivity of capital.demonstrated that an efficient and well functioning financial system contributed to economicimportance of financial market as a source of innovation and productivity growth.  It wasbuttressed by the emergence of endogenous growth literature, which emphasized theintermediation and the real rate of economic growth.  These findings were financial repression”, particularly interest rate and exchange rate controls which restricted growth ofliberalisation literature developed in 1970s and 1980s stressed the costs of “financial financial literature which demonstrated the critical role of financial system in the growth process. The12. The above developments in the real world were supported by findings in the theoreticalallocating savings among alternative investment choices according to their relative efficiency.industrialisedcombined with a fair amount of debate on the nature and characteristics of financial marketsas distinguished from products or factor markets.  Are financial markets special? Do theyrequire a different set of regulatory or supervisory regimes? What are the relative roles ofinternational and domestic institutions and supervisory regimes in ensuring the viability andthe integrity of the financial system in a particular country in the context of globalisation or14. Financial markets indeed have certain special characteristics.  The most important ofthese is the large volume of transactions and the speed with which financial resources canmove from one market to another, and from one instrument to another.  A relatedcharacteristic is the scope for instant “arbitrage” as between different markets and betweendifferent types of instruments.  Financial transactions can be highly leveraged and the risk of15. Another interesting characteristic of these markets is the role of financial intermediaries.There are segments of financial markets, such as stock markets, and bond markets wheresavers themselves make the decision about when and where their money can be used.Markets are, however, also dominated by financial intermediaries (such as banks, providentfunds and pension funds, mutual funds and so on), which take investment decisions as well asrisks on behalf of their depositors. Yet another important characteristic of financial markets isthe so-called “negative” externalities associated with them.  A failure in any one segment ofthese markets may affect all other segments of the market, including the non-financialmarkets.16. Financial markets are also highly susceptible to “self-fulfilling” prophecy or expectations.Sometimes “self-fulfilling” expectations can lead to panic as behaviour of a limited group ofoperators gets Bhagwati has described the classic case of a self-fulfillingprophecy with reference to the behaviour of exchange rates dating back to the 1960s.  Let mequote from an old article by him where he illustrates this particular feature of the foreign“Let the objective reality initially be that the dollar will not depreciate. But suppose thatspeculators expect the opposite, and move out of the dollar, depreciating it.  If the realitywere independent of the actions of the speculators, the dollar would go up again, and themarket would have chastised and ruined the speculators.  But it may well be that as thedollar falls initially with the speculation, wages and hence prices rise in sympathy. If so,the objective reality would itself have changed, legitimating the devaluation of thedollar in view of the speculation-induced rise of prices. Such self-justifying speculation417. In view of the externalities, volatility and certain other special characteristics, it isgenerally agreed that financial markets have to be closely monitored and supervised. It hasalso been the past experience that, in view of the growing integration of worldwide financialmarkets, failure and vulnerability in the domestic market in a particular country can haveinternational implications.  Similarly, problems in the external markets can create difficultproblems for the functioning of the domestic markets, even if the country concerned wasfollowing prudent macro-economic policies.  This close relationship between the twomarkets, domestic and external, raises the question of appropriate duties and responsibilitiesof domestic supervisory authorities and international financial institutions.shapes its own reality.”exchange market:Jagdish generalised.  failure can be transferred by actual decision-makers to innocent by-standers.globality”, as some prefer to call it? “18. Most of these issues have come to the fore in the context of the East Asian crisis andsubsequent developments in certain other countries, such as, Russia and Brazil. Let us brieflyI 19. Much has been said and written about the causes of the Asian crisis and its aftermath.The literature is voluminous and growing by the day.  In some ways, it is as impressive as theearlier literature on the “Asian miracle”, and raises the obvious question of what developingcountries must learn from their successes.  It is not my purpose to review this literature comment on what went wrong and what policies could have been handled better either beforeor after the crisis.  My purpose is limited, and confined to recapturing some aspects of theAsian crisis which may have a bearing on our understanding of the relationship betweenfinance and development, and the lessons that countries like ours need to keep in view inorder to avoid having to go through similar devastating experiences in the future.20. An important point to remember in this connection is that even relatively small in the conduct of macro-economic or exchange rate policies can sometimes lead to big crises.The Asian experience is certainly mixed, and the magnitude of macro-economic and otherpolicy failures in different East Asian countries was not the same. However, in several ofthem, the degree of deviation from the best practices or prudent policies was relatively small.It may be that they persisted with the defence of the pegged exchange rates for a week or twolonger than was desirable, or it may be that they did not take corrective monetary or fiscalaction early enough. However, the devastation and the pain that their economies went5 through because of these policy mistakes were sizeable and unprecedented.incidentally, was also the experience of Mexico and Argentina in early 1995, when a majoremerging crisis was brought under a semblance of control by a massive international rescueeffort launched by the IMF, the United States and the World Bank. It is no coincidence that inall these cases, in East Asia as well as in Mexico and Argentina, the proximate cause was therelatively sudden reversal of capital flows on which these economies had become excessivelydependent. It had taken a relatively long time to build a climate of confidence, and for capitalinflows to rise gradually. However, it took no time for this confidence to be dissipated and forforeign capital to disappear. It is also interesting to note that the major reversal was not onlyon account of foreign lenders or investors, but also on account of resident holders of domesticassets who rushed to 21. The point is simply that handling capital flows is not an easy business. While capitalaccount liberalisation and large capital movements have brought considerable growthbenefits, they have also brought with them greater potential for volatility in asset prices andfinancial markets, including forex markets. This can cause unanticipated damage to the realeconomy during periods of uncertainty about the future economic or political outlook. Asmentioned earlier, adverse expectations about a country’s future during periods of uncertaintycan often become “self-fulfilling”. The fact that such volatility can be aggravated by a weakfinancial system, leading to severe development problems, has also to be borne in mind. Thelesson from the Mexican or East Asian episodes, I must emphasise, is not an argumentagainst capital flows or capital account convertibility. It is about careful and judicioushandling of such flows and about the pace of movement towards capital account for residents. It is also about building domestic safety nets, for example, by keeping the levelmistakesreserves  high in relation to short term external obligations. of liquid foreign exchange liberalisationencash or convert their holdings into foreign currency.This,nor toI. Lessons from the Asian crisislook at the lessons emerging from recent developments in East Asia and elsewhere.22. It can not be denied that, despite the earlier spectacular successes, the financial systems ofEast Asian countries were characterised by several weaknesses. Thus, banks were not subjectto effective prudential regulation and supervision. Credit expansion in these countries waslarge and banks took untenable positions in real estate and other unproductive assets, in theprocess building up large asset-liability and currency mismatches. Banks had also built uphuge off-balance sheet liabilities, which moved on to the balance sheet once there wasadversity. Cross-border interbank positions were also large. Non-banking financial23. Corporates were also highly leveraged. External debt was available at low interest ratesand the fixed exchange rates in these countries offered them a false sense of complacency,encouraging them to hold large unhedged positions. External debt was high, short-term,leveraged and concentrated in the private sector. Thus, on the whole, there was an inherentvulnerability in the financial sector, and once expectation turned adverse, this vulnerabilityeasily translated itself into a panic. Standards of accounting practices, financial reporting anddisclosure norms were somewhat inadequate in these countries. There was lack oftransparency in the operations of market participants as well as the central banks in some24. Events in East Asia have certainly highlighted the two-way interaction between thefinancial sector and development and the need for an appropriate policy framework.Improving the efficiency of financial sector through market based reforms is an importantconcern of the new development paradigm. However, this has to be accompanied by policies,practices and certain amount of restraints that strengthen the financial system towardsstability so that growth becomes sustainable. At the same time, proper emphasis has to beplaced on growth policies that do not give rise to problems that engender systemic instability25. A related issue is that of striking an appropriate balance between financial regulation andmarket freedom. While freedom is essential to foster efficiency, it also raises an equallyimportant question of an appropriate regulatory framework given the wide divergencebetween private and social interest in ensuring the stability of financial system. Hence, aproper system of regulation relating to prudent risk limits, short-term foreign borrowing andthe degree of tolerable maturity mismatches in the banking system assumes criticalimportance for 26. The most important lesson emerging from the Asian crisis, in my view, is the need to bevigilant about domestic and international developments which may impinge on a country’sfinancial relations with the rest of the world. The process of integration of worldwidefinancial markets has resulted in product innovation and greater efficiency, but it has alsomade developing countries subject to greater vulnerability and new risks. Strongfundamentals alone cannot provide full immunity from a crisis. There is a need to takepreventive early action, to build firewalls, and to keep some safety nets handy. It is also clearthat when things are going well, the rest of the world shares in the prosperity. However, whenthings go wrong, the price has to be paid primarily by the country concerned. It is, therefore,an important responsibility of the countries themselves to put in place an efficient, prudentialand safe financial system which can aid and protect the development process at all times –I I I. The Indian Experiencegood and bad.minimising risks to the stability of the financial system.in the financial sector (e.g. a large fiscal deficit).cases.companies contributed to the crisis as these were subject to little or no regulation.27. Against the backdrop of the lessons from the Asian crisis, let us now turn to financialsector reforms in India from the perspective of our past experience, the present stage ofdevelopment and some issues for the future.28. As mentioned earlier, our development strategy for nearly forty years or so afterindependence, placed emphasis on state guided development initiatives, with primary roleassigned to the state and its agencies for mobilisation and allocation of savings. It was notuntil the Eighth Plan that the role of the financial sector and financial markets was given anexplicit recognition in the development strategy. The emphasis on accelerating investmentrate through state intervention in a number of key areas meant channelling credit to certainpreferential sectors at subsidised interest rates, exercising public ownership control on banksand restricting their activities through policy prescriptions. Some of the typical features thatgot built into this system were the directed lending programme with high levels of cashreserve ratio and statutory liquidity ratio, ceiling on deposit and lending rate, lending topriority sectors, branch licensing, and detailed regulation of banks’ loan and investment29. As far as external finance was concerned, India relied primarily on bilateral andmultilateral official development assistance and did not encourage private external capitalinflows as a way to supplement domestic savings. The exchange rate was administered andthere was extensive control over all foreign exchange transactions, which were subject toapproval on a case-by-case basis. Because of pervasive exchange controls, the Indianfinancial system remained largely insulated from international markets. This, however, didnot prevent India from suffering regular balance of payments crises year-after-year and30. The financial system, as a result, faced little or no competition, either domestic or foreign,and costs and efficiency of transactions were not its primary concern. Productivity wasgenerally poor and profitability low. The system was also subject to limited accountability.By the beginning of 1990s, it was becoming evident that the system could not be sustained31. The balance of payments crisis in 1990-91 provided the trigger point of reform in severalsectors, including the financial sector. The reform initiatives in financial sector started withGovernment appointing two committees: one on balance of payments under the chairmanshipof Dr. C. , which went into  of policies in external sector and thesecond, on the financial sector under the chairmanship of  M. , whichdeliberated on domestic financial sector reforms. The reform programme in financial sectorsince 1992 has largely followed the broad approach set out by these two committees,32. What has been our progress in financial sector reform and what are our achievements sofar? In so far as the “ arithmeticals” of reform in the financial sector – to use a phrase used bythe Narasimham Committee – is concerned, significant progress has been made in the pastfew years. There has been a steady decline in the level of resource pre- emption from theThe PresentNarasimham Committee, which was set up in 1997. supplemented by the Second Narasimham Shriliberalisation Rangarajanwithout a thorough revamping of its operations.becoming dependent on aid flows or credits from the IMF.portfolios.ThePastbanking system. Both cash reserve ratio and statutory liquidity ratio have been reduced fromtheir high levels of 15 per cent and 38.5 per cent, respectively, in 1991-92 to 9 per cent and25 per cent now. Interest rates in various segments of financial markets have beenderegulated in a phased manner. This had preceded the abolition of control on capital issuesand freeing of interest rate on private bonds and debentures. While the government borrowingrates are now market determined, there has been a gradual phasing out of interest ratesubsidies on bank loans. Wide-ranging reforms have been initiated to develop and deepen thegovernment securities market, money market, capital market and foreign exchange market.The Bank Rate has been reactivated, regular short-term Repos at a pre-announced rate arebeing conducted, and a system of prime lending rate has been introduced to provide directionto movement of interest rates in the credit market.33. In the sphere of external financial policy, while the exchange rate is market determined,over the years, there has been a progressive liberalisation of foreign direct and portfolioinvestment, and approval procedures have been considerably simplified. As a result, there arenow minimum restrictions on inflow of capital into the economy, or its repatriation andservicing. There has also been a significant liberalisation of policy regarding industry’saccess to foreign equity and borrowing through long term debt instruments. The bankingsector has been given a greater degree of freedom with regard to raising funds abroad andmanaging their external liability, subject to prudential guidelines. The end result of all theseand other reforms has been the growing integration among various segments of financialmarkets, closer convergence of Indian financial system with practices prevailing ininternational financial markets, and greater opportunity for investors to access both domesticand international markets. At the same time, care has been taken to avoid excessive short34. Competitive condition in the banking industry has been facilitated by relaxing entry andexit norms and permitting the public sector banks to raise additional capital from the market(up to a certain level). While public sector banks continue to be predominant, the changingcompetitive environment in the banking sector has made a significant difference to bankingpractices and disclosure requirements.35. Prudential regulation and supervision have formed a critical component of the financialsector reform programme. India has adopted international prudential norms and practiceswith regard to capital adequacy, income recognition, provisioning requirement andsupervision. These norms have been progressively tightened over the years, particularlyagainst the backdrop of the Asian crisis. Recently, the required capital adequacy ratio hasbeen increased to 9 per cent, from 8 per cent, in the banking sector. The mark to marketpractice for valuation of government securities has been gradually enhanced from 30 per centin 1992-93 to 75 per cent by 1999-2000. Further refinement, in line with  international bestpractices, in valuation and classification of investments by banks is currently underconsideration. As a further prudential measure against credit and market risks, risk weightshave been made applicable to government and other securities to take account of price36. An attempt has also been made to avoid the problems arising from “connected lending”.There have been regulations that limit the exposure of individual banks and non-bankingfinance companies to any particular borrower or groups of borrowers. There are restrictionson banking system’s exposure to equity and lending against equity as collateral, and itsexposure to real estate is very limited. Prudent limits have been placed on the financialvariations.term external liability and asset-liability mismatches.37. In the area of supervision, a full-fledged institutional mechanism has been developedkeeping in view the needs of a strong and stable financial system. The system of off-sitesurveillance has been combined with periodical on-site supervision for monitoring the riskprofile of banks and their compliance with prudential guidelines. The Basle Core Principlesfor Effective Banking Supervision is substantially being adhered to. A “CAMELS” rating  system  for Indian banks  has  also  been  introduced.  The Reserve Bank’s regulatoryand supervisory responsibility has been widened to include financial institutions and non-38. As a result of these and other measures, some progress in the performance of the Indianbanking system in recent years is noticeable.  The trend in erosion of profit and capital basehas been reversed. The net profits of the public sector banks, as a  percentage  of  their  totalassets,  averaged 0.4 per cent during 1994-95 to 1998-99, against the loss of about 1.0 percent in 1992-93 and 1993-94. The gross non-performing assets of public sector banks(without allowing for provisions) as per cent of total assets have declined from about 12 percent in 1992-93 to about 7 per cent in 1998-99.  As of March 1999, all public sector banksexcept one had achieved capital adequacy ratios exceeding the prescribed norm of 8 per cent.Currently most of them are on the threshold of the prescribed 9 per cent ratio by March 2000.The improved performance has enabled  most of the banks to meet their capital requirementfrom internal resources and the market without dependence on budgetary support.39. The consolidation of financial system in the recent years has led to increased resilience ofthe Indian economy to external crisis.  This has been evident from the muted impact of theAsian crisis on the Indian financial markets. Since then there has been a constant effort toShri strengthening of India’s financial system. The task is, however, far from complete. Let usareas which require priority consideration in the future.41. The agenda for future is long. Fortunately, there has been a widespread interest anddebate among experts and market participants on various aspects of financial reform whichhas enabled India to chart out a path which is best suited to our conditions.  Limitations of6time - and of your patience – do not permit me to cover the entire agenda for the future. Iwill, therefore, confine myself to highlighting only a few areas which, in my view, deserve42. First and foremost, it is necessary to continue with the process of strengthening ourprudential, provisioning and capitalisation norms and bring them in line with bestinternational standards.  It is equally important to continue with our efforts to introducemaximum transparency, disclosure, and accountability so that investors and counter parties tofinancial transactions can take their decisions based on full information and their ownassessment of market and other risks. Tighter and tougher prudential standards will no doubtcause some pain and impose greater responsibility on banks and other financial institutions.However, as I mentioned before, given the new international focus and externalities andpriority.The Futurebriefly look at some of the Narasimham, there has been significant progress in broadening and Rangarajan and 40. To sum up, it is clear that, thanks to the guidance provided by committees headed by Dr.enhance the regulatory and supervisory standards in conformity with international standards.banking financial companies.basedsystem and the corporate sector as far as external borrowing is concerned.linkages involved, the regulation of the financial sector is no longer a matter of choice or amatter of domestic concern alone.  Over a period of time, it is likely that the willingness ofthe rest of the world to do financial business – either by way of trade credits, directinvestments or other types of investments and loans will depend on their confidence in ourfinancial practices.  India must remain ahead of the curve in its prudential management.43. The level of Non-Performing Assets ( NPAs) of the banking system in India has shown animprovement in recent years, but it is still too high.  Part of the problem in resolving thisissue is the carry-over of old NPAs in certain declining sectors of industry. The problem hasbeen further complicated by the fact that there are a few banks which are fundamentally weakand where the potential for return to profitability, without substantial restructuring, isdoubtful. The Narasimham Committee and the Verma Committee (which recently submittedits report )  have looked into the problems of weak banks and have made certainrecommendations which are under consideration of Government and the Reserve Bank.These are also being widely debated, so that an acceptable long-term solution can be evolved.Leaving aside the problem of weak banks, in profitable banks also, the NPA levels are stillhigh. A vigorous effort has to be made by these banks to strengthen their internal control andrisk management systems, and to set up early warning signals for timely detection and action.The resolution of the NPA problem also requires greater accountability on the part ofcorporates, greater disclosures in the case of defaults, and an efficient credit informationsystem.  Action has been initiated in all these areas, and it is hoped that, with the help ofstricter accounting and prudential standards, the problem of NPAs in future will beNPAs is also tied up with the issue of legal reform.  This is an area whichrequires urgent consideration as the present system, involving substantial delays in arriving ata legal solution of disputes, is simply not tenable. It is hoped that recent efforts, such asestablishing more Debt Recovery Tribunals and setting up of Settlement AdvisoryCommittees in banks, would help.  However, there is an urgent need to institute a properlegal framework to ensure expeditious recovery of debt and give adequate legal powers tobanks to effect property transfers. The absence of quick and efficient system of legal redressconstitutes an important “moral hazard” in the financial sector as it encourages imprudent45. In order to allow for growth in their assets in line with real growth in the economy, banksand financial institutions would need to increase their capitalisation quite substantially in thenext few years.  At present, the minimum shareholding by the Reserve Bank in the StateBank of India, prescribed by legislation, is 55 per cent.  The minimum percentage ofshareholding by Government in public sector banks is 51 per cent.  So far, a number of strongbanks have been able to access capital markets to meet their capitalisation requirements inline with prudential guidelines.  Some of these banks, including SBI, now have limited scopeto raise further capital from the market within the prescribed floor of RBI and Governmentshareholdings. If the risk weighted assets of these banks grow in line with the growth in theeconomy in the next five years, additional capital requirements of these banks may exceed,000 crore.  As against this requirement, the headroom available for these banks to raise,000 crore.  After  allowing  for additional infusion ofreserve capital through  internal generation  and  access  to  subordinated  debt, the  gapbetween their additional capital requirement and the leeway available to raise capital from themarket will still remain quite sizeable.capital from the market is less than Rs.1Rs.10borrowing.44. The problem of effectively contained.46. In this situation, an issue that needs to be debated and resolved is whether this gap shouldbe filled by contribution from the Reserve Bank (in the case of SBI) and Government (in thecase of other public sector banks) or whether legislative ceiling for capital to be subscribedby the public should be raised.  The provision of additional capital by the Reserve Bank istantamount to additional monetisation, and its monetary impact is equivalent to that ofprinting additional currency. Contribution to banks’ capital by the Government has a similareffect as it will add to Government’s deficit, which is already very high. Government, in anycase, would need to provide additional capital to weak banks, which are not in a position toraise capital on their own.  Does it make economic or fiscal sense to add to this burdenfurther? On balance, there seems to be a strong case for raising the legislative ceiling for47. At the same time, it has to be  that in our situation, particularly in view of theneed to give adequate attention to agricultural credit and rural banking as also to maintainpublic confidence in the safety of banks, the public sector character of these banks should notbe given up. Keeping these considerations in view, i.e., those of allowing greater access tomarkets while at the same time maintaining the public sector character of banks presentlyowned by the Government or the Reserve Bank, it may be necessary to prescribe a maximum(at a suitably low level) for shareholding by any single individual or a corporate in publicsector banks. Government may also retain the pre-emptive right to appoint, if itn wishes, the48. Over the years, progressive liberalisation of financial markets and institutional reformshave led to growing inter-links among various segments of financial markets. The emergenceof different types of financial intermediaries, in addition to banks and financial institutions, ishealthy and desirable. A diversified structure contributes to greater stability of the financialsystem in the event of unanticipated problems. Part of the reason why problems in Japan’sfinancial sector have persisted for so long is believed to be due to virtually “Bank-only”7financial intermediation . In India, while there has been progress in developing varioussegments of the markets including money and debt markets, the depth of these marketsremains low and the volumes as well as number of participants are not very large.  Animportant priority for the future is to develop the depth and breadth of these markets and toallow multiplicity of intermediation possibilities with different risks and leverage profiles.RBI will continue to work with financial experts and market participants to develop an49. We also have to devise measures to make our interest rate structure more flexible in orderto take account of changes in economic cycles and the inflation outlook.  At present, forreasons which were highlighted in the Mid-term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy inOctober 1999, there are several constraints  which limit the flexibility of interest rates in thebanking sector as well as the rest of the financial sector.  Given the fact that some of theseconstraints are deeply embedded in historical practices, consumer preference and publicsector requirements, it may take some time to fully meet this objective. However, the process50. The above are just a few priority areas which require consideration. These are by nomeans exhaustive. I believe that if we get these right, it would make movement in other areasIV. Conclusionof financial reform speedier and easier.should begin now.appropriate procedural and policy framework to move in this direction.Chief Executive and the majority of the Board members in public sector banks.recognisedmarket participation in equity capital of public sector banks.51. I would like to conclude with a few observations on the second-half of the title of thislecture, i.e., “Which Way Now? ”. At the beginning, as you would recall, I had discussed thechanging perceptions about the role of finance in development in recent years. The change inthe development paradigm from a largely state-directed strategy to a market-oriented one,and the unsatisfactory results of the earlier strategy, highlighted the role of the financialsystem in efficient mobilisation and allocation of a society’s savings.  All over the developingworld, in the last few years, there has been intense activity in reviewing the structure of thefinancial markets and taking measures to 52. Against this background, and against the background of past dissatisfactions with the oldstrategy, it is interesting to note that the record of development in the nineties has been ahighly disappointing one for the developing world as a whole, with two important exceptions– India and China. The nineties – the period of the triumph of capitalism and financialliberalisation -  has seen a growth rate of only 3.2 per cent in world output which is lowerthan the average of 3.9 per cent in the 70s, and not much different from the rate of growth of3.4 per cent in the 80s. This period has also been a witness  to a large number of currencycrises (from the ERM crisis in Europe in the early part of the decade to the Mexican, Russian,Asian and the Brazilian crises recently); substantial swings in exchange rates (including theexchange rate of two leading currencies – the dollar and the yen); run ups in asset pricesfollowed by sharp collapse (for example, in Japan, Nordic countries and Asia); and banking53. My purpose in drawing your attention to this rather disheartening record is not that weshould now return to the old failed strategy. Nor is it to suggest that financial liberalisation ordevelopment of the financial markets are unnecessary. The old strategy collapsed under theweight of its own excesses and contradictions. Similarly, there is no doubt that financialreform and liberalisation of markets are necessary, essential and desirable to derive themaximum advantage from the momentous changes that are taking place in technology,international movement of capital, and comparative advantage of nations. My purpose inhighlighting some of the problems that have emerged in the world economy in the 90s is tounderscore simply one point, and that is that we must not confuse  “means” with “ends”.Financial reforms and liberalisation of markets are the means to an end, and not ends inthemselves. The final objective of a successful development strategy remains what it hasalways been – a sustained and rising income for all the people, and removal of poverty,54. While we must remain steadfast in our pursuit of financial sector reforms, the success ofthis process should not be viewed from the angle of how much freedom it allows to themarket players. The real test is how much benefit all this brings in terms of development,including greater employment opportunities and poverty alleviation for those who do notparticipate in the markets. It will also be wrong to view financial reforms as antithesis ofGovernment’s role in development or the role of public policy in widening social choices andopportunities. In developing countries, with massive illiteracy and underdevelopment ofinfrastructure, Government will continue to have an important and crucial role in creating thenecessary conditions for growth through investments in areas, such as, education, health,water supply, irrigation and infrastructure, etc.  These and similar tasks cannot be fully takenover by the market. Successful financial reforms must result in strengthening the ability ofgovernments to do what they need to do by helping to generate higher growth, higherrevenues and higher productivity. In developed countries, the so-called “potential output” ofdeprivation and illiteracy within a reasonable period of time.crises in almost all the regions of the world.liberalise and broaden them.the economy, whatever its estimated level, can be left to be realised by changing theparameters of financial and monetary policy. In developing countries, the main challenge isto raise the level of potential output by removing the constraints of infrastructure and lowhuman resource development.55. Which way now? Alongside financial reform and development of markets, I would urgethat the country’s attention must also turn to fiscal empowerment of the state andimprovement in public administration.  This College  has contributed enormously toinculcating a public service culture in our country, and to train civil servants in the highesttraditions of service to the nation.  Yet, more than 50 years after Independence, who can denythat our public offices, including public sector institutions, leave a lot to be desired indelivery of services or in the efficient discharge of essential functions?  A review of our institutional framework, rules, regulations, and accountability of theadministrative organs of the state is now essential.  The focus has to be on what they do forthe people, and not on what they do for themselves. If our public institutions, including thosein the field of education and health, are unable to overcome their inertia, then alternative56. Many of the functions of the state are now left undone or inefficiently done because offinancial stringency at the Centre as well as the States. The dependence on borrowings tofinance even essential expenditure has been increasing year after year leading to a vulnerableand unsustainable fiscal situation.  Without adequate finance, the state cannot fulfil itsdevelopmental role or remove the constraints to country’s potential output.  Pioneering workhas been done by our research institutions, as well as by Central and several StateGovernments, to identify measures that need to be taken to reinvigorate the fiscal system.57. With a revitalised fiscal situation and further progress in establishing a forward looking,strong and stable financial system, the first century of the next millennium can truly be acentury of development.Thank you.I am thankful to Dr.A. help in the preparation of this lecture.1Dr.Amartya December, 1983.2Krugman, The Return of Depression Economics, The Penguin Press, London, 1999.3  Labour”,  ManchesterSchool, Vol. 22,   1954.4 MIT Press, Cambridge, 1998.Stream of Windows - Unsettling Reflections on Trade, Immigration, and Democracy, TheBhagwati, “Wheel of Fortune”, New Republic, October 5, 1987. Reproduced in A Jagdish W.A.Lewis “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Paul  ”. See Economic Journal, 1982 in Dublin, “Development: Which way now?Sen in The title of this lecture has been inspired by an address delivered by  of the Reserve Bank of India for their Prasad M.S.Mohanty and Shri We must move decisively in this direction without loss of time.modalities have to be found by Government for delivering these and other services.thorough-going5 For a recent review of the situation in East Asia after two years of the crisis, see P.S. September, 1999.6 For a review of the present position and future agenda, please see Dr.Y.V. on, “Financial Sector Reform: Review and Prospects”, reprinted in Reserve Bank of IndiaBulletin, January 1999.  For a recent review of financial sector issues by experts, seeJ.A.Hanson and S. Kathuria, “India: A Financial Sector For the Twenty-first Century”,Oxford University Press, Delhi, 1999.7 Greenspanata World Bank–IMF Seminar on September 27, 1999,Washington D.C. (mimeo).Remarks by Alan Reddy’s address“South East Asia and the Future of the Global Economy”, World Affairs, New Delhi, July -Jha,
