Mr. Chairman and Friends,I am thankful to the organisers for giving me this opportunity to be with distinguishedCentral Bank Governors and professionals in forex business from South Asia .  Since we metlast in Hyderabad a year ago, the financial world has come out of a serious crisis, perhapswiser and more sober .  We could at this stage, therefore, give some attention to structural anddevelopmental aspects of the external sector – including forex markets .  I, therefore, proposeto share with you the Indian experience in the development of forex markets.A comprehensive blueprint for development of foreign exchange markets in India wasmade in the Report of the Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India, June 1995( Sodhani Committee) .  A review of the status of implementation of these recommendationswould provide an excellent overview of what has been achieved and what is yet to beachieved. Further, the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, August 1997 ( TaraporeCommittee) made some recommendations on financial markets, especially relevant to forexmarkets, and perhaps a brief review of the current status on these would also be informative .The significant features of our forex market are then brought out in this address. Evolvinglinkages between forex markets and other markets will also have to be tracked .  Finally, someaspects of forex markets, especially relevant to our country such as gold import policy andflows from non-resident Indians will be explained. The address will typically conclude with abrief narration of current issues.EvolutionMarket players in forex became active in the seventies, consequent upon the collapseof Bretton Woods Agreement .  However, India was somewhat insulated since stringentexchange controls prevailed and banks were required to undertake only cover operations andmaintain a ‘square’ or ‘near square’ position at all times .  In 1978, the RBI allowed banks toundertake intra-day trading in foreign exchange and a s a consequence, the stipulation ofmaintaining  `square' or `near square' position was to be complied with only at the close ofbusiness hours each day. This perhaps marks the beginning of forex market in India. Asopportunities to make profits began to emerge, the major banks started quoting two-wayprices against the rupee as well as in cross currencies and gradually, trading volumes began to During the period, 1975-92 the exchange rate regime in India was characterised bydaily announcement by the RBI of its buying and selling rates to Authorised Dealers ( ADs)for merchant transactions. Given the then prevalent RBI’s obligation to buy and sellunlimited amounts of the intervention currency arising from the banks’ merchant purchases,its quotes for buying/selling effectively became the fulcrum around which the market wasoperated. The RBI performed a market-clearing role on a day-to-day basis, which naturallyintroduced some variability in the size of reserves. Incidentally, certain categories of currentand capital account transactions on behalf of the Government were directly routed throughthe reserves account.The recommendations of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments(Chairman: Shri C. Rangarajan) provided the basic framework for policy changes in externalsector, encompassing exchange rate management and, current and capital accountincrease.Rangarajan CommitteeDevelopment of Forex Markets: Indian Experience *.  The Report indicated the transition path also. Accordingly, the Exchange Rate Management System involving dual exchange rate system was instituted inMarch 1992, no doubt, in conjunction with other measures of liberalisation in the areas oftrade, industry and foreign investment. The dual exchange rate system was essentially atransitional stage leading to the ultimate convergence of the dual rates made effective fromMarch 1, 1993. This unification of exchange rates brought about the era of market determinedexchange rate regime of rupee, based on demand and supply in the forex market .  It alsomarks an important step in the progress towards current account convertibility, which wasfinally achieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of theInternational Monetary Fund.The appointment of a 14 member Expert Group on Foreign Exchange ( Sodhani Committee)in November 1994 was a follow up step to the above measures, for the development of theforeign exchange market in India. The Group studied the market in great detail and in itsReport of June, 1995 came up with far-reaching recommendations to develop, deepen andwiden the forex market as also to introduce various products, ensure risk management andenable efficiency in the forex market by removing restrictions, introducing new products andThe Sodhani Committee had made 33 recommendations and of these, 25recommendations called for action on the part of the RBI. RBI has accepted and implementedin full or to some degree, 20 out of the 25 recommendations .  In the process, the banks havebeen accorded significant initiative and freedom to participate in the forex market .  Theseinclude: freedom to fix net overnight position limit and gap limits although RBI is formallyapproving these limits, replacing the system of across-the board or RBI prescribed limits;freedom to initiate trading position in the overseas markets; freedom to borrow or investfunds in the overseas markets (up to 15 per cent of Tier I Capital unless otherwise approved);freedom to determine the interest rates (subject to a ceiling) and maturity period of ForeignCurrency Non-Resident (FCNR) deposits (not exceeding three years); exempting inter-bankborrowings from statutory pre- (subject to minimum statutory requirement of 3 percent and 25 per cent  in respect of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio(SLR) for the total net liabilities respectively); and freedom to use derivative products forCorporates also have been accorded noticeable freedom to operate in the forex.  Thus, they are permitted to hedge anticipated exposures though this facility has beentemporarily suspended after the Asian crisis. Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC)account eligibility has been increased and the permissible end-uses widened .  They weregiven freedom to cancel and rebook forward contracts, though currently due to the Asiancrisis effect, freedom to rebook cancelled contracts is suspended while rollover ispermissible. Banks can, however, offer cross-currency options on back-to-back basis.Corporates can also avail of lower cost option strategies like range forwards and ratio rangeforwards and others as long as they do not end up as net writers of options .  Also availableare some degrees of freedom to manage exposures in External Commercial Borrowingswithout having to approach authorities for hedging permission, and to access swaps withrupee as one of the currencies to hedge longer term exposures.marketasset-liability management.emptionsSodhani Committeetightening internal control and risk management systems.Liberalised liberalisationThe Committee recognised that improvements in internal controls and marketstrategies go hand in hand with liberalisation and towards this end, RBI accepted andimplemented several suggestions of the Sodhani Committee .  These include: revampinginternal control guidelines of the RBI to banks and making them available to corporates aswell; putting in place appropriate market intervention strategies to deal with marketdevelopments; adopting internationally accepted documentation standards; framingcomprehensive risk management guidelines for banks; adopting Basle Committee norms forcomputing foreign exchange position limits and recommending capital backing for openpositions; and setting up a foreign exchange market committee to discuss market issues andsuggest solutions.  Recommendation on publishing critical data on forex transactions, hasbeen implemented, and in fact the standards of disclosure by RBI are considered to be veryhigh now.A few recommendations of the Sodhani Committee which have not been implementedinclude, inducting Development Financial Institutions ( DFIs) as full-fledged AuthorisedDealers ( ADs), setting up a forex clearing house, legally recognising netting of settlements,corporates to undertake margin trading and setting up of off-shore banking units inMumbai. Let me briefly dwell on each of these issues .  Induction of DFIs as full-fledged ADsis linked to future role of development financial institutions and indeed the approach touniversal banking . Till then, their activity in the forex market can only be incidental to whatthey are permitted to do as a DFI. The position on setting up of a Forex Clearing House andthe position on setting up of off-shore banking units will be detailed in the  latter part of thisaddress. Margin trading by its very nature is considered to be potentially speculative, andTarapore Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, 1997, had recommended anumber of measures relating to financial markets, especially forex markets. Some of themeasures undertaken in regard to forex may fall short of the indicative quantitative limitsgiven in the Report, but the purpose and the spirit of such measures are in line with therecommendations of the committee. Among such various  measures undertakenare those relating to foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, investment in JointVentures/wholly owned subsidiaries abroad, project exports, opening of Indian corporateoffices abroad, raising of EEFC entitlement to 50 per cent, , allowing acceptancecredit for exports, allowing  to cover forward their exposures in debt and part of theirexposures in equity market, etc. In respect of the recommendations of the Committee todevelop financial markets also, significant progress has been made. In the money market, aspart of improving the risk management, recently, guidelines for interest rate swaps and have been issued to facilitate hedging of interest rate risks and orderly development of thefixed income derivatives market. Measures have also been undertaken to further develop theGovernment securities market. Permission has also been given to banks fulfilling certaincriteria to import gold for domestic sale. As will be explained later in this address, this aspectof gold policy is a major step in bringing off-market forex transactions into forex markets byofficialising import of gold. Efforts are also underway to expedite the implementation of theannouncement made in October 1997 by RBI to permit SEBI registered Indian fundFeatures of Forex Marketmanagers including Mutual Funds to invest in overseas markets subject to SEBI guidelines.FRAsFIIsforfaitingliberalisationTarapore Committeetherefore, has not been seriously considered so far for implementation.permitting There are several features of Indian forex market which, even if well known, requireThe foreign exchange market in India comprises of customers, Authorised Dealers( ADs) in foreign exchange and Reserve Bank of India. The ADs are essentially banksauthorised by RBI to do foreign exchange business. Major public sector units, corporates andother business entities with foreign exchange exposure, access the foreign exchange marketthrough the intermediation of ADs. The foreign exchange market operates from major centres- Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta, Chennai, Bangalore, Kochi and Ahmedabad, with Mumbaiaccounting for the major portion of the transactions. Foreign Exchange Dealers Associationof India (FEDAI) plays an important role in the forex market as it sets the ground rules forfixation of commissions and other charges and also involves itself in matters of mutualinterest of the Authorised Dealers.The customer segment is dominated by Indian Oil Corporation and certain other largepublic sector units like Oil and Natural Gas Commission,  Heavy  Limited,Steel Authority of India Limited,   and also Government of India (for and civil debt service) on the one hand and large private sector  like RelianceGroup,  Group, Larsen and , etc., on the other. Of late, the Foreign InstitutionalInvestors ( FIIs) have emerged as a major component in the foreign exchange market and theyThe foreign exchange market can be classified into two segments. The merchantsegment consists of the transactions put through by customers to meet their transaction needsof acquiring/offloading foreign exchange, and inter-bank segment encompassing transactionsbetween banks. At present, there are over 100 ADs operating in the foreign exchange market.The banks deal among themselves directly or through foreign exchange brokers. The inter-bank segment of the forex market is dominated by few large Indian banks with State Bank ofIndia (SBI) accounting for a large portion of turnover, and a few foreign banks with benefitof significant international experience.In the inter-bank market, SBI along with a few other banks may be considered as themarket-makers, i.e., banks which are always ready to quote two-way prices both in the spotand swap segments. The market makers are expected to make a good price with narrowspreads both in the spot and the swap segments. The efficiency and liquidity of a market areoften gauged in terms of bid-offer spreads. Wide spreads are an indication of an illiquidmarket or a one way market or a nervous condition in the market. In India, the normal spotmarket quote has a spread of 0.5 to one paisa, while the swap quotes are available at 2 to 4paise spread. At times of volatility, the spread widens to 5 to 10 TurnoverThe turnover in the Indian forex market has been increasing over the years. The average dailygross turnover in the dollar-rupee segment of the Indian forex market (merchant plus inter-paise.ElectricalsMarket MakersSegmentsdo account for noticeable activity in the market.Tubro Tatacorporatesdefence Udyog MarutiBharatParticipantsto be recalled comprehensively.bank) was in the vicinity of US $ 3.0 billion during 1998-99. The daily turnover in themerchant segment of the dollar-rupee segment of foreign exchange market was US $ 0.7billion, while turnover in the inter-bank segment was US $ 2.3 billion. Looking at the datafrom the angle of spot and forward market, the data reveals that the average daily turnover inthe spot market was around US $ 1.2 billion and in the forward and swap market the dailyturnover was US$ 1.8 billion during 1998-99.Forward MarketThe forward market in our country is active up to six months where two way quotesare available. As a result of the initiatives of the RBI, the maturity profile has since recentlyIn India, the link between the forward premia and interest rate differential seems towork largely through leads and lags. Importers and exporters do influence the forwardmarkets through availment of/grant of credit to overseas parties. Importers can move betweensight payment and 180 days usance and will do so depending on the overseas interest rate,local interest rate and views on the future spot rate. Similarly, importers can move betweenrupee credit and foreign currency credit. Also, the decision, to hedge or not to hedge exposuredepending on expectations and forward premia, itself affects the forward premia as also thespot rate. Exporters can also delay payments or receive funds earlier, subject to conditions onrepatriation and surrender, depending upon the interest on rupee credit, the premia andinterest rate overseas. Similarly, decision to draw bills on sight/ usance basis is influenced byspot market expectations and domestic interest rates. The freedom to avail of pre/post-shipment credit in forex and switch between rupee and foreign currency credit has alsointegrated the money and forex markets. Further, banks were allowed to grant foreigncurrency loans out of FCNR (B) liabilities and this too facilitated integration as such foreigncurrency demarcated loans did not have any use restriction. The integration is also achievedthrough banks swapping/ unswapping FCNR (B) deposits. If the liquidity is considerable andcall rates are easy, banks consider deployment either in forex, government or money/ repomarket. This decision also affects the Gradually, with the opening up of the capital account, the forward premia is gettingaligned with the interest rate differential. However, the fact remains that free movement incapital account is only a necessary condition for full development of forward and other forexderivatives market. The sufficient condition is provided by a deep and liquid money marketwith a well-defined yield curve in place. Developing a well integrated, consistent andmeaningful yield curve requires considerable market development in terms of both volumeand liquidity in various time and market segments. No doubt, the integration between thedomestic market and the overseas market operates more often through the forward market.This integration is facilitated now by allowing ADs to borrow from their overseasData on Forex MarketsThe RBI publishes daily data on exchange rates, forward premia, foreign exchangeturnover etc. in the Weekly Statistical Supplement (WSS) of the RBI Bulletin with a lag ofone week. The movement in foreign exchange reserves of the RBI on a weekly basis arefurnished in the same publication. The RBI also publishes data on Nominal EffectiveExchange Rate (NEER) and Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER), RBI's purchases andoffices/correspondents and invest funds in overseas money market up to the same amount.premia.elongated and there are quotes available up to one year.sales in the foreign exchange market along with outstanding forward liabilities on reservesetc. in the monthly RBI Bulletin with a time lag of one month. Since July 1998, the ReserveBank of India started publishing the 5-country trade based NEER and REER in addition to36-country NEER and REER in the RBI Bulletin. Way ahead  of many developing andindustrial country central banks, the RBI has been publishing the size of its gross interventionLinkages among Markets and Policy ResponsesSince the int roduction of the reform measures, broad segments of the market, viz.,money market, Government securities market, capital market, and foreign exchange market,have exhibited some degree of integration. The markets have become inter-linked to theextent participants can move freely from one market to another. The linkages between theforex market and domestic markets essentially depend on the foreign currency liabilities andassets banks can maintain and the extent and degree to which they are swapped into rupeesand vice versa . Thus, on the liabilities side, we have foreign currency borrowings fromoverseas offices/correspondents, borrowings for lending to exporters, FCNR-B deposits andEEFC/RFC deposits. These funds can be used either for raising rupee resources throughswaps or for lending in foreign currency. A significant step was taken by the RBI when itallowed banks to lend in foreign currency to companies in India for any productive purposewithout linking to exports or import financing. This effectively meant that companies had thechoice to borrow either in foreign currency or rupees depending on the cost, taking intoaccount both exchange risk and interest cost .   Thus, companies can substitute rupee credit forforeign credit freely. Similarly, exporters also have the ability to substitute rupee credit forThe integration of foreign exchange market with other markets like money market andgovernment securities market meant closer co-ordination of monetary and exchange ratepolicy. For instance, in January 1998, when the foreign exchange market came under severepressure, Reserve Bank of India undertook strong monetary policy measures leading to sharpwithdrawal of liquidity and increase in short-term interest rates. The impact of monetarymanagement was such that by February 1998 orderly conditions were restored in the forexmarket and normalcy was attained in money market. At times of highly speculative exchangerate movements, simultaneous intervention in foreign exchange and domestic market is calledfor to have an immediate strong effect on both the exchange rate and money marketconditions. Thus, to maximise the effectiveness of the foreign exchange market interventionas a signaling device, it is also carefully co- ordinated with monetary management. These co-ordinated intervention strategies require close day-to-day monitoring of the supply of bankingsystem liquidity and an active use of open market operations to adjust liquidity conditions.However, driving a wedge between money and forex markets at times, becomes necessarywhen it is felt that liquidity conditions may put pressure on the forex market, while tighteningThe recent initiatives of RBI to usher in the rupee interest rate derivatives shouldfacilitate the development of rupee term money market and define the rupee yield curveacross maturities. Besides bringing about greater integration of the money and forex markets,the move has set the stage for the take-off of rupee-foreign currency derivatives.liquidity could hurt the real sector.foreign currency credit.(purchase and sale) each  month and its net forward liability position.Some Unique AspectsLiberalisation of gold policy had an indirect but, significant impact on the forexmarket. The logic behind the changes in the gold policy was explained in my earlier speecheson the subjects of capital flight and gold. The major thrust of the liberalisation process in goldpolicy centred around opening up of additional channels of import, a logical consequence ofwhich was the reduction in differential between the international and domestic price of gold.The price differential of gold was as high as 67 per cent in 1992 when the structural reformprocess was initiated; it fell to 6 per cent by the end of 1998. The unofficial market in foreignexchange which drew its sustenance from the illegal trade in gold went out of existence as animmediate fall out. In essence, the import of gold which was largely on unofficial account inearlier years, was officialised, and correspondingly the foreign exchange used to finance suchunofficial imports was also officialised, mainly through enhanced flow under account.NRI DepositsVarious deposit schemes have been designed from time to time to suit therequirements of non-resident Indians (NRIs). Currently, we have three NRI deposit schemes,viz., Non Resident External (NRE) account which is denominated in rupees, Non ResidentNon  (NRNR) account, which is non- rupee account except for theinterest component which is , and the Foreign Currency Non Resident (Bank)(FCNR-B) account which is a foreign currency account.  Banks have also been allowedconsiderable freedom in deployment of these funds. Of interest to forex markets is theoperation of FCNR-B scheme, because banks have to bear exchange risk.   Banks either holdthese deposits in foreign currency investing them abroad or lend in foreign currency tocorporates in India or swap into rupees and lend to Indian corporates in rupees. Whencorporates borrow in foreign currency, there is an inflow into the market but there may behedging by corporates.  When banks swap into rupees and lend, there is an impact on forexmarkets but forward premia and lending rates in rupees are critical.  Thus, tracking the use offorex markets.Public EnterprisesOperations of large public sector undertakings have a significant impact especially onspot market, and their procedures for purchase or sale of  foreign currency also impact onmarket sentiments. To this end, and in order to enable Public Sector Enterprises ( PSEs) toequip themselves in formulating an approach to management of foreign currency exposurerelated risks, the Government of India had set up a Committee in January 1998. The Reportof the Committee explicitly brings out the approach that is appropriate for risk managementwith reference to the foreign currency exposure of  PSEs . PSEs with large volume of foreignexchange exposure were also advised by the Committee to consider setting up Dealing Roomfor undertaking treasury functions both for rupee and foreign exchange which includemanagement of rupee resources, foreign exchange transactions and risk management.Adoption of approaches recommended would enable the PSEs to spread their demand andsupply in forex market, in a non-disruptive way to the benefit of both the PSE concerned andfunctioning of forex market in India.FCNR (B) deposits is essential in appreciating repatriablerepatriable RepatriableinvisiblesGold PolicyOff-shore Banking UnitsThe setting up of Off-shore banking units at this advanced stage of financialliberalisation in our country is considered by many to be unnecessary and that the time for anoffshore banking unit has gone.  In a country of our size, the issue of linkages between shore sector and the domestic sector is undoubtedly an important one. We need to make aclear distinction between the financial issues and the non-financial issues on the subject.From the central bank's perspective, designing appropriate regulatory framework is importantand the most important issue is ensuring of a firewall between the off-shore transactions anddomestic transactions. Physical location is not relevant, especially when deposit taking andcash transactions are not permitted in off-shore business .  In fact, we do not have a goodmodel of real off-shore centre in a country with capital controls. Confederation of IndianIndustry ( CII) with assistance from the Government of Maharashtra is engaged in a detailedstudy of the various issues to make recommendations to the RBI and the Government ofClearing HouseThe idea of establishing a Forei gn Exchange Clearing House (FXCH) in India wasmooted in 1994. The Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India also recommendedintroduction of foreign exchange clearing and making netting legally enforceable. TheScheme was conceived as multilateral netting arrangement of inter-bank forex transactions inUS dollar. The membership would be open to all ADs in foreign exchange participating in theinter-bank foreign exchange market. RBI will also be a participating member. The netposition of each bank arrived at the end of the trading day would be settled through aClearing Account to be maintained by RBI.  It was recognised that a substantial reduction innumber of Nostro account transactions of the participating banks would lead to economy insettlement cost and efficiency in settlement. Other benefits include easing the process ofreconciliation of Nostro accounts balances by banks, reduction in size of credit and liquidityexposure of participating banks and hence systemic risk, etc. The long-term objective is toestablish clearing house as a separate legal entity with risk and liquidity managementfeatures, infrastructure and operational efficiency akin to other leading clearing systems.However, to start with, we may aim at commencing the operation with such minimummodification to the scheme as may be necessary. For the present, the focus areas are legal,risk and liquidity aspects and operational infrastructure, and all these issues are underRole of FEDAIIn a regime wh ere exchange rates were fixed and there were restrictions on outflow offoreign exchange, the RBI encouraged the banks to constitute a self regulatory body and laydown rules for the conduct of forex business .  In order to ensure that all the banksparticipated in the arrangement, the RBI placed a condition while issuing foreign exchangelicence that every licensee agree to be bound by the rules laid down by the banker’s body –the FEDAI .  FEDAI also accredited brokers through whom the banks put through deals.There is increasing emphasis now on competition, and fixing or advising charges byprofessional bodies is being viewed with disfavour and often treated as a restrictive tradingpractice. It is currently argued by some that with the growth in volumes and giant strides intelecommunication, banks may no longer need to deal through brokers when efficient matchmaking arrangements exist. As in some other markets, the deals are concluded on the basis ofIndia.examination in the RBI.off-voice broking and it is sometimes held that this often results in conclusion of deals which areless than transparent, evidenced by instances where deals have been called off on payment ofdifferences .  Under the circumstances, there is perhaps a need to review several aspects, viz.,compatibility of advising or prescribing fees with pro-competition policy; role of brokers;electronic dealing vis-à-vis voice broking; and relationship between the RBI, FEDAI andauthorised dealers.IssuesBefore concluding this narration of experience, it is proposed to list b riefly the issuesthat require further consideration.First, there are some limits on freedom accorded to banks, such as ones on borrowingand investing overseas; ceilings on interest rates and maturities of non-resident foreigncurrency deposits; and these could be reviewed at appropriate time, with a view toSecond, the medium-term objective of reducing cash reserve requirements to theminimum prescribed in the statute and the longer term objective of proposing amendments tothe statute to make all the reserve requirements flexible will be pursued, consistent withdevelopments in fiscal and monetary conditions.Third, the restoration of freedom to corporates to hedge anticipated exposures iscontinuously under review. However, the issue of restoration of facility to rebook cancelledcontracts needs to be reviewed with caution.Fourth, the extension of facility of forward cover to FIIs is also under continuousFIIs.Fifth, trading in derivatives is a desirable objective, but a number of preconditions areto be satisfied in the matter of institutional as well as regulatory arrangements. This is aSixth, setting up a forex clearing house is on the agenda and it is essential to design iton par with other leading clearing systems in the world.Seventh, a number of recommendations of Tarapore Committee have been accepted,and others are also reviewed from time to time. A view will have to be taken on each one ofthem only in the context of overall liberalisation of capital account, which in turn, dependson, among other things, progress of our financial sector reforms and evolving internationalEighth, development of deep and liquid money market with a well-defined yield curvein place is an accepted objective of RBI. The actions taken and those contemplated toperform this hard task have already been articulated in my earlier speeches on money anddebt markets, and the recent Monetary and Credit Policy Statement of April 1999 hasprovided evidence of RBI's approach in this regard.financial architecture.complex task, but certainly is on the agenda of reform.utilised by review, though facilities available now are yet to be fully liberalising them prudently.Ninth, implementation of the recommendations of the Report on Public SectorEnterprises will facilitate the efficient management of their foreign currency risks and alsoeven out lumpy demand and supply situations in the forex market.Tenth, while there is a dominant view that setting up Mumbai as an off-shorecentre is no longer a necessity, the views of CII, which is posing the issue, may haveEleventh, in any effort to develop markets, role of self regulatory bodies is critical.The role of FEDAI in achieving greater competition, efficiency and transparency in the forexmarkets needs to be reviewed on a continuous basis, so as to keep pace with developments intechnology and financial sector reforms.Twelfth, a number of legislative changes are under contemplation, and of these theones relating to Foreign Exchange Management and Money Laundering are critical todevelopment of forex markets. Harmonisation between existing institutions, regulations andpractices, including transition path to new legislative framework would be a significant taskThirteenth, several representations have been received by Regulations ReviewAuthority to simplify, streamline and rationalise some of the regulatory and reportingrequirements pertinent to foreign exchange. The RRA should be taking a final view in thematter, on the basis of expected report of group of Curiae, within a few weeks.Fourteenth, in the area of technology, on-line connectivity has been initiated inrespect of data transmission by market to the RBI. Once this system is fully established, itwill lead to a very prompt and effective on-line monitoring by RBI as well as reduction inmultiplicity of reporting statements. Similarly, initiatives are underway to expedite backoffice linkage between banks themselves and with RBI for settlement, which will fructifyConclusionTo conclude, the medium-term objective of developing an efficient and vibrant forexmarket continues to be an important priority within the overall framework of development offinancial markets. Naturally, the pace and sequencing have to be determined by both thedomestic and international developments. In particular, the unique features of Indian forexmarkets, legal, institutional and technological factors, and developments related to macro-economic policies would govern the path of moving towards the medium-term objective,without sacrificing freedom in tactical measures to respond to unforeseen circumstances inthe very short-term.rd* Keynote Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, at the 3 South Asian Assembly, at Katmandu, Nepal, on September 3,1999. Dr.Reddy is thankful to Shri. G.Padmanabhan Shri.G . and  Dr.A.Prasad for their assistance.Mahalingam ,  once the VSAT is fully operational.Amicus in the context of forex market development.to be awaited and considered seriously.financial 
