Reforms : An UpdateMr. I am happy to be here again in this gathering of friends in the banking communityon the occasion of the annual general meeting of the Indian Banks’ Association andBankers’ Sports Board.  I feel that it is more an occasion to conduct focussed businessand celebrate rather than one to deliberate on policy issues.  Yet as per tradition, I believethat there has to be an address by the chief guest.  As a central banker, one always has toseriously consider market expectations and sometimes respond positively, even ifThe vision of the Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) is stated to be “to workproactively for the growth of a healthy, professional and forward looking banking andfinancial services industry, in a manner consistent with public good”.  The critical wordsare: ‘proactively’ and ‘public good’ and it is in this light that Reserve Bank of India(RBI) has consistently interacted with IBA.  I would like to place on record, on behalf ofRBI, and on my own behalf, the impressive achievements of IBA during the past oneyear and also the spirit of active cooperation extended by IBA in the whole process ofreform of the financial sector.  In particular, RBI had the benefit of IBA’s advice onseveral regulatory reforms and also in the work of the Regulations Review Authority.The RBI is always with you, “proactively” in the cause of “public good”. While talkingof serving “public”, I am reminded of what our Professor in the then National Academyof Administration told us, the civil service probationers on training, 37 years ago.  Hesaid that civil servants are public servants and that they should serve the public, andadded that civil servants should remember that public are those who are not in civilservice!  Often, in many of our public systems, and perhaps in all large organisations, lotof attention is given to house keeping and staff welfare often overlooking the broaderpurpose for which the Of course, in a competitive environment that is evolving in the financial sector,banks and other financial intermediaries are compelled to place the cost and quality ofdelivery of services at the forefront.  This is a healthy development, in which the RBI,Government of India and members of IBA have a stake.  In this spirit, I will recall andshare with you important issues that have been addressed by each of the threestakeholders in the recent past.  Of course, the narration is illustrative and not exhaustiveFirst, the status of pursuit of medium term objective of reducing through both CRR and SLR.  SLR has been brought down to the statutory minimum.Progress in reduction in CRR continues to be closely related to the pace of reduction infiscal deficit, monetary developments vis-à-vis growth in real output, and uncertainties inforex markets.  On all these fronts, greater comfort in the past could have helped morerapid reduction in CRR, to achieve the medium term objective.  In a structural sense, RBIhas since progressed in the pursuit of the objective viz. proposal to amend the lawrelating to preemptions to give flexibility to RBI to bring the CRR and SLR even below 3per cent and 25 per cent, as and when rendered possible.preemptionsReserve Bank of Indiaand covers the last couple of years.organisation itself exists.somewhat unpredictably!Krishnamurthy and friends, Kohli, Mr. Financial Sector In a procedural sense, significant progress has been made in the prescribedThe medium term objective of reducing pre- emptions and imparting a greaterflexibility and simplification of procedures continues to be at the top of the RBI’s agendafor reform. In pursuing this objective, the RBI keeps in view not only the balance sheetsof the banks but also the need to move towards universal banking, and diversifyingfinancial intermediation which is heavily concentrated now in banks rather than non-banks.  Reduction in refinance window and introduction of Liquidity Adjustment Facilityhave provided greater flexibility in this regard, and further progress in these two areas isbound to ensure lesser recourse to Second, on interest rates, the reform objectives in terms of greater deregulationand rationalisation of small savings rates etc. have been achieved to a significant degree.Further progress in deregulation continues to depend on some stability in inflationaryexpectations, which in turn is dependent on credibility of price-stability.  The emphasis infuture has to be to impart greater flexibility to interest rate regimes, in an environment ofreasonable price-stability and a rational tax-regime.   A rational tax-regime in the contextof an appropriate interest regime should factor in several elements viz.  treatment ofinterest-income vis-à-vis dividend income and of contractual savings vis-à-vis marketabledebt-instruments.  The statement of Finance Minister in the latest budget speech that anExpert Committee will be appointed to provide recommendations on the issue of bettersystem for determination of the interest rates governing Provident Funds and SmallSavings is welcome.  It is hoped that the Expert Committee would address broader issuessuch as tax-regimes affecting all forms of savings, especially the possible distortionsbetween debt and equity instruments.  However, interest rate flexibility should not betaken to mean a continuous downward movement in interest rates. In fact, the referencein the Economic Advisory Council Report to stable real rates of interest does imply thatdepending on the inflation rates, the nominal interest rates would move up and down.Furthermore, it is necessary for banks to appreciate the need for reduction in theirinterest-spreads.  Cost of debt-funds to investors can come down, without hurting thesaver, the goose that lays golden eggs, only and only as the interest-spreads of bankingThird, the issues of prudential requirements including those relating to weakbanks, capital adequacy etc.  Here, the public sector banks continue to be on a differentfooting from private sector banks and approaches for reform do vary.  In any case,impressive progress has been made in imparting a supervisory environment conducive toenhancing efficiency while maintaining stability of the system.  The banking system ofIndia has shown remarkable resilience in the face of several challenges and changes inexternal environment.  In the medium term perspective, the main challenge will be tosubscribe to the proposed New Basel Capital Accord meant to replace the existing 1988Capital Accord.  The new Accord is likely to be finalised by the end of 2001 andmandated for adoption by 2004.  It should be clear to all concerned that the new Accordis likely to be more complex and more binding, warranting early and vigorousFourth, the issue of competition between banks and between banks and non-banks, and the related issue of a level playing field.  The RBI’s policy framework inregard to approach to universal banking has already been spelt out. An approach to2preparatory work by both banks and RBI.sector comes down further.preemptions in the conduct of monetary policy.manner of calculating and maintaining the reserve requirements.reform of urban cooperative banks and rural cooperatives has been drawn up with therecommendations of the Madhava Rao Committee and the Jagdish Capoor Committee.There are significant legal and institutional changes that need to be addressed to ensurefurther progress in imparting competition without serious systemic implications,including ensuring availability of adequate credit to rural areas and agriculture.  In fact, inthe recent past, there has been a fast growth in urban banks and perhaps we should focusFifth, improvements in transparency, disclosure standards as also accountingstandards to attain the best international practices.  Since 1998, there have been dramaticdevelopments in this sphere, especially in codifying the international practices andassessing the domestic standards.  RBI has put out for discussion, several reports ofAdvisory Groups on a variety of Standards and Codes, and a road map for bringing aboutchanges is bound to evolve out of these reports.  Of particular interest to IBA are thereports on (1 )  Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies, (2) Payments andSettlement System, (3) Banking Supervision, and (4) Bankruptcy Laws.  These areSixth, on credit delivery systems several procedural initiatives have been taken.The two major areas that need immediate attention to ensure credit delivery are : the fastgrowing services sector and the critical ‘peoples sector’ viz. agriculture on which a largeSeventh, improvements in financial markets.  Over the last three years, impressivegrowth can be observed in all the three segments of financial markets that are of directconcern to the RBI viz. money, government securities and forex.  The markets havegrown in size, depth, instruments and participants while imparting both efficiency andstability to the system.  The next landmark development would be the operation ofClearing Corporation, an organisation being promoted by several banks.  A successfuloperation of the Clearing Corporation would inter alia help quicker forex settlement,enlargement of repo market and retailing of government securities market.  The FinanceMinister in his budget speech has set a clear timetable in this regard.There are some developments in the financial sector, which had not been flaggeda few years ago but have received attention recently. First, changes in Deposit Insurancethat have been proposed by RBI to government.  Second, establishment of a RegulationsReview Authority to review procedural requirements.  As IBA is aware, Master Circularshave replaced hundreds of earlier circulars and these will be updated annually.  Third,setting up of Credit Information Bureau in which some members of IBA had takeninitiative.  Fourth, banks’ foray into insurance business, which has been carefully crafted.Fifth, the extremely complex task of bringing an almost totally unregulated non-bankingfinancial companies sector into a system of focussed regulation of those which acceptpublic deposits.  Sixth, technological upgradation , which has several dimensions.  Theseinclude computerisation in RBI and projects for use of banks and financial institutionsmainly in the areas of payment and settlement as well as public debt office.  RBI alsoclosely monitors upgradation of technology in banks.  Eighth, and a related measureunder implementation is RBI’s Central Database Management System, which willbecome a pioneering project among emerging countries.  Ninth, there has been anincreasing recourse to auditors as a supervisory resource from RBI.  Finally, to monitordevelopments in financial markets and take prompt actions a Financial Markets3part of our population depends.website. already in the public domain through RBI’s on the cooperative bank segment, which should get activated to serve the rural areas.Committee (FMC) has been constituted within the RBI which meets at least once a dayand often several times during periods of excess activity in the financial markets.  TheFMC provides crucial inputs in assessment of short-term liquidity and operation ofLiquidity Adjustment Facility.  FMC also helps in designing of development of financialmarkets.Thus, RBI has not only focussed on a medium term agenda for financial sectorreform outlined earlier but has refined and reoriented the agenda from time to time, asGovernment of IndiaThree broad areas were identified as critical for reform viz. fiscal deficit,legislative changes and structural issues affecting public sector banks. Undoubtedly,Government has devoted some attention in regard to all the three areas, and the measurestaken are well known. Yet, it will be interesting to recall the relevant budgetThe Budget for 1999-2000 concentrated on reform of the banking sector i.e. DebtRecovery Tribunals, restructuring of weak banks, Settlement Advisory Committees, andtax deductibility for provisions made by banks.  The reform of capital markets focussedon UTI and mutual funds but of interest to financial markets was abolition of Stamp DutyThe budget for 2000-2001 carried forward reform on public sector banking byannouncing intention for a more diversified ownership of public sector banks,establishment of Financial Restructuring Authority, debt recovery, etc. Of particularinterest are announcements relating to establishment of a Credit Information Bureau andpossible legislative amendments to accord greater operational flexibility to the RBI.Most important of all was the intention to bring about a Fiscal Responsibility Act.The canvass gets further enlarged beyond public sector banks and fiscalmanagement to development of debt markets and interest rate flexibility in the budget for2001-02.  No doubt, in all the budgets there is progressive liberalisation of capitalaccount.In brief, the budgets over the last three years have contained larger and widerreference to reforms in the financial sector.  The canvass is spreading from banks tofinancial markets. During the period, the regulatory jurisdiction of RBI was fine tunedand clarified through amendments to Securities Contract Regulations Act, and enactmentof Foreign Exchange Management Act.  While these are some of the severalgovernmental initiatives, significant changes in legal and institutional framework arenecessary for further progress in reform of financial sector.Elaborating on issues related to banks, in this gathering would certainly besuperfluous.  Suffice it to say that there has been noticeable progress in respect of all thefour issues flagged before viz. internal control systems, placement and work practices,flexibility in hiring people and use of technology in banks.  However, there is a long wayfor public sector banks to traverse from current industry-wise approaches to bank-wiseautonomy to enhance efficiency and profitability.  It may be worthwhile to chart aroadmap for genuine autonomy for public sector banks consistent with principles of good4pronouncements.corporate governance.Bankson transfer of debt instruments within the depository mode.warranted by developments.In brief, a notable part of agenda for reform has been completed and in theprocess, some items not in the original medium-term agenda became necessary forCurrently, the focus is rightly shifting to legislation, markets, technology andIt is also evident that reforms can succeed only and only if coordinated efforts areIt must, however, be recognized that key to financial sector reform is bankingreform; key to banking reform is public sector banking reform; and key to public sectorFinally, you would appreciate that, by and large, we in RBI try to be aware ofBefore concluding, I must mention that the tasks ahead of you listed by the IBAare appropriate, complex, and urgent.  These are broadly divided into four areas viz.human resources management, technology, structure of banking, and sound banking.  TheBanks’ Sports Board, a relatively recent institution has already impressive achievementsto its credit and is bound to advance the course of national sports in the coming year also.rd* Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 53of the Indian Banks’ Association and the 13 Annual General Meeting of the Banks’ Sports Board on5thMumbai. March 15, 2001 at  Annual General Meetingagain ! Thanking you all I have great pleasure in wishing you all the best on this happy occasion.what is desirable and we are implementing whatever is feasible.banking sector reform is Government’s initiative.made by RBI, Government of India and banks, themselves.beyond banks to non-banks.reform.Conclusion
