*Fifteenth C D Deshmukh Memorial Lecture: Vote of ThanksHonourable Professor Joseph Stiglitz, Governor Dr. Subbarao, distinguishedguests and colleagues from the Reserve Bank.Central banks have come under severe intellectual scrutiny ever since the globalcrisis, even as they have crossed all conventional barriers in responding to the crisis.Monetary policy was partly blamed for the genesis of the crisis, and it continues to beblamed for ineffectiveness in giving us a durable recovery. We need nothing short of arevolution to make monetary policy more relevant. Two major forces playing out sincethe crisis could aid this revolution: First, the innovative response of advanced countrycentral banks to ensure that this time it should be different from the Great Depression.Second, the animated academic debate amongst the best minds in economics and finance,led by Nobel laureates like Prof Stiglitz, to recommend what should be the framework formonetary policy in future?In his opening remarks, Governor Dr. Subbarao discussed the first dimension,which included extensive reliance of advanced country central banks on quantitative andcredit easing measures, operation twist and forward guidance, to escape the   theoreticallimits posed to the conventional conduct of monetary policy by the zero lower bound(ZLB). He noted the far reaching changes emerging in the recent period in monetarypolicy frameworks of advanced country central banks,   with the Fed announcing anexplicit target for unemployment; the Bank of England examining possible replacementof inflation targeting with nominal income targeting, and the Bank of Japan beingexpected to respond to prolonged deflation by accepting a higher explicit inflation target.* Vote of thanks by Shri Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director on the occasion of the Fifteenth C DDeshmukh Memorial Lecture on A Revolution in Monetary Policy: Lessons in the Wake of Global FinancialrdCrisis delivered by Professor Joseph Stiglitz at Mumbai, 3 January 2013.-1-Emerging market central banks, despite the pre-crisis best practices, generallypreferred to continue with multiple objectives, which included financial stability, and alsotried to manage the impossible trinity, with country specific approach to exchange rateregimes and capital account. After the global crisis, the spillovers form ultra-accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies have amplified the challengefrom the impossible trinity, besides increasing commodity price pressures. Governor, Dr.Subbarao, encapsulated in his remarks the complex nature of the issues involved in therecent innovations in the conduct of monetary policy, most of which could beexperiments, and how these may influence the mainstream monetary policy frameworks,going ahead.Here, one has to look up to guidance from eminent thinkers like Prof Stiglitz. Intoday’s CD Deshmukh lecture, he unraveled fifteen attributes for monetary policyarchitecture post-crisis. While each of these recommendations would need to be discussedand understood in the country specific context, some of them are clearly path-breakingand thought-provoking.First, his boarder definition of monetary policy also included financial regulatorypolicy. The argument here is that what matters for the real economy is lending rates andavailability of finance.  While monetary policy affects both, regulation can improve theaccess to credit and terms of credit.Second, faith in the invisible hand and excessive reliance on market efficiencyshould not blind side central banks to the possibility of market failures.Third, a central bank should not be reluctant to use all possible instrumentsavailable at its disposal, constrained by the notion that only rate-based policy is moreefficient.Fourth, macro-prudential regulation is necessary to deal with asset bubbles andmacroeconomic volatility.Fifth, monetary policy should be sensitive to distributional consequences.-2-Sixth, national monetary policy should stand ready to address globalization-induced spillovers, and in this context capital control should very much be a part of thepolicy toolkit.Most of the recommendations of Prof Stiglitz are intuitively appealing to many ofus in emerging and developing economies.  In India, we have a multiple-objectives andmulti-indicators approach to the conduct of monetary policy. While price stabilityremains the dominant objective, financial stability has been recognized an explicitobjective of monetary policy.  We have used macro-prudential measures even before thecrisis as a stabilization instrument. Our approach to financial sector reforms andliberalization of the capital account has been cautious and gradual. We recognize thatimproving access to credit to certain sectors through sector specific policies should beintegral to monetary policy. We are also vigorously pursuing financial inclusion as anintermediate objective to promote inclusive growth.We, in the Reserve Bank, would need to reflect more closely on the key messagesfrom Prof Stiglitz to strengthen the micro-foundations of macro-economic policies. For alarge and diverse economy of over 1.2 billion populations, micro-foundation of monetarypolicy is indeed a major challenge for us.Ladies and Gentlemen, I extend my sincere thanks to Prof. Joseph Stiglitz forhaving accepted our invitation to deliver the Fifteenth C. D. Deshmukh MemorialLecture, and leaving with us very thought provoking ideas, which I am sure would triggerfurther debate and research, not only in the Reserve Bank, but globally.I thank Mrs. Anya Stiglitz for her gracious presence. I thank the family membersof late Dr. C. D. Deshmukh for kindly gracing the occasion.The successful conduct of this programme owes much to the guidance and keeninterest of our Governor, Dr. D. Subbarao, and I thank him for that.I thank all the distinguished invitees present here for attending the function withgreat enthusiasm. I thank all my colleagues from the Reserve Bank for theiroverwhelming participation.  I thank the event management team of the Taj Hotel and allother service providers for their support.  I thank the liaison officers of the Bank for theircooperation.-3-Finally, I must thank Adviser K U B Rao and his team from the Department ofEconomic Policy and Research (DEPR) for meticulously planning every aspect of thisprogramme so well.Thank you all, once again.*****-4-
