*The Importance of Inflation Expectations‘‘Each possesses within himself two antagonistic and foolishcounsellors, whom we call by the names of pleasure and pain…besidesthese two, each man possesses opinions about the future, which go bythe general name of ‘expectations’; and of these, that which precedespain bears the special name of ‘fear’, and that which precedespleasure the special name of ‘confidence’.”Plato, 360 BCI thank Dr. Sesha Iyer and Dr. Pattnaik for the invitation to address this youngaudience. In monetary analysis and policy, inflation expectations play a pivotal role.Recently, in many advanced economies, central banks have substantially expandedtheir balance sheets, which is apparently inflationary. However, central banks in thesecountries allay the inflation concerns by indicating that, despite substantial monetaryeasing, medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored. One inference,therefore, is that inflation in future is unlikely to go up if inflation expectations do notgo up.  In India, we have the opposite problem: elevated current and expected inflationconstrains the Reserve Bank in substantially easing monetary policy. This suggeststhat central banks, assign a significant weight to inflation expectations in theirmonetary policy assessment.How does one define “expectations” which is a behavioural and psychologicalconcept and apply it to economics and practical policy making? This is the theme ofmy talk today.  I will sequence my presentation as follows: first, I briefly review thetheory and practice of defining inflation expectations; second, discuss the measures ofinflation expectations; third, analyse the measures of inflation expectations in India;and finally, conclude with some thoughts on enhancing our understanding of theinflation process and expectations.* Speech by Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India at S.P. Jain Institute of Managementth& Research, Mumbai, 9 November 2012. The assistance by Dr. Praggya Das in preparation of this paper isacknowledged.1Theory and PracticePlato defined “expectations” as “the beliefs about the future” more than 20001years ago which remains valid even today. Such beliefs about the future do affect thecurrent behaviour of economic agents. Therefore, inflation expectations can bebroadly defined as economic agents’ belief or views or perceptions about inflation inthe future.  As humans, our minds cannot escape thinking about the future. In a marketeconomy, almost every economic entity is affected by inflation in some way or other.Hence, it is reasonable to surmise that people form their expectations about inflation.The relevant literature identifies two ways of forming inflation expectations.The first is a variant of adaptive behaviour wherein expectations are formed byextrapolating the past and current experience into the future. Apart from the pastexperience, people do factor in new generally available information. For example, inour case if the monsoon rains are deficient people may expect higher food inflationand, hence, higher overall inflation. At the same time, economic agents learn fromtheir past errors in projecting inflation and take that into account in forming theirexpectations.  However, people may not change their expectations continuously, butmay stagger their revisions periodically.  The key feature of these variants of inflationexpectations is that it is largely backward-looking.The second way of forming inflation expectations in a forward-looking manneris rational expectations. If the economic agents are forming their expectations afterprocessing all available information and also factoring in the reaction function of themonetary authority, it could be considered as rational. In practice, economists derivevalue of expectations from complex rational expectations models.Empirical evidence, however, suggests that expectations are subject tosignificant errors, both in its adaptive form and the rational expectations form. In acomplex and uncertain world nobody possesses perfect foresight. Even our economy,in which we form expectations, operates with several imperfections. It is not possible1 Curtin, R. (2010), “Inflation expectations and empirical tests”, in Inflation Expectations, Peter Sinclair (eds),Routledge.2to devise an economic model that captures all the relevant variables and at the sametime gives accurate predictions about the future.  It may thus be reasonable to assumethat expectations formation is both a process of adaptive learning and boundedrationality.In terms of practice, a steady and low inflation combined with well-anchoredinflation expectations helps the monetary authority in achieving the other objectives ofmonetary policy – such as economic growth and financial stability. The state ofinflation expectations greatly influences actual inflation and, thus, the central bank'sability to achieve price stability. In a paper on inflation expectations, the current USFed Chairman Ben S. Bernanke explained the term “anchored” to mean relatively2insensitive to incoming data. That is, if the public experiences a spell of inflationhigher than their long-run expectation, and their long-run expectation of inflationchanges little as a result, then inflation expectations can be considered as well-anchored. If, on the other hand, the public reacts to a short period of higher-than-expected inflation by marking up its long-run expectation considerably, thenexpectations are poorly-anchored.Price rises reduce the real purchasing power of individuals. Thus, if inflation isexpected to be persistently high, workers bargain for higher nominal wages to protecttheir real income. This creates a pressure on firms’ costs and they may in turn increaseprices to maintain their profits. Independently, the producers’ own inflationexpectations also affect inflation directly by influencing their pricing behaviour. Ifcompanies expect general inflation to be higher in the future, they may believe that3they can increase their prices without suffering a drop in demand for their output .In economic models with rational expectations, the inflation expectations, andhence inflation itself, is an equilibrium outcome, strongly influenced by the public’s2 Bernanke, B. S. (2007); “Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting”, Speech delivered at the MonetaryEconomics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge,Massachusetts, July 10, 2007.3 Driver, R. (2007). “Public attitudes to inflation and interest rates”, Quarterly Bulletin  Q2, Bank of England(pp 208-223).3beliefs about the policy rule followed by the central bank. Following this insight fromthe rational expectations tenet, central banks increasingly communicate their policyreaction function in terms of possible paths for inflation expectations and byestablishing inflation targets, attempting to anchor the public’s long-run inflationexpectations. Since uncertainty about future inflation affects households’ purchasedecision, price stability is described as  an environment where economic agents need4not take into account uncertainty about future inflation in their decision-making .Empirical work from advanced countries suggests that, “successfulmaintenance of price stability requires keeping long-run inflation expectations at the5desired level, as economic shocks and policy mistakes come and go”. Underscoringthe importance of inflation expectations, the Reserve Bank’s Second Quarter Reviewthof Monetary Policy 2012-13 released on 30 October 2012 noted: “A central premiseof monetary policy is that low and stable inflation and well-anchored inflationexpectations contribute to a conducive investment climate and consumer confidence,which is key to sustained growth on a higher trajectory in the medium-term.”Measurement of ExpectationsWhile it is challenging to conceptualise inflation expectations, it is even moredifficult to measure it as it cannot be observed in real time. In order to achieve theirmandate for low and stable inflation, central banks use several methods to measure theprevailing level of inflation expectations. For this, they seek to gain knowledge aboutthe public’s expectations about inflation in addition to the financial market basedmeasures. The measures used by central banks can thus be broadly classified asmarket-based measures and survey-based measures. Let me now turn to some of themeasurement issues.4 Greenspan, A. (1996), ‘Opening Remarks’, in Achieving Price Stability, Federal Reserve Bank ofKansas City, Kansas, pp. 1–5.5 Posen, Adam (2011), ’The soft tyranny of inflation expectations’, Oxonia Distinguished Lecture, Oxford,February 22.4First, inflation-indexed bond is a market based measure of inflationexpectations. It provides protection against inflation. While a conventional bond paysits coupon on a fixed principal amount, the inflation linked bonds provide coupon oninflation-adjusted principal amount. In the recent years, sovereign inflation-indexedbonds have become available in a number of countries and have provided a newinstrument for use in retirement saving. The differential yields between ordinary andinflation-indexed government bonds of similar maturity provide an indication ofinflation expectations.Second, inflation expectations can also be derived from the yield curve ofordinary bonds of different maturities. The expectations theory implies that the shapeof the yield curve depends on the expected pattern of short-term interest rates. Thelong-term interest rates exceed current short-term rates if short-term rates are expectedto rise. The yield curve thus slopes upward. In contrast, long-term interest rates areless than current short-term rates if short-term interest rates are expected to fall. In thiscase, the yield curve slopes downward. The yield curves can thus be used to gaugeinflation expectations.Third, the survey-based approach is the other method of measuring inflationexpectations. Surveys can gauge people’s expectations for inflation by simply askingthem what they expect. The survey-based methods of measuring inflation expectationsare important to policy makers and researchers because they provide data on anotherwise unobservable variable. The surveys cover different target groups ? usuallythey pertain to households or professional forecasters. Most of these surveys presentboth short-term and long-term forecasts on inflation.Fourth, many of the households’ savings and expenditure decisions such aspurchasing perishable and durable goods can be affected by expectations anduncertainty about future inflation. Many countries, therefore, conduct consumersurveys to gauge consumer confidence including inflation expectations. In suchsurveys different sampling techniques such as pure panels and repeat panels are used.5Fifth, the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) is another important sourceto gauge the inflation expectations from analysts. The survey is usually used forforecasting a large variety of macroeconomic variables in addition to inflation, viz.,gross domestic product (GDP), interest rates and the unemployment rate. Asprofessional forecasters process large volume of information and rely on econometricmodels, their forecast of inflation expectations can be considered more rational thanthat of pure households.Measures of Expectations in IndiaI now turn to issues pertaining to measurement of inflation expectations inIndia. In the recent years, the Reserve Bank has been assessing the state of inflationexpectations in the Indian economy through several means. It conducts a series ofsurveys aimed at different economic agents as well as model based inflation forecasts(Table 1). These surveys have evolved over time with periodic refinements. Let megive you some perspective on these surveys.Table 1: Survey-based Inflation ExpectationsYear ExpectationsSurvey Frequency Coveragestarted periodIndustrial 1200-1600Outlook 1998 Quarterly Manufacturing 3-month aheadSurvey companiesInflation 4000 urban3-month ahead  &Expectations Sept-05 Quarterly households1-year aheadSurvey of across 12 citiesHouseholdsQuarterly for nextSurvey of About 304 quarters, next 5Professional Sept-07 Quarterly professionalyears & next 10Forecasters forecastersyearsConsumer 5400 householdsConfidence June-10 Quarterly across 6 metro 1-year aheadSurvey cities6First, the Reserve Bank has been conducting a survey of inflation expectationsof households since September 2005 to get a measure of the public pulse on inflation.The initial rounds of the survey were only qualitative in nature and from therd3 round, questions about expected rate of inflation over the next three months andthnext one year were added. From the 9 round in September 2007, a question on therespondents’ perception of the prevailing inflation rate was also added. A question onstawareness of the public on the RBI’s role to control inflation was added in the 21round in September 2010.Second, the survey presents a measure of households’ present perception ofinflation as well as their expectations about the near future. The inflation expectationssurvey of households is conducted in twelve cities, three each from the north, south,east and west zones covering the major metros from each zone and eight other cities.The 4,000 respondents are chosen within a city in such a manner that a goodgeographical and occupational coverage is achieved. The price expectations aresought in the survey for general prices and for five groups: food products, non-foodproducts, consumer durables, housing and services.Third, the Reserve Bank’s consumer confidence survey gives an assessment ofthe consumer sentiments on prices, as it is an important variable influencing theoverall consumer confidence. The overall consumer confidence is assessed on thebasis of respondents perceptions of the general economic conditions and their ownfinancial situation. The consumer confidence surveys provide a qualitative measure ofconsumers’ price expectation.Fourth, the Reserve Bank has been conducting a survey of professionalforecasters since 2007. The survey covers forecasters that have an established researchset-up and bring out periodic updates on economic developments. These organizationsinclude investment banks, commercial banks, stock exchanges, internationalbrokerage houses, select educational & research institutions, credit rating agencies,securities firms and asset management companies. The schedule covers annual as wellas quarterly forecasts of major macroeconomic variables such as, real gross domestic7product (GDP), savings and capital formation, select financial market variables, fiscaldeficit, policy rates, external sector variables, along with the two key measures ofinflation – the wholesale price index (WPI) and the consumer price index forindustrial workers (CPI-IW). Importantly, the forecasters are also asked to providetheir medium-term (5-years) and long-term (10-years) forecasts of GDP, WPI andCPI-IW.Fifth, apart from the households and the professional forecasters’ inflationexpectations, the Reserve Bank captures another measure of inflation expectations ?those from the producers. These sentiments are captured from a business outlooksurvey which is being conducted on a quarterly basis since 1998. The survey presentsan advance assessment on economic and industrial environment based on thequalitative data collected from select manufacturing companies including theirassessment and expectations on the input and output price behaviour.Finally, the results of the above surveys are used as inputs for monetary policyformulation and are placed on RBI website for public dissemination. Salient featuresof the surveys are also included in the quarterly Macroeconomic and MonetaryDevelopments issued as a companion document to our quarterly policy statements.Trends in expectationsNow I turn to evidence on inflation expectations as revealed by varioussurveys.First, the inflation expectations survey of households seeks information onproduct-wise price expectations.  It can be seen that inflation expectations weredominated by the food price inflation: the prices of food articles drove the sentimentof overall inflation of the households 3-month ahead. The increase in priceexpectations with regard to household durables was the lowest (Chart 1).8Chart 1: Households’ Product-wise Price Expectations- 3 month aheadSecond, similar trend was also observed for households’ 1-year ahead priceexpectations (Chart 2). These results are not surprising considering that food hassubstantial share in the measured relevant price indices: 24.3 per cent in WPI, 35.8 percent in new (base: 2010 = 100) CPI-urban and 56.6 per cent in new CPI-rural.Chart 2: Households’ Product-wise Price Expectations- 1 year ahead9Third, the inflation expectations survey of households uses quota sampling toget adequate representation of the gender, occupational categories and age groups.Empirical validation through a bootstrap confidence interval worked out for theoverall inflation expectations showed that the width of the confidence interval wasquite narrow. Also the size of the confidence intervals increases with the time horizon,indicating that the respondents are more coherent on their perception of the currentand very near term (3-months) inflation than their expectations of near future (1-year).Fourth, the inflation expectations of households, however, are their ownperceptions based on their own consumption basket which may not directlycorrespond to any official measure of inflation. This is reflected in significantheterogeneity across households within the survey. However, to see how the averageexpectations behave compared to the official headline measure of inflation, theseexpectations have been plotted against WPI inflation. While there is a significantdifference in the level of inflation between the headline WPI and the survey, notablyhouseholds’ 3-month ahead inflation expectations have been, by and large, trackingWPI turning points (ex-post) (Charts 3). This suggests that the households’ inflationexpectations are adaptive with significant learning. While households do not revisetheir expectations unless they see changes on the ground, they are willing to changetheir expectations with the actual outcome.Chart 3: Households’ 3-month ahead Mean Inflation Expectations and WPI10Fifth, while the professional forecasters give their immediate term forecast ofinflation, it is also an important source of medium- to long-term inflation forecast. Theforecast of the professional forecasters can be considered rational as they apparentlyprocess all available information including the central bank’s likely reaction functionto arrive at their medium- to long-term inflation forecasts. As regards their short-terminflation forecast, as more information becomes available, the forecasters revise theirforecasts to incorporate the latest information and the revised quarter ahead forecaststend to converge to the actual numbers (Chart 4).Chart 4: WPI and Professional Forecasters’ Quarterly Median WPI Projection1313883 3-2-2WPI 1st Estimate WPI 2nd Estimate1813138833-2-2WPI 3rd EstimateWPI 4th EstimateSixth, professional forecasters’ long-run inflation expectations have beeninfluenced by the trend in actual inflation. In the last quarter of 2007-08, the 5-year(10-year) WPI inflation expectations at 5 per cent (4.5 per cent) was aligned to theReserve Bank’s comfort level. The consumer price (CPI-IW) inflation expectationwas slightly higher at 5.5 per cent (5.0 per cent). With the persistence of near double-digit inflation in 2010 and 2011, the medium- and long-term inflation expectationshave risen. As per the latest survey conducted in the second quarter of 2012-13, the 5-year (10-year) WPI inflation expectations were higher at 6.5 per cent (6.0 per cent).Similar upward movement in inflation expectations with regard to CPI-IW was also11Y-o-y inflation (%)Y-o-y inflation (%)Sep-08Sep-08Mar-09Mar-09Sep-09Sep-09Mar-10Mar-10Sep-10Sep-10Mar-11Mar-11Sep-11Sep-11Mar-12Mar-12Sep-12Sep-12Mar-13Mar-13Sep-13Sep-13Y-o-y inflation (%)Y-o-y inflation (%)Sep-08Sep-08Mar-09Mar-09Sep-09Sep-09Mar-10Mar-10Sep-10Sep-10Mar-11Mar-11Sep-11Sep-11Mar-12Mar-12Sep-12Sep-12Mar-13 Mar-13Sep-13Sep-13seen.  At the same time, the differential between WPI and CPI-IW has also widenedunderscoring the role of higher food prices in expectations formation (Table 2).Table 2: Professional Forecasters’ WPI and CPI Inflation Median ForecastFor 5 and 10 Years AheadActualInflation in next 5 & 10 yearsActualin theNext 5 years Next 10 yearsin theYear Quarter quarterquarter(CPI- CPI- CPI-(WPI)IW) WPI IW WPI IW2007-08 Q46.0 6.3 5.0 5.5 4.5 5.0Q19.0 7.8 6.0 6.0 5.0 5.4Q211.0 9.0 6.0 5.9 5.0 5.02008-09Q38.7 10.2 5.0 5.5 4.5 5.0Q43.7 9.4 5.0 5.9 4.5 5.0Q1 0.8 8.9 5.3 6.0 4.5 5.5Q20.5 11.8 5.5 6.5 4.8 5.82009-10Q3 4.6 13.3 5.5 6.5 4.5 5.3Q49.6 15.3 5.5 7.0 5.0 6.0Q110.5 13.7 6.0 7.0 5.0 6.5Q29.3 10.3 6.0 7.0 5.5 6.52010-11Q38.9 9.2 6.0 7.0 5.3 6.5Q49.6 9.0 6.4 7.0 5.4 6.3Q19.6 8.9 6.3 7.0 5.7 6.5Q29.7 9.2 6.0 7.0 6.0 6.22011-12Q38.9 8.4 6.0 7.0 5.9 6.5Q47.5 7.2 6.1 7.0 5.8 6.3Q1 7.5 10.1 6.2 7.3 6.0 6.82012-13Q27.6 10.1 6.5 7.3 6.0 6.5Seventh, the inflation expectations were, however, significantly less volatilethan corresponding actual rates suggesting that medium- to long-term inflationexpectations remained stable, notwithstanding their recent upward movement (Chart5).12Chart 5: Professional Forecasters’ Long Term Median Inflation ExpectationsEighth, the manufacturing companies’ assessment of changes in selling prices forthe current quarter and expectations for the ensuing quarter obtained from theindustrial outlook survey are well correlated with the year-on-year changes in the6price level of non-food manufactured products (NFMP) component of WPI. Thus thesurvey indicators provide good lead information about the movements in themanufacturing price inflation (Chart 6).6 For the period December 2000 to September 2012, correlation coefficients at 0.64 and 0.75 respectively forcurrent and ensuing quarters, were statistically significant at 1 per cent level.13Chart 6: Output price Expectations of Industrial Outlook Surveyand WPI-NFMP inflationWay ForwardAs I discussed above, the Reserve Bank has developed several measures ofinflation expectations over the last seven years which are providing important inputsfor monetary policy formulation. In order to reinforce this process, I make a fewsuggestions.First, the RBI’s inflation expectations survey of households provides ameasurement of the sentiment of inflation expectations that is essentially urban. Thesurvey can gradually be extended to semi-urban and rural areas of the country toenhance its representation. But considering the strict time schedule in which thesurvey needs to be conducted to feed into the quarterly monetary policy process, itmay be a difficult task to have a true national representation. Moreover, being tooambitious in the scope and coverage of the survey could dilute its quality.Alternatively, an inflation expectations survey of the households for the rural area canbe considered. The sample villages can be drawn from the sampling frame of the newconsumer price index-rural.14Second, governments in many countries have issued inflation-indexed bonds.These bonds apart from providing the investors a hedge against inflation, give anestimate of inflation expectations. In 1997,  India had introduced a variant of inflation-indexed bond where the capital was indexed to inflation. There was no subsequentissue of such bonds due to lack of investor response. Now that we have been through aperiod of above-trend inflation, the appetite for such bonds may have increased.Further, the issuance of such bonds could signal the firm commitment for containinginflation and thereby, inflation expectations as well. It is, therefore, important thatsuch products be introduced in the Indian debt market to get a pulse of the marketbased inflation expectations.Third, while there is substantial research on inflation expectations for advancedcountries, there is hardly any research in the Indian context. Since the Reserve Bankputs in public domain the results of the various inflation expectations surveys, there isavailable data base for research in this area. This will not only help improving thequality of the surveys but also will enhance understanding of the process ofexpectations formulation in the Indian economy. Alongside, financial market variablessuch as yields and futures prices could be analysed to extract market informationabout inflation expectations.ConclusionLet me conclude.First, it is clear that peoples’ belief about future inflation is an important factorin shaping inflation trends. But it is not so clear how these inflation expectations areformed: are they formed purely on the basis of past experience or in a forward-lookingmanner after processing all information or a combination of both? The ReserveBank’s household expectations surveys suggest that expectations are formedadaptively with learning; but here there is a dominance of food inflation in shapingoverall household inflation expectations. Such behaviour of inflation expectationsunderscores the need for the Reserve Bank to continue to monitor in the Indian15context, an array of measures of inflation ? both overall and disaggregatedcomponents, to assess the underlying inflationary pressures.Second, even professional forecasters, who are considered more rational, havemoved up their inflation expectations. This suggests that food inflation is acquiring astructural character feeding into inflation expectations: rather than treating higher foodprices as a temporary shock, households are assessing this as a permanent structuralfactor. This has inflationary implications in terms of higher wage-price spiral. Ifworkers’ and producers’ inflation expectations go up than the latter’s demand forwage increases is more likely to be acceded to by the former.  If such wage increasesare in excess of productivity increase they will be inflationary, making the inflationprocess persistent and raising the costs of disinflation.Third, in 2007-08, professional forecaster’s medium- to long-term inflationexpectations in the range of 4.5-5.5 per cent was well in line with the Reserve Bank’scomfort level and what can be considered growth enhancing threshold level ofinflation. Subsequently, as the actual inflation performance has deteriorated, medium-to long-term inflation expectations have also risen to a range of 6.0-7.3 per cent. Thisunderscores the need that the current level of inflation ought to be brought down tobetter anchor inflation expectations which is vital for maintaining price stability in anenduring manner.16
