C M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Corporate Governance in Banks*V. LEELADHARLet me at the outset commend the achievements of operatives are organised groups of people and jointlyyour bank in almost all the performance parameters. It is managed and democratically controlled enterprises. Theyindeed heartening to see a well functioning and sound exist to serve their members and depositors and producebank in the otherwise none too rosy co-operative sector. benefits for them. Co-operative corporate governance isIn fact, there could have been no better tribute to the therefore about ensuring co-operative relevance andmemory of your great founder Sheth Shantaram Mangesh performance by connecting members, management andKulkarni than to turn in a solid performance year after the employees to the policy, strategy and decision-makingyear, and also at the same time becoming a processes.technologically savvy institution. I congratulate themanagement team and staff of your bank for carryingGENESIS OF C ORPORATE G OVERNANCEforward the vision of your great founder.It will certainly not be out of place here to recounthow issues relating to corporate governance and corporateCORPORATE G OVERNANCE AND CO-OPERATIVE B ANKScontrol have come to the fore the world over in the recentComing to the theme of my lecture today, I deem it a past. The seeds of modern corporate governance wereprivilege to have been invited to address this gathering probably sown by the Watergate scandal in the USA.on a topic of tremendous relevance, focus and significance Subsequent investigations by US regulatory and legislativein today’s context. Needless to say, for the co-operative bodies highlighted control failures that had allowed severalbanks in India these are challenging times. Never before major corporations to make illegal political contributionshas the need for restoring customer confidence in the co- and bribe government officials. While these developmentsoperative sector been felt so much. Never before has the in the US stimulated debate in the UK, a spate of scandalsissue of good governance in the co-operative banks and collapses in that country in the late 1980s and earlyassumed such criticality. The literature on corporate 1990s led shareholders and banks to worry about theirgovernance in its wider connotation covers a range of investments. Several companies in UK which sawissues such as protection of shareholders’ rights, explosive growth in earnings in the ’80s ended the decadeenhancing shareholders’ value, Board issues including its in a memorably disastrous manner. Importantly, suchcomposition and role, disclosure requirements, integrity spectacular corporate failures arose primarily out of poorlyof accounting practices, the control systems, in particular managed business practices.internal control systems. Corporate governance especiallyThis debate was driven partly by the subsequentin the co-operative sector has come into sharp focusenquiries into corporate governance (most notably thebecause more and more co-operative banks in India, bothCadbury Report) and partly by extensive changes inin urban and rural areas, have experienced grave problemscorporate structure. In May 1991, the London Stockin recent times which has in a way threatened the profileExchange set up a Committee under the chairmanship ofand identity of the entire co-operative system. TheseSir Arian Cadbury to help raise the standards of corporateproblems include mismanagement, financial impropriety,governance and the level of confidence in financialpoor investment decisions and the growing distancereporting and auditing by setting out clearly what it seesbetween members and their co-operative society.as the respective responsibilities of those involved andThe purpose and objectives of co-operatives provide what it believes is expected of them. The Committeethe framework for co-operative corporate governance. Co- investigated accountability of the Board of Directors toSpeech delivered by Shri V. Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India on November 27, 2004 at the “Sheth Shantaram*Mangesh Kulkarni Memorial Lecture” organised by The North Kanara G.S.B. Co-op Bank Ltd.1101C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004shareholders and to the society. It submitted its report non-banking and non-finance organisations. In the caseand the associated ‘code of best practices’ in December of traditional manufacturing corporations, the issue has1992 wherein it spelt out the methods of governance been that of safeguarding and maximising theneeded to achieve a balance between the essential powers shareholders’ value. In the case of banking, the riskof the Board of Directors and their proper accountability. involved for depositors and the possibility of contagionBeing a pioneering report on corporate governance, it assumes greater importance than that of consumers ofwould perhaps be in order to make a brief reference to manufactured products. Further, the involvement ofits recommendations which are in the nature of guidelines government is discernibly higher in banks due torelating to, among other things, the Board of Directors importance of stability of financial system and the largerand Reporting & Control. interests of the public. Since the market control is notsufficient to ensure proper governance in banks, theThe Cadbury Report stipulated that the Board ofgovernment does see reason in regulating and controllingDirectors should meet regularly, retain full and effectivethe nature of activities, the structure of bonds, thecontrol over the company and monitor the executiveownership pattern, capital adequacy norms, liquiditymanagement. There should be a clearly accepted divisionratios, etc.of responsibilities at the head of the company which willensure balance of power and authority so that noindividual has unfettered powers of decision. The BoardREASONS FOR HIGH D EGREE OF OVERSIGHTshould have a formal schedule of matters specificallyreserved to it for decisions to ensure that the directionThere are three reasons for degree of governmentand control of the company is firmly in its hands. Thereoversight in this sector.should also be an agreed procedure for Directors in thel Firstly, it is believed that the depositors, particularlyfurtherance of their duties to take independent professionalretail depositors, can not effectively protectadvice.themselves as they do not have adequateThe Cadbury Report generated a lot of interest ininformation, nor are they in a position to coordinateIndia. The issue of corporate governance was studied inwith each other.depth and dealt with by the Confederation of Indianl Secondly, bank assets are unusually opaque, andIndustries (CII), Associated Chamber of Commerce andlack transparency as well as liquidity. ThisIndustry (ASSOCHAM) and Securities and Exchangecondition arises due to the fact that most bankBoard of India (SEBI). These studies reinforced theloans, unlike other products and services, areCadbury Report’s focus on the crucial role of the Boardusually customised and privately negotiated.and the need for it to observe a Code of Best Practices.l Thirdly, it is believed that that there could be aCo-operative banks as corporate entities possess certaincontagion effect resulting from the instability ofunique characteristics. Paradoxical as it may sound,one bank, which would affect a class of banks orevolution of co-operatives in India as peoples’even the entire financial system and the economy.organisations rather than business enterprises adoptingprofessional managerial systems has hindered growth of As one bank becomes unstable, there may be aheightened perception of risk among depositors forprofessionalism in co-operatives and proved to be athe entire class of such banks, resulting in a runneglected area in their evolution.on the deposits and putting the entire financialsystem in jeopardy.THE SPECIAL PLACE OF BANKINGThe banking sector is not necessarily totally corporate.ROLE OF THE GOVERNMENT AND THE REGULATORSome part of it is, of course, but a segment of banks isRegulators are external pressure points for goodmostly government owned as statutory corporations orcorporate governance. Mere compliance with regulatoryrun as cooperatives – just like your bank. Banking as arequirements is not however an ideal situation in itself.sector has been unique and the interests of other stakeIn fact, mere compliance with regulatory pressures is aholders appear more important to it than in the case of1102C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004of Co-operative Societies Act / Rules of the stateminimum requirement of good corporate governance andconcerned and the bye-laws of the respective institutions.what are required are internal pressures, peer pressuresand market pressures to reach higher than minimumstandards prescribed by regulatory agencies. RBI’sBOARD OF DIRECTORS AND THEIR COMMITTEES:approach to regulation in recent times has some featuresthat would enhance the need for and usefulness of goodAt the initiative of the RBI, a consultative group,corporate governance in the co-operative sector. Theaimed at strengthening corporate governance in banks,transparency aspect has been emphasised by expandingheaded by Dr. Ashok Ganguli was set up to review thethe coverage of information and timeliness of suchsupervisory role of Board of banks. The recommendationsinformation and analytical content. Importantly,include the role and responsibility of independent non-deregulation and operational freedom must go hand inexecutive directors, qualification and other eligibilityhand with operational transparency. In fact, the RBI hascriteria for appointment of non-executive directors,made it clear that with the abolition of minimum lendingtraining the directors and keeping them current with therates for co-operative banks, it will be incumbent onlatest developments. Private sector banks, etc. it isthese banks to make the interest rates charged by themunanimously accepted that the most crucial aspect oftransparent and known to all customers. Banks havecorporate governance is that the organisation have atherefore been asked to publish the minimum andprofessional board which can drive the organisationmaximum interest rates charged by them and displaythrough its ability to perform its responsibility of meetingthis information in every branch. Disclosure andregularly, retaining full and effective control over thetransparency are thus key pillars of a corporatecompany and monitor the executive management. Somegovernance framework because they provide all theof the important recommendations on the constitution ofstakeholders with the information necessary to judgethe Board are:whether their interests are being taken care of. We inl Qualification and other eligibility criteria forRBI see transparency and disclosure as an importantappointment of non-executive directors,adjunct to the supervisory process as they facilitatel Defining role and responsibilities of directorsmarket discipline of banks.including the recommended “Deed of Covenant”Another area which requires focused attention isto be executed by the bank and the directors ingreater transparency in the balance sheets of co-operativeconduct of the board functions.banks. The commercial banks in India are now requiredl Training the directors and keeping them abreast ofto disclose accounting ratios relating to operating profit,the latest developments.return on assets, business per employee, NPAs, etc. asalso maturity profile of loans, advances, investments,borrowings and deposits. The issue before us now is howMEASURES T AKEN BY B ANKS T OWARDSto adapt similar disclosures suitably to be captured in theIMPLEMENTATION OF BEST P RACTICESaudit reports of co-operative banks. RBI had advisedPrudential norms in terms of income recognition,Registrars of Co-operative Societies of the Stateasset classification, and capital adequacy have been wellGovernments in 1996 that the balance sheet and profit &assimilated by the Indian banking system. In keeping withloss account should be prepared based on prudentialstthe international best practice, starting 31 March 2004,norms introduced as a sequel to Financial Sector Reformsbanks have adopted 90 days norm for classification ofand that the statutory/departmental auditors of co-operativeNPAs. Also, norms governing provisioning requirementsbanks should look into the compliance with these norms.in respect of doubtful assets have been made moreAuditors are therefore expected to be well-versed withstringent in a phased manner. Beginning 2005, banks willall aspects of the new guidelines issued by RBI and ensurebe required to set aside capital charge for market risk onthat the profit & loss account and balance sheet of co-their trading portfolio of government investments, whichoperative banks are prepared in a transparent manner andwas earlier virtually exempt from market risk requirement.reflect the true state of affairs. Auditors should also ensurethat other necessary statutory provisions and Capital Adequacy: All the Indian banks barring oneappropriations out of profits are made as required in terms today are well above the stipulated benchmark of 9 per1103C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004with improvements in the capability of market players tocent and remain in a state of preparedness to achieveanalyse the information objectively.the best standards of CRAR as soon as the new Basel 2stnorms are made operational. In fact, as of 31 MarchThe off-site surveillance mechanism is also active in2004, banking system as a whole had a CRAR close tomonitoring the movement of assets, its impact on capital13 per cent.adequacy and overall efficiency and adequacy of managerialpractices in banks. RBI also brings out the periodic dataOn the Income Recognition Front,  there is completeon “Peer Group Comparison” on critical ratios to maintainuniformity now in the banking industry and the systempeer pressure for better performance and governance.therefore ensures responsibility and accountability on thepart of the management in proper accounting of income Prompt corrective action has been adopted by RBI asas well as loan impairment. a part of core principles for effective banking supervision.As against a single trigger point based on capita adequacyALM and Risk Management Practices – At thenormally adopted by many countries, Reserve Bank ininitiative of the regulators, banks were quickly requiredkeeping with Indian conditions have set two more triggerto address the need for Asset Liability Managementpoints namely Non-Performing Assets (NPA) and Returnfollowed by risk management practices. Both these areon Assets (ROA) as proxies for asset quality andcritical areas for an effective oversight by the Boardprofitability. These trigger points will enable theand the senior management which are implemented byintervention of regulator through a set of mandatory actionthe Indian banking system on a tight time frame andto stem further deterioration in the health of banksthe implementation review by RBI. These steps haveshowing signs of weakness.enabled banks to understand, measure and anticipate theimpact of the interest rate risk and liquidity risk, whichin deregulated environment is gaining importance.CONCLUSIONIn the years to come, the Indian financial system willMEASURES T AKEN BY R EGULATOR T OWARDSgrow not only in size but also in complexity as the forcesCORPORATE G OVERNANCEof competition gain further momentum and financialmarkets acquire greater depth. I can assure you that theReserve Bank of India has taken various stepspolicy environment will remain supportive of healthyfurthering corporate governance in the Indian Bankinggrowth and development with accent on more operationalSystem. These can broadly be classified into the followingflexibility as well as greater prudential regulation andthree categories:supervision. The real success of our financial sectora) Transparency reforms will however depend primarily on theorganisational effectiveness of the banks, including co-b) Off-site surveillanceoperative banks, for which initiatives will have to comec) Prompt corrective actionfrom the banks themselves. It is for the co-operative banksTransparency and disclosure standards are also themselves to build on the synergy inherent in the co-operative structure and stand up for their unique qualities.important constituents of a sound corporate governanceWith elements of good corporate governance, soundmechanism. Transparency and accounting standards inIndia have been enhanced to align with international best investment policy, appropriate internal control systems,better credit risk management, focus on newly-emergingpractices. However, there are many gaps in the disclosuresin India vis-à-vis the international standards, particularly business areas like micro finance, commitment to betterin the area of risk management strategies and risk customer service, adequate automation and proactivepolicies on house-keeping issues, co-operative banks willparameters, risk concentrations, performance measures,definitely be able to grapple with these challenges andcomponent of capital structure, etc. Hence, the disclosurestandards need to be further broad-based in consonance convert them into opportunities.1104C M Y K
