Developing Government Securities Market : Some IssuesMr. I am happy to be here with you today at the Second in the series of seminars conducted by thePrimary Dealers Association of India. Since I delivered the inaugural address at the first seminarin Chennai last year, the number of Primary Dealers ( PDs) has increased from six to fourteen.I participated in a  Bank for International Settlements meeting last month in which one ofthe subjects related to debt markets. During the discussions, it became evident that after therecent Asian crises, the issue of development of domestic  bond market has gained credence.Many central banks of emerging markets have recently shown interest in developing their debtmarkets. They were appreciative of the fact that we in India concentrated on financial sectorreform early in the reform cycle, and we are focussing not merely on development of equitymarkets but also on debt markets, especially Government Securities market.Among the initiatives taken by Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in developing theGovernment Securities market, undoubtedly the institution of PDs is very significant. The RBIinitially promoted and owned a primary dealership; and within a few years, divested itself ofcontrolling interest. Soon, domestic financial institutions  promoted  some  Primary Dealerships.More  recently, we  have  PDs  with benefit of international experience. The RBI believes thatthis is an appropriate path and pace for bringing about gradual but speedy and sustainable reformin the financial sector.The RBI has been closely coordinating with Primary Dealers on a number of policy andoperational issues, both through continuous consultations with the Primary Dealers and throughMr. Ramesh’s membership in the Technical Advisory Committee on Financial markets. And, Imust place on record that we are appreciative of the contributions. Together, we are ahead on thelearning curve in this regard, and we will continue to learn from the experience gained from ourLet us briefly recall the objectives of reforms relating to the Government Securitiesmarket in India since 1991-92.  First, reform has aimed at increasing the operational autonomy ofthe RBI by measures such as abolition of automatic monetisation through Ad Hoc Treasury Billsand introduction of a system of Ways and Means Advances for the Central Government. improvements in institutional infrastructure were sought to be achieved through the system of. Third, the breadth and depth of markets were sought to be improved by introduction of avariety of new instruments (fixed coupon, floating rate, capital indexed bonds, T-Bills of14/91/182/364 Day T-Bills, Zero Coupon) and improvements to market microstructure (yieldbased and price based auctions, tap loans, pre-announcing notified amounts, non-competitivebids outside notified amounts, reissue of dated securities, announcing calendar of T-Bills, DVPsystem, underwriting by , liquidity support). Fourth, progress in enabling sound legal andregulatory framework has been demonstrated by the Amendment to Securities Contracts(Regulation) Act and proposals for introduction of Government Securities Act. Fifth, technologyPDsPDsSecond,Developments in Government Securities Marketown reform process and from the international experience.So, let me welcome the new additions to the family at this Seminar.Ramesh and friends,related developments include initiation of computerisation of all Public Debt Offices of RBI andof real time gross settlement system. Finally, in RBI and in its relations with market participants,high on the agenda are, improvements in transparency and introduction of standardised codes formarket practices, for example, through dissemination of information by RBI, monitoring ofstandardised accounting norms.Before I dwell on reviewing progress in reforms, I would like to spend a few moments onreviewing the management of the market borrowing programme during the current year, inThe market borrowing programme during the current year has been large and there wereoccasions when the RBI had  accepted  private placements that were later released to the marketwhen interest rate expectations became favourable. Some PDs have expressed that this strategyhas deprived them of business, but such a decision has always been taken by us after assessmentof the market situation and in my view it has minimised the risk on PDs.  During the year, weprolonged the maturity structure and thanks also to the role played by PDs , it has been possibleto elongate the maturity to 20 years. Over 60 per cent of the dated Government Securities issuedduring 1999-00 had a maturity of 10 years or above. As a result, the weighted average maturityduring the current fiscal year so far increased to 13.03 years as compared with 7.07 years duringthe corresponding period of the previous year.  Another noteworthy aspect of the internal debtmanagement operations has been the shift from yield based auctions to price based auctions. Thishas resulted in a number of beneficial impacts. First, with larger amount of outstanding stock ineach security, the liquidity in  these securities has improved. Second, it has led to a moreefficient price discovery process in primary auctions as reflected by the considerable narrowingin the range of bids in yield terms. Third, the opportunity of reopening existing issues has beenused to undertake passive consolidation of debt, which has resulted in evolution of benchmarkFor record, let me narrate the specific reform measures relating to the market that havebeen implemented during the current year. These are : apart from price based auctions,reintroduction of auction of 182-Day Treasury Bills, issuing a calendar of T-Bills issuance, asystem of minimum bidding commitment of PDs to cover 100 per cent of notified amounts in T-Bills auction, underwriting by PDs of 100 per cent of notified amounts in respect of datedGovernment Securities, permission to non-banking entities to borrow and lend money in the repomarket and availment of special ways and means advances by State Governments againstA number of other reform measures are in different stages of implementation and thePrimary Dealers Association is actively involved in most of them. It is useful to recall the statusRepo MarketA sub-Group of the Technical Advisory Committee on Government Securities Markethad prepared a Technical Paper on Repos, which had been circulated among major players in themarket for comments. Three of the recommendations of the sub-Group were announced for2Widening the and flag issues for further consideration.Progress in Reformscollateral of T-Bills in addition to dated   securities.securities and also improved the liquidity in the market.PDs are closely involved. which both the RBI and market activities and encouraging implementation in the monetary and credit policy of April 1999. These related to permitting non-bank entities who were hitherto permitted to undertake only reverse repos to borrow moneythrough repos; issuing clarifications regarding maximum period for repos and allowing repos tobe undertaken in all PSU bonds and  bonds issued by corporates and financial institutions held inrecognised stock exchanges.In order to operationalise the recommendation relating to widening the repo market,another sub-group was constituted to go into the legal and regulatory aspects of setting up aClearing Corporation. The sub-group is in the final stages of submitting its Report. Once theClearing Corporation is established , it will pave the way for introduction of over-the-counter andtripartite repos. I would appreciate your views on the scope and modalities for such a ClearingIncidentally, we are vigorously pursuing with the Government , the issue of clarificationdematerialisation.There are a number of other recommendations of the sub-group on repos that deal withexisting systems and procedures in the context of standardised practices and uniform codes.These relate to uniform accounting practices, master repo agreement, code of conduct for etc.I would urge the Primary Dealers Association and FIMMDAI to coordinate andimplement these recommendations as quickly as possible, since as I understand, these are issuesA landmark development in the regulatory framework in financial sector relates to recentamendments to Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act 1956. With the amendment, it is possibleby Government to delegate some responsibilities to the RBI.These amendments would help RBI put in place, from time to time, appropriateregulatory framework, keeping in view rapid changes in financial institutions, instruments andpractices governing money, Government Securities and forex markets, apart from gold-relatedfinancial products. With the delegation of powers by Government to RBI in these matters, theprocedural delays and constraints can be eliminated.There are two major issues in regard to regulation in financial sector, which needattention. The first relates to regulation of private placements in debt markets. There are severalpossibilities and these are being explored by a Technical Committee. I hope these would beresolved soon. Recognising the urgency, RBI has been highlighting this issue in the last coupleof years and more recently, the unregulated nature of the private placement market has come infor adverse notice among international financial analysts. The second relates to regulatory gapsand overlaps in financial sector, which could be resolved by formalising, with some changesthrough a statute, the Informal High Level Committee on Capital Markets. If you are interested3in details, you may seek them during technical discussions and oblige us with your comments.Legal and Regulatory Issueswhere participants themselves can work out the modalities for implementation.repos,Standardised Practices and Uniform Codeson applicability of stamp duty to enable widespread Corporation.dematerialised form in On the repeal of the Public Debt Act 1944, and the introduction of the GovernmentSecurities Act, the draft Bill has been circulated to state Governments for concurrence. The RBII am sure you would also be interested in early passage of this Bill. We have  beenassured of early action by Ministry of Finance, Government of India and Finance Secretaries ofThe RBI has just commenced a project for complete automation of the operations ofRBI’s Public Debt Office. It will  provide for connectivity between different PDOs, and facilitateon-line screen based execution for trade settlement in Government Securities transactions. Theproject will be implemented in phases.  The first phase will cover the PDO  atMumbai and facilitate screen based negotiated dealings in Government securities and moneymarket instruments, tendering of screen based applications in auctions, full-fledged audit trail,debt servicing, information dissemination, price list for open market operations, centralinformation system for access by monitoring and regulatory authorities, etc. It is expected thatthe first phase will be operationalised well within a year. In the second phase, other regionalPDOs would be linked with the central PDO system. This phase will facilitate  active openmarket operations of RBI through all regional PDOs.  The entire project is expected to beoperationalised in about a year. The RBI is also separately putting in place real time grossDo let us know if you have any suggestions to make in this regard and we will considerThe growth in the Government Securities market has perhaps not been adequatelyreflected in the depth of the market as the main investors continue to be commercial banks,insurance companies and provident funds. Consequently, the retail segment of the market has notdeveloped. While alluding to this issue in my earlier speeches, I had noted that there is aninherent potential for households to diversify their investment portfolio encompassingGovernment Securities. With this in view, commercial banks were given the facility of a secondSGL account to enable them to hold Government Securities on behalf of customers in safecustody in demat form. The feedback received is that many large banks with country widenetwork have yet to make this facility available to their branch customers. Similarly, not muchheadway has been made in retailing Government stock by NSE, NSDL and NSCCL, which werealso given the facility of a second SGL account.We in RBI are totally convinced that there is need to promote and publicise gilts as aninvestment instrument and we would greatly appreciate your cooperation in this endeavour.There is scope to reduce cost of borrowing to Government by retailing and the investors,4Retailing of Government SecuritiesNow, I will turn to some other issues that are currently engaging our attention.Current IssuesPDs is very critical. them seriously - since close interaction between the Public Debt Offices and settlement system, which is scheduled to be operational within the same time frame.computerisationTechnology IssuesState Governments.is following up vigorously with the Central/State Governments to obtain their approval.especially small investors, will benefit by access to safe gilt edged securities. I am sure there isgood business potential for PDs also.Currently, the counterparties to PDs in the secondary market are  predominantly themselves and commercial banks. But, we understand that many urban and other cooperativebanks are maintaining deposits with eligible institutions to comply with SLR stipulations merelybecause they are easily not  able to find Government Securities. NBFCs also seem to be facing asimilar problem. RBI would urge that PDs take special efforts to satisfactorily meet the  demandIn a competitive environment, considerations of safety, liquidity and reasonable returnappeal to retail investors and  Primary Dealers should take up the task of building up awarenessregarding these characteristics in Government Securities among retail investors. We hope thatthe Primary Dealers Association would be more proactive in publicising the advantages ofDespite my repeated requests, I have not seen brochures or advertisements issued by thePrimary Dealers Association on the Government Securities market. Permit me to reiterate thatendeavour.It is recognised that there are a few structural and tax issues that render GovernmentSecurities somewhat unfavourable as compared with other financial instruments available tosavers. First, the rates of interest paid on small savings and tax exemptions available to suchinstruments cause a dampening impact on retailing of Government Securities, and also increasethe cost to Government. Secondly, interest income from Government Securities are subject to taxbeyond a certain level, while for some other instruments, such a ceiling does not exist. It can beargued that exemption from dividend tax for Gilt Funds are justifiable on the same lines of equitymutual funds. Of specific interest to PDs is the matter relating to tax deduction at source on theinterest income earned on call/term/notice money transactions . Let us hope that these matterswill be resolved soon.Consistent with developments in financial sector reform, the RBI has taken a fewimportant initiatives with respect to state finances. First, the RBI has been holding periodicmeetings with State Finance Secretaries, where important policy issues are discussed. Second, inorder to reflect market realities, currently, the coupon rate for State Government Securities isbeing pre-determined at about 25 basis points over the coupon rate for Central GovernmentSecurities of similar maturity. However, financial markets are becoming conscious of the levelsof fiscal management of different states. Further, under the current system, there is no scope forbetter managed States to access funds at competitive rates of interest. Third, an option was givento the State Governments to enter the market through a flexible approach on their own to theextent of 5 to 35 per cent of their gross borrowings. Some States have already exercised thisoption. The ultimate aim is to make all the States raise the entire market borrowings in a flexible5manner.Auction Based Market Borrowings of State Governmentsthe RBI is willing to extend full cooperation to you in this holding Government Securities.of this segment.PDsSome State Governments have indicated that they would like PDs to play a larger roleand PDs may also find substantive business opportunities in this process. I would urge PDs todiscuss this subject in today's meeting. It may be of interest to note that in the deliberations withState Finance Secretaries, two options on role of PDs were flagged, viz., underwriting of StatePDs and issuing loans through PDs.Recently, there has been renewed articulation of a view that Government debtmanagement be separated from monetary management by RBI. Let me share with you ourposition. An Informal Working Group was set up within RBI to examine the issue internally. TheGroup was of the view that the RBI needed to exit its role as a debt manager in the interest ofprice stability and favoured  separation of debt management from monetary management. TheGroup suggested taking out all issuance and debt management related activities from the RBIand assigning them to a separate institution to be set up for this purpose. The RBI would thenretain only core activities related to monetary policy operations such as undertaking open marketoperations including repos ,  carrying out Bank's own investment activities, undertaking marketThe recommendations were examined within the RBI. There seems to be little  evidencethat in the current stage of market development, and given the large market borrowingprogramme of Government, separation of the two functions would result in a more advantageoussituation  than is the case now. While it can be argued that separation of the two functions mayput pressure on the Government to reduce its borrowing requirements, on balance it may bebetter to coordinate the two functions for the present, while vigorously pursuing withGovernment ,  a reduction in Government borrowings to more sustainable levels and developingthe Government Securities market further.It has been concluded by us that while status quo could continue, the issue will have to bereviewed from time to time. Perhaps, after some more progress in fiscal consolidation and afterThere has been some concern about lower primary market response and reducedsecondary market activity in Treasury Bills during the current year. Market interest rate in T-Bills is seen to be generated only when call money rates fall below the refinance rate of 8 percent. In the primary auctions, the number of bids and the aggregate volume of bids have beenvery low. Most of the bids are from PDs, perhaps because they have bidding commitments tofulfill. There is little trading in the secondary market in the T-Bills segment and marketThese issues were addressed in the Technical Advisory Committee on Financial Marketsbased on a Report of Internal Group constituted to look into related issues. Basically, the issuesflagged for further debate are : ( i) whether there is a case for cutting down the number of T-Billsthat are currently being auctioned (ii) Whether there is a case for increasing the notified amountsin the auctions (iii) whether the PDs should be allowed exclusive access to primary auctions ofT-Bills (iv) should the RBI withdraw itself from primary auctions of T-Bills and restrict its6participants have been complaining about lack of liquidity in T-Bills.Revitalising the Treasury Bills Marketthe adoption of Fiscal Responsibility Act, the issue could be revisited appropriately.making functions and regulating the Government Securities market.Separation of Monetary Management from Debt Managementbookbuilding exercise undertaken by loans by operations to the secondary market? If so whether the RBI should give two-way quotes at alltimes or enter the market at its own will? (v) If the RBI’s operations are restricted to thesecondary market, should its dealings be restricted to PDs or should it operate with allPDs may like to discuss these and other issues and favour RBI with operationally feasibleThe banks have a large portfolio of Government Securities and the method of theirvaluation is of special interest not only to RBI and bankers, but also to PDs who dealsignificantly in the market.  Currently, banks have been asked to bifurcate their investments intoPermanent and Current categories. We had earlier said that our endeavour is to reduce theproportion of investments under the permanent category in the banks portfolio with a view toachieving 100 per cent marking of portfolios of commercial banks. The policy of valuation, apartfrom reflecting the fair value of securities, has also encouraged increased trading in  thesecondary market as many banks restructured their existing portfolios by substituting old loansfor new loans. However, on a request to review this approach, an Informal Group was set up inRBI and the Report has been circulated as a Discussion Paper on the RBI the international experience, the Group recommended that banks may classify their entireinvestments into three categories, viz., Held for Trading, Available for Sale and Permanent. ThePermanent category should not exceed 25 per cent of total investment. The Group recommendedthat securities classified as Held for Trading should be marked to market monthly, if not morefrequently. Securities in Available for Sale was recommended for marking to market at the end or at more frequent intervals as decided by the Board of Directors. Securities held inPermanent Category can be carried at cost or market value whichever is lower.If you do find it worthwhile to vent your views, perhaps in consultation with bankerspresent here, please do so and come back to us soon.Active Consolidation of Government DebtAs mentioned earlier, we  made a beginning during the current year with regard toconsolidation of Government debt. Consolidation has improved the liquidity in the market withconsequent reduction in the liquidity premium. Encouraged by the results, We would now like toembark on an active programme of consolidation consistent with the market borrowingprogramme of Government. Currently, there are about 98 outstanding loans with residualmaturity of up to ten years, covering 78 per cent of outstanding value. There are 20 loans withmaturity over 10 years covering the remaining 22 per cent.  Over the last few years, the investorprofile in these loans have changed, partly reflecting the valuation norms introduced by the RBI.A number of banks have resorted to substitution of old loans for new marketable loans. Keepingall these developments in view, some options can be explored. Wherever there are a largenumber of fragmented issues in any year, these could be consolidated through recall of someloans against reissue of others. Another option is to convert loans maturing, say in the next fewyears into certain actively traded securities coinciding with the same maturity or with elongatedmaturity. Even if this does not result in reduction in the number of outstanding loans, the7yearwebsite. After studyingValuation of Banks’ Investment Portfolioplan for its consideration.participants ?objective of improved liquidity in a few benchmark securities will be achieved. PDs may like toThe Committee on Banking Sector Reforms ( Narasimham Committee II) had suggestedthat the RBI’s support to market should be through a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF).Under this facility, the management of liquidity by the RBI will have to be through repos andreverse repos at rates reset by the RBI periodically, if not daily. Pending  intechnology and legal/procedural changes to facilitate electronic transfer and settlement, the RBI an Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility (ILAF). Under this facility, injection ofliquidity to banks/ PDs is by way of collateralised lending at predetermined interest rates andabsorption of liquidity is by way of fixed rate repos.An Internal Group in the RBI has been set up very recently to consider further stepstowards Liquidity Adjustment Facility by considering interrelated aspects of making the  BankRate  a true signalling rate, delinking  Bank Rate from repo operations and  substituting ILAFwith LAF. This would also imply that liquidity support to PDs will need to be reviewed.Regarding PDs, the view is to move over from the system of liquidity support at fixed interestrate in phases. In the first phase, the Additional Collateralised Lending Facility could be atvariable interest rate. In the second phase, both Level I and Level II liquidity support could be atvariable interest rate and in the final phase only a minimum level of support could be assuredwithout any assurance regarding the rate. The timing, phasing and sequencing are all issues thatneed to be worked out.While the PDs may prefer the comfort of assured liquidity at fixed interest rate, thecompulsions of liquidity management and interest rate operations demand that we ensurealignment between support to PDs and other monetary operations of  the RBI. The real issue isone of smooth transition from assured liquidity support at pre-determined interest rates to aPDs may discuss this in the overall framework of reforms in the financial sector Friends, I have flagged a few issues that are currently engaging our attention. I have alsospelt out the thinking in the RBI on these issues. As I have already mentioned, I would urge thePDs to deliberate on these issues and forward their view to the RBI.Thank you.• 8Dr.A.Prasad for their help. Thorat and Smt.Usha Dr.Reddy is thankful to organised by Primary Dealers Association of India, at Calcutta, on January 4, 2000. Inaugural Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, at Seminar on Government Securities MarketI wish the deliberations all success.Concluding Remarkseffective transmission of monetary policy.andmarket determined liquidity support from RBI.operationalisedupgradationOperationalising Liquidity Adjustment Facilityexamine these issues in greater detail.
