*Financial Regulatory Reforms:  Not far enough or Overkill?- Anand Sinha___________________________________________________________A very good afternoon to you all.  It is my privilege to chair the panel on‘Financial Regulatory Reforms:  Not far enough or Overkill?’   Let mewelcome the four very eminent panelists, Mr. Jae-ha Park, Deputy DeanADBI; Mr. Stephen Pickford, Associate Fellow, Chatham House; Mr. PaulBernd Spahn, Professor Emeritus of Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,Germany and Ms. Susan Thomas, Assistant Professor, Indira GandhiInstitute of Development Research.2. The topic of the panel discussion is a subject of heated debate aroundthe globe and I hope our discussions today would help set a balancedperspective on the issue involved.3. Let me first try and flag the major issues and present both sides of theargument, without expressing my views at this stage.4. Regulatory reforms undertaken as a policy response to the crisis havegenerated as serious a debate as the crisis itself.  The crisis is still continuingand is unprecedented in terms of its coverage, impact and longevity.  Thepolicy response to the crisis, too, has been quite extensive and as somewould say, onerous.  Going by the Newton’s third law of motion (every actionhas an equal and opposite reaction), it is fair to expect that reaction (policyresponse to the crisis) matches action (the crisis), in magnitude.  Many,* Opening remarks by Mr. Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the PanelDiscussion on ‘Financial Regulatory Reforms: Not far enough or Overkill’ as part of the event ‘ GlobalEconomic Cooperation: Views from G 20 countries’ organized by ICRIER during Oct 7-9, 2012 at NewDelhiPage1 of5however, hold the view that this law has been violated inasmuch as thepolicy reaction is a case of overkill.5. The crisis has highlighted many gaps in the conceptual framework.Some of the gaps are:  the notion that macroeconomic stability ensuresfinancial stability; light touch regulation and supervision are adequatebecause financial markets are sophisticated and efficient, which candistribute risks to those who can handle these risks; risk models measurerisk accurately and all financial innovations are useful, etc.  Serious gapshave also emerged in macroeconomic modelling and, above all, in theunderstanding or lack of understanding of systemic risk and how to deal withit. The crisis has challenged the intellectual foundations of macroeconomicand financial policy making.  New theories have been written debunking theold ones and new regulatory framework is being put in place to make thefinancial system more resilient.  The redesigned regulatory frameworkencompasses measures such as enhancing the quality and quantity ofcapital to be maintained by banks, reducing leverage, enhancing riskcoverage, stipulating liquidity ratios, maintenance of countercyclical capitalbuffers etc.  More importantly, the recognition of the role of systemic risk andthe importance of financial stability are the major lessons learnt from thecrisis.6. The new regulatory framework, inasmuch as it requires higherquantum of higher quality capital and liquidity buffers leading to reducedleverage, has raised intense debate over the impact they could have on theeconomic growth and the profitability of banks.  It is argued that theincreased capital requirements would impinge on the profitability of banks,Page2 of5forcing them to either increase their lending rates to maintain their margins orcut down on lending to preserve their capital base, both of which may have alarge negative impact on economic growth.  The proposed restrictions onactivities permitted to be undertaken by banks and the ring fencing of certainbanking activities have also led to concerns in some quarters.  Theprohibition under the Dodd Frank Act on proprietary trading by US banks,bank holding companies and their affiliates, despite certain carveouts has,particularly, caused discomfort from the perspective of its negative impact onmarket liquidity and its cross border implications.7. On the other hand, many feel that these regulations are necessary topreserve systemic stability and to ensure long term growth.  The crisis haswreaked havoc on the global economy with significant economic and socialcosts.  To strengthen the financial system and enhance the systemic stabilitywith a view to minimizing the incidence of such crises in future, it is arguedthat stronger regulation is necessary.  The proponents of stronger regulationargue that the benefits of financial stability would outweigh the costs ofregulation and, therefore, there is a good reason for revamping theregulatory framework. The debate is still inconclusive and the judgement onwhether these regulations are a necessity or a case of overkill is broadlydependent on which side of the fence you are on i.e. whether you are aregulator or associated with a regulated financial sector entity.  There are, ofcourse, many others not in either of the two categories who hold strongviews.  While even the critics broadly agree on the idea that regulations needa revamp, the critical question remains, how much regulation is adequate? Atwhat point the regulations start having diminishing returns – regulatory costsPage3 of5outweighing benefits? And whether the regulation which is global in scopecaters to the local needs of specific jurisdictions?8. Let me, in addition to some of the concerns mentioned earlier,highlight a few other issues:i. The redesigning of regulations, distilling the lessons taught bycrisis, has been an enormous task for the policy makers.  Whilea significant amount of work is already done, work relating tosome critical areas is still in progress, such as– framework forforward looking provisioning, management of liquidity risk,cross border resolution mechanism and oversight andsurveillance of the shadow banking system, etc.ii. Some parts of the new regulations, despite having recentlydesigned framework, need more clarity.  For example, thereare currently no readily available and widely accepted metricsof systemic risk to help calibrate instruments or gauge policy†performance, even ex post, with much precision. Thetransmission mechanism of macroprudential policies need tobe better understood and modelled.   Similarly, interactionbetween liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) and monetary policy isan area which is still being examined.  The likely asymmetricaleffect of macroprudential policies during the upturn anddownturn phases of the economy, and fine tuning ofcommunication by central banks or designated macroprudentialregulators on macroprudential issues and policies are otherareas requiring focussed attention. The possible role ofmonetary policy in leaning against the credit cycles is beingresearched and debated and it may be a while before a cleardirection emerges.iii. As regards implementation of new regulations, many questionslinger– Is it the right time to implement, especially when the† Caruana, Jaime, (Sept 2012),‘Dealing with financial systemic risk: the contribution ofmacroprudential policies’Page4 of5global economy is slowing, as the new regulations requirehigher quantum of capital which would not only be difficult toraise but may also have an adverse impact over global growthdue to deleveraging and higher lending costs? Are all BaselCommittee members in adequate state of preparedness toimplement the Basel III framework in time and in fullcompliance with the framework?iv. Another concern voiced by many is the possible impact thenew regulations may have on Emerging and DevelopingEconomies (EDEs) which, did not contribute to the crisis.EDEs require growth and the new regulations, in their pursuit ofstability over growth, may impinge upon their growth at least inthe short term. The opinion often expressed, therefore, is thatthese regulations are an unnecessary burden on EDEs.9. Today’s panel discussion on ‘Financial Regulatory Reforms: Not farenough, or overkill’ is quite apt in scope and timing.  I am sure we are goingto have an enlightening discussion on the adequacy and impact of theregulatory reforms.  The eminent panelists would present their views on thesubject followed by Q & A.Now, over to the panelists…*****Page5 of5
