Changing Role of RBI: Agenda for Attention *I am grateful to the organisers of the Madon Memorial Lecture for inviting me to deliver thisLecture.  That the contributions of Shri B.F. Madon are of lasting value is evident from the factthat although, over seventy years have elapsed since he passed away, lectures in his memory areorganised, and the response is still overwhelming.  There are several reasons why I feelespecially elated at my association with this lecture series.  First, Madon revealed a strongpreference to reflect on the problems of the exchange rate and currency issues in his celebratedpaper and two books.  I hardly need reveal my keen interest in this subject. Secondly, he had apenchant for  public opinion, and as an eminent publicist  published several articles, somewhatsimilar to my weakness for public lectures.  Thirdly, for understandable reasons, about half of theMadon Memorial Lectures were delivered by those closely associated with the Reserve Bank ofIndia, the first by Mr. H.V.R. Iyengar and the latest, the seventeenth by Dr. C. Fourthly, apart from my Gurus Dr. C. Rangarajan and Mr. M. Narasimham, I have closeassociation with several of those who delivered these lectures, such as Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao, Dr.I.G. Patel, and  Mr.Moeen A. Quereshi. I feel a sense of awe considering that the lecture seriesincludes a galaxy of stalwarts such as Messrs.  , , , and  Bhagwati and I am emboldened to suggest to the , that thelectures provide a panoramic but insightful view of deep thinking on critical issues of economicpolicy in India since 1961, and hence a collection of these lectures could be brought out as avolume in this millennium year, with an appropriate overview. I trust my friend Mr. would volunteer to work on this project and for my part I would be delighted to assist theToday’s subject essentially addresses the changing role of the Reserve Bank of India.  Since I amon the verge of entering the final year of my  term as Deputy Governor, there is a strongtemptation to be retrospective and narrate what has been done and what could not be.  But, Irealise that apart from myself, many others have already commented on these events. So, thefocus of today's  talk is mainly prospective and I would freely address unsettled issues, emergingchallenges, cognisable dilemmas, contingencies on the horizon, unfolding scenarios, and so on.It would be presumptuous  to attempt to provide  vision for the RBI or a list of issues at thefrontiers and surely unwise to suggest a specific set of actions for  future policy. Yet, I feel thatthis is about the time I should share with you, and place on record for the benefit of my youngercolleagues in the RBI and Government, my random thoughts on what may be called an Agendafor Attention , in regard to the changing role of the RBI in the context of  liberalisation andThe three important questions that often trouble central bankers are: What is money?How to measure money? Does money matter? The answer varies from country to country and, ofcourse over time.  To meet these dynamics, RBI had set up three working groups on moneysupply and the latest submitted its report in 1998.  The report of the third group has slightlyredefined money, added credit and liquidity measures, and concluded that money still mattersMonetary Policy Functionsglobalisation.organisers if they wish to pursue this idea.Jhaveriorganisers Jagdish B.K.NehruL.K.Jha C.D.Deshmukh Mudaliar RamaswamiRangarajan.Mr. Chairman and friends,though not in the same way or to the same extent as before.  It is observed that spread of creditcards, innovations in financial instruments and onset of E-Commerce have been far more rapidthan envisaged by the Group and so, a fourth Working Group may need to be set up sooner thanmost of us would consider appropriate. Monetary policy in India, in the pre-reform periodhad to contend with a multitude of objectives prescribed as part of planning strategies for growthand societal concerns.  The high level of automatic monetisation of the fiscal deficits andGovernment’s market borrowings at rates of interest unrelated to market conditions coupled witha plethora of other administered interest rates and pre-emptions of credit in the banking andfinancial sectors had resulted in stunted growth of financial sector and virtual absence of amarket for financial assets.  As a result, monetary policy had to rely heavily upon directinstruments as evidenced by high pre-emption of the banking system’s resources. An objective ofreform has been to develop an efficient and integrated financial market as a prerequisite forswitching over to indirect instruments of monetary control.  With a series of reform measures inmoney, government securities and foreign exchange markets, the markets have now grown insize, depth and activity paving the way for a flexible use of policy instruments.The transition has been made possible through several initiatives initiated by theGovernment and the RBI, in a coordinated manner.  These include deregulation of interest rates;rationalisation of CRR and SLR, structural reforms in the real economy, phasing out of ad hocof  automatic monetisation and replacing it with a system ofWays and Means Advances, activation of Bank Rate and reduction in the reliance on refinance.Consequently, the thrust of monetary policy in recent years could include use of instruments in aThese reforms have laid a solid foundation for the RBI to respond more effectively to tinternational  challenges such as the East Asian currency crisis,  sanctions and domesticuncertainties. The measures have assisted the attainment of a respectable growth rate, reasonableTo ensure that RBI’s conduct of monetary policy continues to command  respect andcredibility, it is necessary to focus on existing constraints, emerging factors, and possible impacton the policy in the future.Existing ConstraintsAmong the existing constraints, first and foremost is fiscal dominance or high fiscaldeficits.  We have to recognise that fiscal management is essentially in the realm of politicaleconomy and not a technical issue. Once a final decision is taken by Government on the level ofborrowings, RBI as a debt manager, has to manage it successfully.  Merely wishing the deficitaway or trying to conduct monetary policy as though deficits do not exist would be disastrous.No doubt, the cost of fiscal deficit goes beyond managing public finances and spills over intomonetary and external sector management.  We should recognise that any further progress inmonetary and financial sector reform is clearly contingent on the progress in the magnitude andquality of fiscal adjustment. The proposal for a Fiscal Responsibility Bill is a necessary step inSecond, the large share of publicly owned financial intermediaries, including banks andthe nature of their responses to micro-market developments currently operate as a constraint toseveral policy changes. Monetary policy initiatives, have to assess market responses, but if sucha response from a large segment of the market is uncertain, policy initiatives tend to be verycautious. Thus, the pace of further refinements in monetary policy is linked to the pace of2improvements in overall efficiency in the public sector banks as a whole.this direction.price as well as exchange rate stability.hemore flexible and bi-directional manner.treasury bills, eliminating the system Third, the state of development of financial markets is yet another important constraint.While significant progress has been made in the recent past in all parameters of money andGovernment securities markets, the technological infrastructure initiatives including launching ofReal Time Gross Settlement, computerisation of Public Debt Office, establishment of a ClearingFourth, legal and institutional infrastructure conducive to healthy financial markets is alsonecessary for effective transmission of the policy. A beginning has been made on the issue ofStamp Duty and Securities Regulation. The new  Government Securities Bill has, however,  yetto be passed.  The Finance Minister has assured actions for amending the RBI Act and BankingFifth, transparency in market operations is essential for an efficient monetary policytransmission mechanism.  This will depend a great deal on the mounting of electronic dealingsystem, establishment of uniform accounting systems and evolving proper codes of conduct forSixth, in regard to the data availability on many fronts, be it real sector or prices, there areissues of adequacy, timeliness and quality.  In a globalisation context, policy conducted with dataof poor quality could be very inefficient. In this context, the work of the National Statistical is of great interest to the RBI.With globalisation and impact of technology, several new challenges are likely to emergeThe emergence of ‘e-money ’ or electronic devices that store monetary value in electronicform could have perceptible implications for monetary policy.  In this regard, two inter-relatedissues namely, impact on the balance sheet of the central bank and the conduct of monetarypolicy have been widely discussed.  The balance sheet effect implies that extensive use of e-money could substantially replace central bank money, i.e., currency notes in the hands of thepublic.  Since currency notes form a major chunk of any central bank’s balance sheet, theexpansion of e-money would imply that the size of the balance sheet would shrink resulting inthe erosion in its capacity of conducting effective Open Market Operations (OMO).  In thissituation, large additional reserves with the banking system created in the wake of large-scale useThe rapid expansion of e-money would also pose challenges in the area of compilation ofmonetary statistics and, therefore, render the monetary policy prone to operational errors.  Theissue of e-money not backed by central bank money by private issuers would also be subject tothe problem of moral hazard and would necessitate careful and extensive supervision by centralcent advances in information technology have reduced transmission lags of monetarypolicy resulting in a narrowing of the distinction between the short and long run.  Thus, in thenew set up, the relationship between money, output and prices may also change, and becomerelatively less predictable posing a new challenge for monetary policy.  Such has been theexperience of many other countries where, financial liberalisation made the link between that central banks might face would be in their role in crisis preventionin the context of large volume and high speed transactions through complex instruments.  Thiswould require building of enhanced expertise to deal with  moral hazard and systemic problemsand strategies of intervention with safeguards against undue credit risk exposures.  Central banks3Another challengemonetary aggregates and inflation unstable.Rebanks.of e-money cannot be sterilised and could pose a challenge to monetary policy.for the fraternity  of central banks.New ChallengesCommissionmarket practices.Regulation Act to grant greater operational autonomy to the RBI and banks.Corporation are still underway. RBI’s successful handling of these is a major expectation.will also have to monitor the growth and pace of financial innovations by the private sector thatmay sometimes tend to avoid regulations.  Thus, the scope of central bank activities would haveto extend beyond the traditional realm of monetary policy to various issues that impinge on theAs the virtues of fiscal rectitude are recognised and progressive structural corrections inour fiscal system instituted, the monetary policy, in the future, may even have to be conductedwith concurrent fiscal surpluses in the accounts of the Government.  Such a situation may need acareful reassessment of the way that monetary policy measures would have to be implemented inorder to balance and stabilise movements in the structure of interest rates that might arise onaccount of a mix of productivity changes in the economy and the presence of budgetarysurpluses.  Moreover, the creation of surpluses and the Government options to retire public debtcould have far reaching implications for the effectiveness of traditional monetary instruments.This would be especially so, if a substantial part of such debt is held in the books of the centralThe increasing degree of interdependence among economies in the world and the largemovements of capital imply that the role of monetary policy vis-à-vis the exchange rate wouldhave to be carefully addressed.  This would essentially require having clarity in a country’smonetary policy framework and the building up of credibility to sustain the size and volatility ofImplications for the FutureWhat do these existing constraints and emerging challenges imply for the future conductof monetary policy. As regards objectives, while price stability and credit availability wouldcontinue to be the main objectives, and relative weights may vary from time to time, a moretransparent articulation of relative weights may have to be sought. Furthermore, as the economydevelops, sacrifice ratios in terms of the short-run trade off between growth and price stabilityWith progres globalisation of the economy, the exchange rate becomes a very criticalfactor in the conduct of monetary policy.  The excessive weight that may be given to popularperceptions in regard to exchange rate as against what is warranted by compulsions of economicfactors could certainly complicate monetary management.  Creating public awareness of forexsituation and Greater recourse to indirect instruments is inevitable and that would requiresophistication, nimble-footed response and market savvy approach – qualities that have beendemonstrated by the RBI so far, but in a rapidly changing environment, the skills of the RBIcould be continually tested.Of the four transmission channels, it is cle ar that the quantity variable is still valid but isyielding place to rate variables though conditioned by the evolving status of financial markets.The exchange rate channel will, however, emerge important and the future relevance ofIn terms of operating procedures, the increasing importance of foreign currency assets inthe balance sheet of the Reserve Bank of India accompanied by greater discretion to the RBI inthe stock of domestic assets, essentially Government paper, facilitated by termination of systemof automatic , gives more control to the RBI over the size and quality of its balancesheet. That in some senses gives operational freedom in regard to conduct of monetary policy,4though continued fiscal dominance will constrain such freedom.monetisationsignificance of asset price channel cannot be ignored.forex markets would thus be an important task for the RBI.sive may come down warranting greater stress on price stability.capital flows that characterise the world financial system.bank.overall health of the financial system.Finally, the RBI may have to operate on liquidity even on intra-day basis, utilise banks asmajor planks of policy although banks’ share in financial intermediation would be less, while atthe same time improving data systems, management information systems, market intelligence,and understanding the global trends. It is in this context  that the recently introduced LiquidityAs the process of reform continues, the role of financial markets in the economy getssignificantly enhanced. While this process essentially involves domestic liberalisation, thedecision to open up the economy adds urgency and complexity to the process of developingfinancial markets in India. The changing role and increasing responsibility of RBI has to be seenin this context and in conjunction with development of financial markets in areas outside of RBIMore specifically, the role of the RBI in the financial markets should be assessed in thelight of the First, the primary interest of the RBI in financial markets is because of its criticality inSecond, the conscious effort by the RBI towards the development of efficient, stable andhealthy financial markets is important since they were repressed in several ways in the past bylaw, regulation and policies. Mere lifting of  restrictions will not automatically help createvibrant financial markets. Hence, the RBI has been and should continue to facilitate thedevelopment of markets through legal changes, technological and institutional development anddynamic improvements in market microstructure.Third, regulation of some financial markets is warranted by virtue of RBI’s charter. Thisrelates to money market which is central to monetary policy, Government Securities marketwhich is significant from the point of view of developing a yield curve, forex market which isintegral to external sector management and gold markets, which have  been more recentlyderegulated.  This position has been formalised with the recent amendments to the SecuritiesContract Regulations Act and Government notifications thereunder giving jurisdiction to theRBI.Fourth, with the gradual development of sophisticated instruments and innovations inmarket practices, technological infrastructure has become an indispensable part of the reform ofthe financial markets.The RBI has, therefore, to equip itself to perform its developmental and regulatory roleseffectively. The process involves constant interaction with the rest of the world in order toidentify best practices, benchmark existing practices in our markets, identify gaps and takemeasures to move towards these international standards, within the framework of our uniqueSecondly, coordination with other regulators within the country is important to sort outThirdly, it is important to constantly interact with market participants without in any waycompromising confidentiality so as to effect changes in the regulatory aspects of the marketsFourthly, with increased liberalisation, there is also need to update information andFifthly, a major challenge within the RBI will be to institute arrangements to improve its5skills to keep pace with the speed and the skills of market participants.market intelligence to assess the prevailing situation and take quick actions.through consultative mechanisms.regulatory gaps and overlaps.country circumstances.the transmission of monetary policy.following :jurisdiction but relevant to its activities, especially equity markets and insurance activities.Financial Markets is a watershed in the refinement of techniques of monetary intervention. Adjustment FacilitySpecifically, in the money markets, in order to facilitate the conduct of monetary policyand improve the efficiency of transmission mechanism, it would be necessary for the RBI tomanage the transition of switching over from direct to indirect instruments, preemptions not only to their statutory minimums but beyond that, developing a transparent andliquid repo market and institution of a full fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility. Some of theseCurrently, the Government securities market is an overwhelming part of the overall debtmarket. Interest rates in this market provide benchmarks for the system as a whole.  In the recentpast, several initiatives have launched this market into a high growth trajectory, in terms ofdepth, liquidity, turnover, participants, etc.  Several initiatives for development of this markethelped the success of a large borrowing programme in  recent years, and  far larger thanbudgeted programmes were carried out successfully.  But, the benefit of innovations may not beinexhaustible.   Recent initiatives towards retailing would hopefully provide headroom, but thereThere are some conflicts in the role of the RBI as regulator and supervisor of bankswhich, for example, tilts favouring short-term paper to match ALM guidelines while the RBI asdebt manager prefers to balance the maturity profile with long duration paper.  This could throwup more conflicts in future.The dilemmas involved in the RBI being both debt manager of Government and amonetary authority have been chronicled extensively. At this stage, minimisation of adverseimpact of high fiscal deficit requires such a combination of roles but perseverance with theobjective of separating these two functions at the earliest viable window of opportunity would beIn the Government securities market, currently, the RBI has two roles, that of a debtmanager and a regulator. The RBI Act enjoins upon the RBI, the role of debt manager. Thefuture role of the RBI that is likely to emerge in the Government securities market can bevisualised in four phases. The first phase may see the RBI withdrawing from the primary marketin Government debt  with a phased cessation of  devolvement and private placements. This phasewill also see the completion of the major reforms that are currently in progress such as repodocumentation, establishment of clearing house, commencement of electronic dealing system,etc. The second stage would relate to separation of debt management function from the RBI. Asfiscal deficit comes down, Government debt as a percentage of total debt would also come downand the regulatory framework for the Government securities market and the corporate debtmarket would converge. In this context, the RBI's regulatory oversight of banks and financialinstitutions exposure to debt will have to be refocused. The final stage will involve the changedrole of the RBI in an environment of fiscal surplus, though in such  the RBI will faceIn the foreign exchange market, the absence of well conceived risk management systemsin the treasury operations of end-users has constrained its healthy development. PSUs are largeplayers in the forex market and their internal systems are not always consistent with developmentof efficient risk management approaches. The main challenge would be to evolve means ofremoving such constraints. A further challenge relates to inculcating and encouraging thepractice of hedging by corporates and commercial banks, who, in their own interest ought to beIn India, there is extreme sensitivity to volatility in exchange rates and with a publicfixation and a dollar rupee rate the relative movements of exchange rates, which are routine in6closely monitoring their exposures.yet another set of problems. As you see,  there is no peace for wicked creatures.Paradiseadvisable.is a well recognised need for fiscal support in terms of tax treatment for this laudatory objective.developments do call for adequate progress by way of legislative actions.reducinginternational financial markets, are not clearly considered. In the circumstances, the challenge forthe RBI is to develop the forex market given these  constraints and relaxations of restrictions inthe market.There is some enthusiasm for early integration of financial markets but currently, wehave to identify linkages. For example, the integration between call money market and forexmarkets operates essentially through banks’ permissible limits on investments in overseasmarkets, and options to hedge, prepay etc. in foreign currency under FCNR (B), on banks’ ownaccount or that of corporates. These linkages will get widened and deepened and ought to betracked.  Another example relates to the linkages between call money market and Governmentsecurities market where large positions in Government securities are funded through short-termborrowings, especially call money market. As the reforms in the financial markets progress,linkages will improve - between the different segments of market and between domestic andinternational markets. Internationally there will be increased pressure for rapidly and moredeeply integrating domestic and global markets.External Sector ManagementIt is generally appreciat ed  that the RBI has distinguished itself in regard to externalsector management, whether it was meeting the balance of payment crisis in 1991, or managingthe transition to a liberalised exchange rate, unified exchange rate, current account convertibilityand capital account liberalisation.  The basic parameters set for itself in terms of current accountdeficit, market-determined but non-volatile exchange rate, containing debt especially short-term,well sequenced liberalisation of capital account, and building up as well as managing adequateforeign exchange assets have all been met and often exceeded, despite several international anddomestic uncertainties. In all this, the Government's own actions have provided active support inPerhaps an ideal starting point could be the replacement of the Foreign ExchangeRegulation Act (FERA) by Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) with effect from thebeginning of this month.  The philosophy of foreign exchange management has shifted from thatof conservation of foreign exchange to one of facilitating trade and payments as well asdeveloping financial markets.  This definitive shift in the objectives of foreign exchangemanagement will automatically get reflected in the operations of the Reserve Bank.  Under thenew system, all current account payments except those notified by the government are eligiblefor appropriate foreign currency in respect of genuine transactions from the Authorised Dealerswithout any restrictions.  The surrender requirements in respect of exports of goods and servicescontinue to operate.  The Reserve Bank however, would have the necessary regulatoryjurisdiction over capital account transactions.  To this extent, further action in regard to capitalOn the current account, RBI will have to closely monitor the trends in imports given theliberalised environment, the growth in exports, particularly export of services, and private inwardremittances.  Overall, the impact of possible increased investment activity in the future,particularly in infrastructure, on the level of current account would have to be assessed. In doingso, the fact that the combined share of exports and imports has gone up from about 13 percent ofGDP in the latter half of eighties to over 20 percent in the recent period as well as the sharpincreases in capital flows and the level of reserves could be kept in view.    In this background,and on the assumption of sustainable level of non-volatile capital flows, the possibility of anacceptable band of sustainable current account deficit may need to be 7conceptualised.account liberalisation appears to have been put by government squarely in the court of RBI.achieving these objectives.Similarly, the level and the composition of the capital flows would also change and thestability of these will be impacted less by capital controls and more by the domestic policies aswell as transparency practices and standards and codes, though international factors wouldAs regards exchange rate management, the unfolding events with reference to fiscalpolicy, financial sector, especially financial markets and International Financial Architecturewould determine the course of policy. Perhaps the biggest dilemma for RBI as for many centralSignificant improvements have been made in the quality of performance of regulatoryand supervisory functions by the RBI.  Admittedly, the level of our compliance withinternational practices, is one of the best among the peers.  Attention is being paid by my fellowDeputy Governor,  Mr.S.P. Talwar  to several contemporary issues such as, relative roles ofonsite and off-site supervision, functional versus institutional regulation, relative stress oninternal management, market discipline and regulatory prescriptions, consolidated approach tosupervision, etc.  Several legislative initiatives have also been taken up with Government,covering procedural law, debt recovery systems, Credit Information Bureau, Deposit Insurance,Basic featuresWhile appreciating these initiatives, it will be useful to list what may be considered as theAs we move forward in the reform, it is recognised that the regulatory and supervisoryframework in financial sector are no longer domestic concerns.  Tracking internationaldevelopments, participating and contributing to them, conforming to the extent possible tointernational practices and maintaining a convincingly efficient and stable financial sector wouldSecond, in the light of the above, both avoidable regulatory in trusion and inadequacies insupervision would be harmful.  The critical objectives of a supervisory system should be clearviz., protection of depositors interests, mainly retail, enhancement of efficiency throughThird, while developments in technology would pose several challenges to banks, theyFourth, there have been movements between public and pri vate ownership of banks inmany countries as warranted by circumstances but in all these the central bank concerned didplay a part.  The movements in ownership between public and private will have to continue toFifth, the effect of crisis in banking system, irrespective of status of ownership will be onthe fisc, i.e., government finances. Even if the RBI is operating as a lender of last resort theburden is on the fisc, since in the ultimate analysis a central bank’s resources put at risk reallybelong to Government.Sixth, while persevering with improvements in prudential regulation, the sequencing andthe application of rigour cannot ignore the inevitable business cycles, though regulatory8forbearance has to be eschewed. This is no doubt a delicate balance.dominate the attention of the Reserve Bank.will continue to be special as long as they are significant for payments system.competition, and avoidance of instability and potential systemic failure.continue to be a priority.basic features that would govern the RBI’s role in future.etc.  Progress in these is critical for effectiveness of RBI in the regulatory sphere.Regulatory and Supervisory Functionsbanks would be reconciling monetary and external sector management.continue to be critical.Seventh, the regulatory and supervisory framework has to reckon with expanding capitalflows, faster and faster movement of such flows, increasing recourse to technology for suchcapital transactions, and rapid financial innovation. These make the tasks of regulatorincreasingly complex. These developments would warrant a qualitative change in the nature ofrelationship between the regulated and the RBI as the regulator and the relationship may be oneEighth, there could be an emerging asymmetry between transparency practiced by marketparticipants and the regulator, since the latter as a public institution has to demonstrate itsaccountability.  This would add to the complexities faced by the regulator.In the light of the broad considerations described, it is possible to list the major issuesthat would need the RBI’s attention in the near future.First, whether the regulatory and supervisory functions need to be combined  as iscurrently the position or whether they should be separated from other RBI functions. What is ofoverriding concern is not whether regulation / supervision should be  combined or separatedfrom other RBI functions but how regulation/supervision is conducted.Second is the issue of coverage of the RBI’s supervisory role, which is currently focussedmore strongly on banks, but only to some extent in the case of  non-banking financial companies(NBFCs), especially those accepting public deposits, and to some extent, Development FinancialDFIs).  For example, there could be a separate agency for regulating NBFCs but thatThird, the broader issue of choice between mega regulator and single regulatory authoritydeserves to be addressed.  In any case, the regulatory gaps and regulatory overlaps in the existingsystem have been noticed and they are being resolved through informal as well as ad-hocarrangements.  The market participants are somewhat uncomfortable with the vagueness impliedin informal arrangements.Fourth, there are multiple institutional structures in the financial system.  This has to berevisited firmly in the context of the move towards universal banking.  Convergence betweenbanks and DFIs would be easier in future as the reserve requirements of banks are reduced. Themanagement of transition, especially of individual DFIs, could face hurdles, especially due toexistence of both the statutory corporations and company form of organisation in the DFIs.  Infact, even the concept of State Financial Corporation as statutory bodies performing functions nodifferent from NBFCs require a review.  Quite apart from transitional problems, therecommendation of the Narasimham Committee, namely that there be only banks and NBFCswould need to be sooner or later faced, and my own preference is sooner than later.Fifth, the concept of public financial institutions (PFI) appears not only anachronistic butsome of the PFIs are performing functions such as motor car financing.  The continued relevanceSixth, while the regulatory focus should be on protection o f retail public depositors,currently, acceptance of public deposits are governed by regulations of Department of CompanyAffairs, SEBI and Reserve Bank.  In fact, the effectiveness of the monetary policy itself could bein jeopardy if these multiple systems of regulation, including fixation of interest rates, by severalSeventh, the issue of dual regulation i.e. by RBI and State Governments concerned hasbeen repeatedly emphasised both in the case of urban cooperative banks and rural cooperatives.9agencies persists.  There is a group in RBI studying this issue.of such special categorisation needs to be considered.would be adding another regulator to the multiple regulators in accepting public deposits.Institutions (Major Issuesof greater transparency and more consultation than before.Some proposals have already been made in regard to Urban Cooperative Banks which are yet tobe resolved in the Government.  Rural cooperatives are yet another important set of creditEighth, in regard to public sector banks, which form the most important segment of thebanking system being owned by the government, the Reserve Bank’s regulatory thrust is alwayscircumscribed.  The basic issues relating to the form of organisation i.e. corporate or company;the extent of ownership, the nature of control over management by the major shareholder, thesystem of corporate governance are still subject to considerable vagueness.  In fact, thisunresolved situation is perhaps the most significant stumbling block in considering furtherNinth, it is inevitable that the Reserve Bank takes a clear-cut view, at least in regard toScheduled Commercial Banks, about the entry norms, the exit norms and norms forrestructuring, inclusive of amalgamation.  The problem of select weak banks in public sector andvarious solutions such as an asset reconstruction fund address the current issue. In a moredynamic sense, RBI should have necessary freedom to regulate aspects relating to entry, exit andTenth, the issue of conflict between owner and regulator in as much as RBI holding apredominate share in SBI apart from NHB and NABARD need to be resolved sooner than later.RBI’s position has already been made clear in various documents of RBI that as a regulator, itEleventh, in the light of Government’s statement on Exim Policy that economic zones areto be treated as outside of the country for regulatory purposes, a view needs to be taken by theReserve Bank as to whether offshore banking units of scheduled commercial banks as branchesof each bank could be considered.  Such a separate regulatory prescription is possible under theTwelfth, with rapid growth in technology, and complexities in risk analysis as well asassessment, the regulated are racing ahead with both innovations and skills. RBI as a regulatorwill have to specially equip itself to facilitate innovations and assess the prudential requirementsFinally, it is also essential to develop and sustain a well thought out fra mework for use ofratings of credit rating agencies by the RBI for regulatory purposes.Reserve Bank of India played a significant role in enlarging skills and institutionalcapabilities in the area of credit to rural areas, to finance exports, and to industry.  Institutionssuch as Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI), National Bank for Agriculture and RuralDevelopment (NABARD), National Housing Bank (NHB) and even Unit Trust of India (UTI)are virtually offshoots of the RBI. RBI had promoted Securities Trading Corporation of IndiaLtd. (STCI) and Discount and Finance House of India Ltd. (DFHI) and most of RBI’s shares inthese two institutions have already been sold.  A more recent example is InfrastructureDevelopment Finance Company.  RBI had been providing funds to many of these organisationsthrough several windows, enabled by legislative provisions and encouraged by policy-thrust inthe process of planned development.As part of the reform, a decision has been taken, in consultation with the Government ofIndia that the profits transferred to the LTO funds should be directly made over to Governmentwhich be the best arbiter of allocation for development. There are persisting expectations and10Developmental Functionas well as regulatory implications of market practices.newly enacted FEMA.would not wish to continue as owner.restructuring including mergers or acquisitions.changes in technology, in financial markets and even in monetary policy.institutions languishing from ill-effects of dual regulation.demands on RBI for taking initiatives in directly financing developmental or social welfareactivities.  A clear articulation and a clear commitment to the legitimate role of RBI in theThe Reserve Bank can promote the process of accelerat ed economic growth by infusingefficiency in financial intermediation and stability in the financial system.  It is recognised thatwhile growth may not be a sufficient condition for elimination of poverty, it is a necessarycondition.  In this sense, there is a convergence between the Reserve Bank’s core function ofefficiency and stability in financial sector and objectives of growth.Second, it is possible to argue that the broader objective of the financial system’sefficiency coupled with stability, includes, and has as its core price-stability.  As Dr. C.Rangarajan, former Governor, Reserve Bank of India is never tired of pointing out, the best anti-poverty programme that the RBI should concern itself with is price stability.  There isundoubtedly a total convergence between the welfare of the poor and the core responsibility ofThirdly, ensuring availability of credit for all productive purposes is necessary and this ismade possible through the pre-condition of efficiency and stability in the financial system.  Thesafety of the interest of the depositors, the goose that lays golden eggs for the financial system,and the meeting of social needs as well as priorities are important.  Currently, there areinstitutional, structural and procedural bottlenecks for credit delivery in our country.  Inparticular, the financial sector reform has provided greater avenues to corporates to raiseresources and typically these benefits have not percolated to small and medium enterprises.There are legitimate concerns about credit availability to small and medium enterprises butrecourse to the same instruments that have harmed the financial system in the past is notRegional spread ofbanking is important, and so far only public sector banks are carrying these obligations, and thisneeds to be corrected.  The instrumentality of priority sector lending has not served its purpose asenvisaged, and as articulated by my fellow Deputy Governor Mr. Jagdish Capoor, the subjectneeds a thorough review – sooner than later.  Credit delivery systems should also recognise thechanging composition of Gross Domestic Product in favour of services and effective stepsshould be considered to ensure flow of credit including extension of bill rediscounting to thissector.Fourth, the total income generated by the RBI net of its expenditures in performing all ofits legitimate functions and net of transfer to its own resources as needed for its balance sheetpurposes should legitimately go to the Government, though priority is for adequacy of reserves.It is necessary to appreciate that prudence requires that attention is paid to the RBI  building upadequate internal reserves to meet all possible contingencies. By ensuring efficiency andprudence in its own balance sheet management, the RBI would serve the purpose of makingavailable surplus to the GovernmentFinally, RBI should give unstinted support to development of th e technologicalinfrastructure or financial structure or funding of research and training in the sector and being acatalyst for the development of  new type of financial institutions.  To this extent, there is adevelopmental function to be performed by RBI in so far as it relates to its core functions but itIt is useful to clearly enunciate the areas where the Reserve Bank should not engage itselfunder the mistaken notion that it is promoting economic development in an optimal way.  Firstly,there is always the temptation for government to seek from the RBI extra budgetary resources for11should not become the conduit for resources for  financial intermediaries.appropriate.  Similarly, flow of credit to agriculture deserves attention. the Reserve Bank viz. price stability.developmental sphere is perhaps warranted.programmes which should essentially be funded by the government.  There is a possibility ofRBI also being tempted to oblige, and in such a case, there is a potential for erosion of autonomySecondly, utilisation of RBI’s resources for funding equity in institutions such asNational Housing Bank, NABARD are not on a much different footing from lending by RBI.Indeed, RBI should desist from continuing with its ownership functions in both commercialbanking and refinance or development finance segment.  Furthermore, some of the ReserveBank’s regulatory functions are being combined with the developmental functions in some ofthese institutions.  As we move along the road of reform, combining such functions needsThirdly, there was some association of Reserve Bank with credit guarantees, particularlythrough Deposit Insurance & Credit Guarantee Corporation.  The concept of credit guarantee bya central bank in any form has proven to be wrong in theory and bad in practice.  Fortunately,Fourthly, there has been, as part of the reform, a review of the role of selective creditcontrols, direct lending and subsidisation of lending. Fortunately, selective credit controls havevirtually disappeared.  Directed lending tends to be very inefficient if there is an element ofcross-subsidisation. When there is subsidised lending, the real problem arises not only in termsof moral hazard but also in terms of the health of the banking system.  Increasingly, banks arerecognised to be only one category of financial intermediary.  In fact, as Governor Dr. pointed out, the share of banking system in financial intermediation is bound to go down in theinterest of both efficiency and stability of the system.  In such a situation, utilising the bankingsystem for subsidisation or cross-subsidisation makes the banking system weak in relation to theother institutional categories of financial intermediation.  As we move towards greaterliberalisation and globalisation, any damage to the health of the banking system erodesinternational competitive strength of our financial sector and could impose a burden on the fiscIn brief, a clear enunciation of what Reserve Bank should not do in future may be asimportant as a recognition of what it should do in the cause of development and socialSince mid-nineties, India has been gaining in importance in the global financialcommunity and RBI has been playing its legitimate role.  In 1996, we gained membership in theBank for International Settlements and we have been active in utilising the facilities andcontributing to its deliberations. The RBI has been taking an active role in the evolving processThe RBI also participated inthe preparation of G-22 Reports on International Financial Architecture.  Later, it wasrepresented along with G-7 countries and other emerging market members in the Group of 20,whose objective is to encourage informal exchange of views leading to consensus on RBI is not only reacting to global changes but also participating in the process.  Forexample, RBI is one of the select few to be represented in the consultation process of BIS onnew norms being considered for Bank’s supervision.  Similarly RBI is associated with a workinggroup constituted by the newly setup Financial Stability Forum.  RBI is also associated with aninternational group on Settlements.  This role is expected to increase in future and RBI should bewell-equipped for the purpose. A Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and12International Financial Architecture and RBIof RBI.international issues.on the international financial architecture after the Asian crisis.objectives.when stability is threatened.Jalanthere is already an agreement in principle to eschew such guarantees.correction.Codes has been constituted in India with  joint membership of Government and the RBI.  Themain task of this Committee is to identify and monitor developments in global standards andcodes and consider its applicability to the Indian financial system. The Committee would alsohelp align to the extent necessary India’s practices to the international best practices.  In fact,closer collaboration between Government of India and RBI is witnessed in several fronts and thisneeds to be strengthened in future.Balance Sheet of RBIIn the emerging scenario, there is need to accord the respect that is due to the balancesheet of a central bank.  Fortunately, RBI has been devoting special attention to several aspectsof its balance sheet viz. avoiding contingent liabilities, building up adequate reserves therebyregaining some control over its balance sheet and further enhancing accounting and transparencystandards.  In view of significant amounts of foreign currency assets on its portfolio and the needto adopt internationally accepted valuation norms for all its assets, RBI should be strong enoughin its internal reserves so that it can withstand any possible adverse impact on its balance sheet.A fear of adverse impact on its balance sheet may inhibit RBI to pursue otherwise desirable andprudent policies and the level of its reserves should be enough to remove such fears.  RBI shouldguard itself against pressures to dilute the policy framework on transfer to reserves betweenBoard of RBI and Government.  It will be interesting to note that as the fiscal adjustmentFinally, the balance sheet ofthe RBI can command credibility as well as effectiveness in its policy interventions, domesticallyas well as internationally; when among other things it has sufficient autonomy and control overits balance sheet.In conclu sion, I believe that the RBI has continued to acquit itself well in discharging itsfunctions during the reform period.  It has deservedly gained importance, credibility and respect.It is currently well equipped in terms of technical skills to meet domestic and internationalIt must be recognised that close understanding between the RBI and Government wasinstrumental in bringing about structural reform and meeting crisis-like situations during therecent years. In particular, RBI has been providing analytical inputs in policy making in so far asfinancial sector is concerned. This approach should be carried forward while respecting the needAnother significant recent achievement of RBI is the close links it developed with StateGovernments - as banker, as debt manager and as policy adviser, and keeping up this momentumThere has been a notable change in the work practices and approaches to policy makingas well as problem solving. These include constant review of international experience, workinggroup approach and multi-disciplinary and multi-departmental  standing committees to aidFinally, there is great merit in devoting urgent and serious attention to three aspects.First, there should be deliberate efforts to continuously upgrade skills on a moreSecond, whether, as a regulator or in performing other functions such as banker toGovernment or issuer of currency, there is significant interaction with users.  With interestshown by Governor Dr. Jalan, there has been discernible impact but some more drastic changes13in attitudes and procedures may be necessary.extensive scale.  For this purpose, both, facilities as well as incentives would be needed.decision making. The gains from this approach are evident and should be carried forward.is desirable.for RBI's autonomy in conducting its monetary operations.challenges.Conclusionprogresses and succeeds the potential for RBI’s profits decreases.Third, the work practices including placement, deployment, redeployment etc. need to bevisited and thoroughly revamped to bring them in alignment with demands of a rapidlymodernising financial sector.In all these areas, it would be worthwhile for an immediate examination and consensusfor moving forward.Let me once again thank the organisers for giving me this opportunity to freely set my random thoughts on changes in the RBI’s role in future.* 18 B.F. Madon memorial Lecture delivered by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India,14, 2000. th13thDr.Reddy is grateful to several professionals in the RBI for their immense help.organised by the IMC Economic Research and Training Foundation at Indian Merchants Chamber, Mumbai, on Juneout
