C M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Debt Markets in India – Issues and Prospects*RAKESH MOHANI am very happy to be amongst you today to deliver Today after a decade of the reforms process, it is anrdthe keynote address at the 3 Annual Citibank - Fitch opportune time to take a look at the current issues thatDebt Markets Conference. I understand that the response are of interest to the market.to the previous Citibank-Fitch debt markets conferencesThe limitations of public finances as well as thehas been very encouraging, which has motivated thesystemic risk awareness of the banking systems inorganisers to convert this into an annual event. This kinddeveloping countries have led to growing interest inof interaction among investors and issuers provides andeveloping bond markets. It is believed that well run andopportunity for mutual discussions in the interest ofliquid corporate bond markets can play a critical role infostering further market development.supporting economic development in developing countries,Development, sustenance and expansion of the debt both at the macroeconomic and microeconomic levels.markets is a very complex activity. Our experience so Corporate debt in developing countries has traditionallyfar suggests that a well functioning debt market needs to been raised from banks through plain vanilla bank lending.be carefully nurtured over time and requires a great deal The need for a developed bond market with a sizeableof discussion between issuers, investors, intermediaries, corporate debt segment is particularly important as itand regulators, alike. Today’s deliberations, I am sure will offers an effective alternative to banks for raising capitalprovide newer visions towards such a collaborative by corporates, leading to improvement in efficiency ofdevelopmental process. the capital market. Corporate debt markets also functionas a stable source of finance when the equity market isvolatile. Generally, there have been two models forI. PROLOGUEdeveloping debt markets internationally. Whereas, indeveloped countries like the U.S., regulators stepped inA well developed capital market consists of both theto bring about an orderly way of doing business after theequity market and the bond market. While the exactmarkets had by themselves developed reasonably, incomposition of the market varies from country to country,several developing countries such as India, the regulatorsit is generally found that the debt market segment of thehave had to assume the role of market developers.capital market develops more slowly than the equityWhat have the developments in these segments of themarket. Purely from an issuer angle, the debt market couldfinancial market? What needs to be done? What issuesbe segregated into G-Sec and corporate bond market. Dueremain the paramount concern of the regulators? Let meto their genre, I shall discuss them separately.today trace some of the developments and share with youThe existence of an efficient government securitiessome of my thoughts on these issues.debt market is usually seen as an essential precursor forthe corporate debt market. Following a developmentalmodel rather than a regulatory and supervisory model,II. OVERVIEW OF DEVELOPMENTS IN THE G-SECthe Reserve Bank of India took up the task of developingMARKETthe government securities market, so as to facilitate overallimprovement in the strength of financial and economic Let me take you to little bit back in time. As we allsystem of the country. Along with the initiation of overall know, the Government securities market before the 1990seconomic reforms in the early 1990s, the development of was characterised by administered (and often artificiallythe government securities market was initiated in 1992. low) rates of interest, captive investors (essentially banks)Speech by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, the then Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 3rd India Debt Markets Conference*organised by Citigroup and Fitch Ratings India on August 14, 2004 at Mumbai.  Dr. Mohan is grateful to H.R. Khan, ParthaRay and S. Subbaiah of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance.1091C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004due to high Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)  requirements, known. I will only recount some of the key reformabsence of a liquid and transparent secondary market for measures:G-Secs and lack of smooth and robust yield curve forl 1992: Introduction of auction system for pricepricing of the instruments. Low coupon rates were offereddiscoveryon government securities to keep government borrowingl 1993: Introduction of 91 day T- bills for managingcosts down, which made real rates of return negative forliquidity and benchmarkingseveral years till the mid-1980s. During the 1980s, thevolume of debt expanded considerably, particularly short- l 1994: Zero Coupon Bonds were issuedterm debt, due to automatic accommodation to Centrall 1995: Primary Dealer (PD) system was set up; DvPgovernment by the Reserve Bank, through the mechanismsettlement system introduced; Floating Rate Bondsof ad hoc Treasury Bills. With a captive investor baseissuedand interest rate below the market rate, the secondaryl 1997: Technical Advisory Committee set up,market for government bonds remained dormant. Artificialpermitting repos in G-Secs, allowed FIIs to investyields on government securities affected the yield structurein G-Secs; system of Ways and Means advancesof financial assets in the system, and led to higher lendingintroduced for Government of India; introducedrates. Driven by these compulsions, Reserve Bank’sCapital Indexed Bondsmonetary management was dominated by a regime ofadministered interest rates, and rising Cash Reserve Ratiol 1999: OTC interest rate derivatives like IRS/FRAs(CRR) and SLR prescriptions. High CRR and SLR leftintroduced.little room for monetary maneuvering.l 2000: Introduction of Liquidity Adjustment FacilityWhat were the compelling factors for initiating(LAF) to manage short term liquidity mismatchesreforms? The following factors were extremely importantl 2002: Operationalisation of Negotiated Dealingin particular:System (NDS) and CCIL. Trade data on NDS madel Increasing borrowing requirements of theavailable on RBI web site for transparencygovernment due to a rising fiscal deficit;l 2003: Introduction of trading of G-Secs on stockl The need to keep the cost of borrowing reasonable;exchanges, permitting non-banks to participate inl The need for developing a benchmark for otherrepo market, introduction of exchange tradedfixed income instruments for the purposes ofinterest rate futurespricing and valuation;l Operation of monetary policy through indirectIII. RECENT D EVELOPMENTSinstruments like Open Market Operations andrepos, which required an active secondary marketSubsequently, significant measures have also beenfor G-Secs andtaken during the current year, 2004. An importantl Improving the overall efficiency of the financialdevelopment has been the introduction of the Real Timemarkets. Some of the most salient reforms initiatedGross Settlement System which will facilitate betterin the G-Sec market after 1991-92 are presentedliquidity management. The DvP III mode of settlementbelow.has been enabled which permits net settlement of bothIn this perspective the primary objective of the reform funds and securities legs. The DvP III mode of settlementhas also permitted the rollover of repos. Anotherprocess in the G-Sec market was to raise government debtsignificant development was the introduction of theat market related interest rates. In order to do so,development of appropriate market infrastructure, Market Stabilisation Scheme which has expanded theinstruments available to the Reserve Bank for managingelongation of maturity profile, increasing the width anddepth of the markets, became extremely critical. the surplus liquidity in the system.Improving risk management practices and transparencyThese reforms can be briefly viewed as a systematicwere the other important considerations.exercise for the development of the debt market as wellWhat did we do? The sequence of Reserve Bank’s as integration of the entire financial markets by makingit deep, wide and transparent. In looking back at themarket development activities in the 1990s is now well1092C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004(YTM) of a basket comprising three bonds with maturitysequence and pace of these reforms that have been putranging from 9 to 11 years. The exchanges are in thein place over a decade, one begins to appreciate theprocess of launching such a new product.complexity and difficulty that is intrinsic to thedevelopment of an efficient debt market. And we stillb) Legality of OTC Derivatives – Amendments to SCRAhave a long way to go.OTC interest rate derivatives were introduced inThese reforms were linked to operational autonomy of1999. Banks could undertake plain vanilla FRA and IRSthe RBI. Measures such as the abolition of automaticcontracts for their own balance sheet management andmonetisation through ad-hoc Treasury Bills (in 1997) andalso for market making purposes, provided they ensureits replacement by Ways and Means Advances facility, withadequate infrastructure, risk management systems andlimits, to meet temporary cash flow mismatches for theinternal control systems. The volume in the market hasCentral Government, were considered critical for thegrown noticeably with the outstanding notional amountstabilisation of monetary policy. You are also aware that1at around Rs. 6,40,000 crore . However, there has beenthese measures have been taken in close collaboration withsome apprehension regarding legality of OTC derivativesthe market players. This underscores the need forwith section 18A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation)collaboration and consultation between regulatoryAct, 1956 (SCRA), making only derivatives contractsauthorities and market players in the process ofthat are executed on exchanges legal and valid.development of any market. It is heartening to note thatAccordingly, certain modifications by way ofthis has been achieved very successfully in the Indian debtsupplementary provisions to the proposed amendmentsmarket because of the existence of industry associationsare under discussion with the Government of India solike FIMMDA and PDAI, and an active PD system whereinas to ensure that the proposed amendments do notthe Primary Dealers have acted as a linking mechanismjeopardize the legal status of OTC derivatives.between the market and the Regulator. The heterogeneitySpecifically, it has been suggested that section 18A beof market participants, some of whom have brought in toamended so as to make contracts of the class and naturethe Indian market the best international technology, riskas notified by RBI legally valid, even if they are notmanagement practices, know how of the instruments,traded on any recognised stock exchange. Exchangeespecially derivatives has also helped greatly.traded derivatives have their own role to play in theLet me discuss some of the recent developments indebt market - but by their very nature they have to begreater detail : standardised products. OTC derivatives, on the otherhand can be customised to the requirements of thea) Interest Rate Futures (IRFs)trading entities. Thus both OTC and exchange tradedderivatives are essential for market development.Consequent upon the decision to introduce IRFs onNSE, guidelines in respect of RBI regulated entities werec) Rollover of Reposformulated to enable their participation. NSE introducedWith the decision to move gradually towards a purethree futures instruments on June 3, 2003, viz., futuresinter-bank call/term money market, there is a need tocontracts on notional 91 day Treasury Bill, futuresremove the operational/regulatory constraints in the repocontracts on notional 10 year coupon bearing bond andmarket. One of the perceived hurdles in the developmentfutures contracts on notional 10 year zero coupon bonds.of the repo market is the inability to rollover contracts.While banks were allowed to use futures only to hedgeTo enable continuous access to funds from the repotheir G-sec investments in Held for Trading (HFT) andmarket, it was decided to permit rollover of repos whichAvailable for Sale (AFS) categories, PDs were allowedwill be enabled along with DvP III.to deal in interest rate derivatives (IRDs) for both hedgingd) DvP III Mode of Settlementand trading. However, due to the lack of liquidity of theexchange traded futures market, Securities and Exchange In order to reduce the price risk assumed by marketBoard of India (SEBI) in consultation with FIMMDA participants, sale of securities previously purchased issimplified futures contracts on a 10-year notional bond, proposed to be permitted with certain safeguards built inwhich is priced on the basis of the ‘Yield To Maturity’ to prevent short sales. To enable this as well as to enable1As on September 17, 2004, this amount increased substantially to Rs.8,53,000 crore.1093C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004rollover of repos, net settlement in securities is required. Dealers will have to assume a greater role andTherefore, it has been decided to shift the settlement mode responsibilities for market making and retailing of G-secs.to DvP III. On the benefits side, the long pending demand of thePDs for exclusivity in the auctions of G-Secs in a limitede) Market Stabilisation Schemeway has been under the active consideration of RBI. InAs a response to the large-scale capital inflows inaddition, the Standing Technical Advisory Committee onrecent years and the consequent problems faced inMoney, Government Securities and Forex Markets hasmanaging liquidity, the Reserve Bank introduced theformed a Sub Group to look into the issue of broad basingMarket Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) after consulting thethe PDs portfolios by permitting them to invest in theGovernment of India for mopping up liquidity of a moresovereign securities abroad, setting up of overseas jointenduring nature in March 2004. Under this scheme, theventures, wholly owned subsidiaries, and the like.Government would issue existing instruments, such as,As a result of all these measures, the Indian G-SecTreasury Bills and/or dated securities by way of auctionsmarket has been transformed substantially over the lastunder the MSS, in addition to the normal borrowingten years. A major outcome of this development is thatrequirements, for absorbing liquidity from the system. Thethe market is becoming increasingly broad based: withintention of MSS is essentially to differentiate the liquiditythe market now looking well diversified with theabsorption of a more enduring nature by way ofparticipation of banks, financial institutions, providentsterilisation from the day-to-day normal liquidityfunds, insurance and pension funds, primary dealers, 100management operations. In order to provide transparencyper cent gilt mutual funds, corporate bodies, providentand stability to the financial markets, an indicativefunds, trusts, individuals, foreign institutional investorsschedule for issuance of Treasury Bills/dated securities(FIIs) and non-resident Indians (NRIs). Theon a quarterly basis is being announced.consolidation of securities achieved over the years, hasf) Capital Charge for Market Riskresulted in the development of active benchmarkWith a view to ensuring smooth transition to the normssecurities. Hence we now observe that the auctions forunder Basel II, banks were advised to maintain capitalGovernment securities have developed a high degree ofcharge for market risk over a two-year period as under:sophistication. There is an ever narrowing gap betweenl Banks would be required to maintain capital chargethe cut-off price and the weighted average cut-off price;for market risk in respect of their trading bookthe bids at the primary auction are nearly perfectlyexposures (including derivatives) by March 31,correlated with the secondary market yield curve2005.indicating excellent price discovery. A reasonablyl Banks would be required to maintain capital charge smooth and elongated yield curve of up to 30 yearsmaturity has emerged, which is probably comparablefor market risk in respect of the securities includedwith those in developed economies. Volumes of tradingunder available for sale (AFS) category by March31, 2006. in the secondary market are increasing and bid-askspreads are narrow. The annual turnover in the secondaryg) Primary Dealers and their Rolemarket for G-Secs now is more than twice the GDP ofAs we know, PDs are expected to promote retailingthe country and that, after Japan, India’s G-Sec marketin the G-Sec, active market making in G-Secs and priceis probably the largest in Asia.discovery. While the institution of PDs has led toI would like particularly to emphasise the high qualityimproved liquidity in the secondary market, retailing ofof infrastructure that has been put in place in India.G-Secs and promoting a retail market has not beenThrough a process of novation, a Central Counter Partyundertaken by the PDs on the scale and intensity thatlike the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL),was expected. With the proposed order driven trading inhas provided excellent infrastructure and risk managementG-Secs on the NDS, PDs are expected to play a significantmeans. The efficacy of the settlement system ofrole in developing the retail markets on exchanges. PDsgovernment securities and forex transactions throughshould also improve their market making in interest rateCCIL was clearly brought out recently when thederivatives, particularly with a larger category ofsettlement in respect of transactions of the Global Trustinstitutions like insurance companies coming into theBank following the moratorium, was put throughmarket. Thus, in order to fulfil their obligations, Primary1094C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004smoothly. There is still no room for complacency and to maturity and consequent reduction in market supplythe need for sustained efforts to further improve market of these securities are some of them.practices and to benchmark them against the internationalSeveral measures have been taken in the recent paststandards is of paramount importance.to transform the corporate debt market in IndiaIn fact in the process of reaching where we are today predominantly under the aegis of SEBI. Some of thesein developing the G-Sec market, several issues had to measures include de-materialisation and electronic transferbe addressed and problems were faced in the areas of of securities, rolling settlement, introduction ofbroadening the primary market with appropriate auction sophisticated risk management, trading and settlementmethodology, promoting depth and liquidity in the systems. Towards the end of 2003, SEBI has also takensecondary market, fostering market intermediaries and steps to reform the private placement market. Inmarket making, setting up of reliable trading and conjunction with these measures, Reserve Bank of India,settlements systems, ensuring adequate institutional, legal issued guidelines to banks on investment of their non-and risk management systems and facilitating data SLR securities. All these measures are expected todissemination and transparency. It is gratifying to note improve the functioning of corporate debt market in India.that despite these challenges, we could develop a deepSince this conference is a confluence of people acrossand liquid market for government securities in India.different sides of the debt markets in India, let me sharea recent development. To help in the further developmentof the corporate debt market, a Group has recently beenIII. R EVIEW OF THE C ORPORATE DEBT M ARKETset-up with the participation of RBI, SEBI and othermarket participants. Among others, the group intends toHaving delineated the developments of the G-Seclook into the following issues:market, let me now come to the other segment, viz.,l Examination of the issues relating to primarycorporate debt market, although it is the Securities andissuances as well as growth of secondary marketExchange Board of India (SEBI) that has the primaryof corporate debt securities in the light ofresponsibility. But I do have some locus standi to speakinternational experience.on this issue as Chairman of SEBI’s Market Advisoryl Examination of the regulatory aspects for theCommittee! Whereas the Government Securities marketdevelopment of the market for Asset Backedhas developed a great deal, the corporate debt marketSecurities (ABS) and Mortgage Backed Securitieshas a long way to go. Though the corporate debt market(MBS).in India has been in existence since independence in 1947,l Analysing the issues relating to trading, settlementit was only after 1985-86, following some debt marketand accounting of corporate debt securitiesreforms that state owned public enterprises (PSUs) beganincluding the issue of DvP settlement for corporateissuing PSU bonds. However, in the absence of a welldebt market.functioning secondary market, such debt instrumentsl Suggesting measures to enhance transparency inremained highly illiquid and unpopular among thepricing and valuation of corporate debt securities.investing population at large.I understand that the deliberations of the Group areHowever, corporates continued to prefer privateunderway. Taking advantage of this conference, let meplacements to public issues. Such a dominance of privateinvite your suggestions and comments for furthering theplacement has been attributed to several factors, viz., easedevelopment of the corporate debt market, so that weof procedures and operation of private placement,can take a comprehensive review and propose measuresinvolved procedure and considerably higher costs ofwhich are pragmatic and relevant.public issues, and higher subscriptions for privateplacements. Essentially for these reasons, the financialinstitutions have tended to dominate public issues in theIV. SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME IN THE G-SEC MARKETprimary corporate debt market. The secondary market forcorporate debt has also certain shortcomings. Lack ofIn order to have a feel of the shape of things to comemarket making resulting in poor liquidity, tendency on in the G-Sec market, let me have a quick review of thethe part of institutional investors to hold these securitiesvarious proposed measures in the G-Sec market.1095C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004a) Diversification of Instruments: insurance that at the time of redemption the principalvalue would not fall below par. The proposal for theDifferent investors have a variety of investmentreintroduction of such CIB is under discussion with thehorizons, risk appetite and needs. It is therefore importantGovernment. Our proposals on the characteristics ofto diversify the instruments available.capital indexed bonds have also been put on our websiteFloating Rate Bonds: There is a perceptibleto elicit expert and market views. We will welcome anyimprovement in the issuance of Floating Rate Bondsviews you might have on the appropriate design of these(FRBs), which is an effective instrument for hedginginstruments. It may be indicated that CIB was introducedinterest rate risk by investors in the context of elongationin December 1997 which matured in December 2002. Noof the maturity profile of Government debt. A total ofsubsequent issue has been made till date.Rs. 16,000 crore was raised through Floating Rate Bondsb) Screen-based Trading of Government Securitiesduring 2003-04, which accounted for 16 per cent of thetotal issuances of dated securities, excluding those issued A countrywide, anonymous, screen based, order drivenby way of private placements with the RBI. The calendar system for trading in government securities introduced infor H1/2004-05 also provides for issuance of FRBs for the stock exchanges (NSE, BSE and OTCEI) in Januaryabout 10 to 20 per cent of the total issuances. We have 2003 has continued to suffer from very poor tradingalready issued Rs.18,000 crore in this fiscal year. These volumes during 2003-04. In order to examine the variousinstruments are particularly popular during times of issues related to the successful operationalisation of theperceived market uncertainty. screen-based trading, a Working Group on Screen BasedTrading in Government Securities was constituted. TheSTRIPS: Introduction of STRIPS is one of our topGroup has made several recommendation relating topriorities. An informal interdepartmental Group in RBIimproving the NDS in terms of software and hardwareon operationalisation of Separate Trading for Registeredand linkages with INFINET, administration of NDSInterest and Principal of Securities (STRIPS) hasfunctioning, setting up of an NDS user Group etc. Therecommended certain system requirement specificationsGroup has also recommended that it would be desirablewhich are being evaluated internally. Meanwhile, stepsto make available an anonymous, screen-based orderhave been taken to realign the coupon payments dates ondriven trading system for the NDS members in a Straightfour identified dates so as to create a critical mass forThrough Processing (STP) mode. The Group has alsoissue of coupon STRIPS. Necessary enabling legalsuggested in the Report several measures to develop theprovisions are expected to come into effect as and whenretail gilt market on the exchanges. These include,the Government Securities Bill is introduced and passedobligation on market intermediaries to provide two-wayby Parliament soon. With introduction of STRIPS, thequotes, spreading awareness through concerted campaignslong felt needs of the market in the areas of ALMby exchanges etc. The Group also highlighted the needmismatches and better cash flow management would befor market making on exchanges by the Primary Dealers.addressed, besides, improving the opportunities for theretail segment for investing in long term discount As you are aware, the Reserve Bank of India hasinstruments. decided to implement the recommendation relating tointroduction of screen-based order matching tradingCapital Indexed Bonds: The RBI proposes to re-system on the NDS. The trading platform, called “RBI-introduce Capital Indexed Bonds (CIBs) with modifiedNDS-GILTS-Order Matching Segment, (or, NDS-OM,features. The proposed CIB, in line with structuresin short) is a part of RBI’s NDS application. It will beprevalent internationally, would offer inflation linkedavailable to the NDS members in addition to the existingreturns both on the coupons and the principal repayments.trading mechanism. It will be temporarily hosted at CCILThe proposed CIB would be offered with marketpending installation of required infrastructure at RBI. Thedetermined real coupon rate, which would remain fixednew trading system will be audited by external expertsduring the currency of the bonds. The semi-annual couponduring the trial run phase to ensure robustness of securitypayments on the bonds would be made by applying thefeatures and connectivity, and efficiency of the system.fixed real coupon rate to the inflation-adjusted principal.The proposed system which was demonstrated by CCILThe principal repayment at maturity would be theto the market participants recently on August 11, 2004 isinflation-adjusted principal amount or its original parexpected to go live as soon as system integrity is ensuredvalue, whichever is greater, thus providing an in-built1096C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004and appropriate training has been imparted to traders in companies. SEBI issued a circular on December 22, 2003the NDS members. I am sure that this new option to the to all the stock exchanges incorporating the abovemarket traders would go a long way in addressing some suggestions. It was observed that the clarifications issuedof the issues relating to transparency, price discovery, by SEBI effectively addressed almost all the issues raisedcredit risk etc. by the market participants. The feedback received fromthe market confirmed it.c) Clearing of OTC Interest Rate Derivatives by CCILa) Infrastructure FinancingA central counter party based clearing arrangementfor OTC derivatives would reduce counterparty risk and With the development of an elongated and smoothextend the benefits of netting. Accordingly, in order to yield curve and aided by abundant liquidity in the system,strengthen the OTC derivatives market and to mitigate I think the stage is set for growth in infrastructurethe risks involved, a clearing arrangement through CCIL financing. It is needless to highlight the importance offor the OTC interest rate derivatives is under examination. infrastructure financing if the stated objective of attainingThis measure is expected to strengthen the OTC interest the developed country status for India is to be achieved.rate derivatives market. Therefore, the developments in the debt markets shouldpercolate down to this sector as well. On its part, RBId) Trade in non-SLR Securities - Settlement andhas been actively encouraging the government and theInformationmarket participants to work more on the issue and ensurePrudential guidelines on banks’ investment in non-SLRthcredit enhancement to the sector. In the recently held 13securities require banks to report all ‘spot’ transaction inState Finance Secretaries Conference, a decision waslisted and unlisted non-SLR securities on the NDS andtaken to set up a Working Group to study the issue ofsettle through CCIL, from a date to be notified. CCIL iscredit enhancement to the infrastructure financing inworking out an arrangement for settlement on non-states. I feel that the private sector infrastructure agenciesguaranteed basis and dissemination of information relatingcould also be active in the long term financing, but forto trades in listed as well as unlisted non-SLR debtthis to work, the credit enhancement has to pick up. Whileinstruments by NDS members. This measure wouldin 1995-96, there were large number of issuers, today weimprove transparency of trades in corporate debt market.have a substantial pool of potential investors, who needto be tapped for this credit enhancement to materialisefor the infrastructure area. At the same time, I hope thatV. POTENTIAL OF CORPORATE D EBT MARKETa bond insurance mechanism can potentially be developedfor ensuring credit enhancement and investor safety.In order to improve transparency and improving themarket for private placement of debt, SEBI issued There have been enough indications that infrastructureguidelines on September 30, 2003 stipulating theneeds would go up, which would contribute to an efficientconditions to be complied in respect of private placement functioning of corporate debt market. The crucial issuesof debt. These conditions governed issuance, listing and involved in developing the corporate debt market are thetrading of privately placed debt securities. Subsequent toways and means of elongation of maturity of corporatethe issue of the circular, market participants madedebt paper, improving the liquidity in secondary market,representations and suggestions and sought clarifications improving institutional mechanics etc. While the G-Secon various provisions of the circular from SEBI. Theremarkets were now fairly well-developed, the corporatewas a general feeling in the market that the guidelines debt markets needed to go a long way so that India canwere too stringent. It may be mentioned here that from have a well-integrated financial market. An integratedtime to time, RBI had been interacting with SEBI on thefinancial market is necessary for efficient transmissionissue of Private Placement of Corporate Debt. Based onof monetary policy, keeping in view the fact that it isthe feedback received from market participants and banks, now operated on indirect instruments. Fortunately, theRBI has modified (on December 10, 2003) the prudentialfoundations for developing an efficient corporate debtguidelines for banks’ non-SLR investments. Besides, SEBI market have already been laid as the necessarywas advised to take steps to address the issues of (i) a infrastructure and institutions that have been created forsimplified listing procedure for listed companies and (ii)the G-Sec market are already available. The regulatorsto spell out an appropriate listing procedure for unlistedhave also taken the first initiative in this regard with SEBI1097C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004announcing its guidelines on trading and listing regulations on the private placement in debt market. Torequirements for corporate debt and the RBI asking banks encourage the growth of this market, the Reserve Bankto invest only in listed and rated corporate paper on a excluded investments in Asset Backed Securities (ABS)/private placement basis. Mortgage Backed Securities (MBS) from the 10 percentceiling on the investment of banks in unlisted non-SLRThe economy being on a high growth path wouldsecurities. However, several issues relating to regulation,create higher demand for funds, especially inlisting and improvement of liquidity need to beinfrastructure development. Corporates looking to raisingaddressed. Most MBS/ABS are issued by Special Purposefunds from the capital markets would also require themVehicles (SPVs) in the form of trusts which are notto raise the balancing debt. With term lending fromregulated. ABS/MBS issued by trusts cannot be listed,financial institutions on the decline, corporate fundingalthough these are rated. Only the securities issued byneeds, especially of the infrastructure segment, wouldthe companies can be listed. On the other hand, there isnecessarily have to be met by the bond market. With theselegal ambiguity on the status of the listing of ABS/MBS.motivating factors for development of corporate debtExchanges reportedly sought SEBIs clarification on themarket and a large pool of well-informed urban populationissue and it is learnt that SEBI preferred an unambiguouswith 35 cities having 10 million population, there is aenabling provision in the SCRA that these mortgagehuge potential in this market for new issuers andbacked securities can be listed. Even in the case ofinvestors. However, we need innovations in creditU.S.A., where the ABS/MBS market is very large, theenhancement with the active participation of brokerageregulatory process is still evolving. In fact, the SEC ishouses, retail investors etc.proposing comprehensive new and amended rules andHowever, while the development of corporate debtforms covering registration, disclosure and reportingmarket was an opportunity, the experience of developingrequirements for ABS and MBS under the Securitiesthe G-Sec market has shown that it is a long drawn outAct of 1933 and the Securities Exchanges Act of 1934.and arduous effort which requires cooperative andThe Group on corporate debt market is examining thecollaborative efforts from not only the regulators butissues relating to development of securitised market inalso from the market participants and self regulatoryIndia in a comprehensive manner, including the issuesorganisations. The players – both issuers and investorsrelating to pricing, valuation and credit enhancements.- in the corporate debt market would be varied. It wastherefore important for the regulators to focus attentionon protecting investors’ interest by developing processesVI. THE R OAD A HEADof clearing and settlement that would ensure a risk freeenvironment. This calls for effective regulation andHow do we see the future? Taking a cue from Woodyinnovative approaches as well. One of these innovationsAllen, the American film maker who said “forecasting iscould be conversion of loan market in to bond marketdifficult, particularly for the future”, let me refrain fromof banks. Since the cash flows being similar, and loansgiving any futuristic scenario. Instead let me flag fouroutstanding are significant, these loans could beissues viz., (a) securitisation of state government paper;securitised and bonds could be issued against them. This(b) FRB and its impact on the debt markets; (c) thewould lead to high credit quality and reduction in overallderivatives market and (d) corporate governance and riskrisks.management.b) Repo in Corporate Debt Papersa) Securitising State Government PaperTo facilitate the growth of corporate debt market, thePromoting liquidity in state government papers is aReserve Bank is actively considering introduction of reposcrucial issue, especially in the context of large borrowingin corporate bonds, to be settled through CCIL.by the state governments under debt swap of high couponParticipation of corporates in repo market is also beingstate government loans with the government of India. Theconsidered positively.recent issue of power bonds has also added to the stockc) Securitisation Marketof state government paper. Against this background andThe securitisation market has been growing at a rapidin the scenario of the continued large borrowings by statepace, particularly after the SEBI/RBI introduced governments, there is an urgent need to promote liquidity1098C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004and trading in state government papers. One way of highly challenging task. Banks are hesitant to financesolving this issue could be to securitise the various state infrastructure projects partly because they lack thegovernment paper. Such securitising of state government requisite skills in project appraisal and partly onpaper and issuing units based on these underlying state consideration of asset-liability mismatches. The gapgovernment papers, addresses the issues of fungibility, between increasing demand for financing infrastructuretransferability etc., besides improving liquidity in state activity and lower budgetary support has led to a wavegovernment papers, I therefore, urge the market of deregulation and privatisation of infrastructure in aparticipants to think on this issue and get back to us with number of countries. The huge gap between investmentcomments and suggestions. demand and the supply of finances provides complexchallenges to the different constituents of the financialb) Fiscal Reponsibility and Budget Managementsystem, which compel a search for alternative ways of(FRBM) Act and the Debt Marketsfinancing these investments. With the development of anOver the last two decades, sustained budget deficitsactive and liquid market for securitised corporate debt,produced large issuance of government securities in India.mutual funds, pension and insurance funds could alsoTaking advantage of this, we were able to develop a deepemerge as potentially large investors. Thus, in the contextand liquid government securities market. Improvementsof infrastructure financing, the prevelance of a long-termin the fiscal position in the last two years have resulteddebt market becomes critical. A vibrant debt marketin a lower than budgeted fiscal deficit. The governmentassumes importance in the context of providinghas embarked on a process of fiscal consolidation throughmechanisms for greater liquidity as also for riskthe Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Actminimisation. In India, while equity markets havethrough which the improvement in the fiscal position (zerodeveloped faster in terms of liquidity, infrastructure andrevenue deficit) is projected to be achieved in the nextregulatory framework, the debt market has lagged behind.five years. The fiscal deficit is sought to be brought downAs the fiscal consolidation process proceeds resourcesto 3.0 per cent. The achievement of these targets can bewith financial institutions of different kinds willexpected to lead to a significant decline in the share ofincreasingly become available for investment in corporategovernment securities in the total assets of the financialdebt for financing productive activities.system. However, after accounting for inflation andThird, with the decline of development financeexpected real GDP growth, there may not be much fallinstitutions, one of the sources of finance for corporates,in the absolute level of net issuance of governmentviz., project loans has been falling. Corporates willsecurities in the coming years. The Indian market hastherefore have to increasingly source their debt financingbeen used to rising fiscal deficits and large borrowingdirectly from the market. This underscores the importanceprogrammes of government over the years. So we willof a transparent, deep and liquid corporate debt market.continue to have active issuance of government paper inIn order to promote infrastructure lending, the Governorthe foreseeable future. Banks especially have beenproposed, in his Annual Policy Statement on May 18,investing in government securities much more than the2004 to allow banks to raise long-term bonds with astatutory requirements. The Reserve Bank of India,minimum maturity of 5 years to the extent of theirthrough its monetary and credit policy statements andexposure of residual maturity of more than 5 years to theother fora, has been cautioning against such a substantialinfrastructure sector. It was also proposed to expand theexposure to market risk if the yields reverse. In fact, thescope of the definition of infrastructure lending to includeannual policy statement issued on May 18 reads “Theprojects/sectors for construction in the areas of (i) agro-movement in interest rates during 2003-04 corroboratesprocessing and supply of inputs to agriculture (ii)the view that banks should, in their interest, take steps topreservation and storage of processed agro-products,build up investment fluctuation reserves (IFR) in a smoothperishable goods such as fruits, vegetable and flowersand phased manner for better risk management”.including testing facilities for quality and (iii) educationalThe challenge facing the Indian economy is theinstitutions and hospitals.acceleration of the growth process. The availability ofAll these point to the need and scope for theadequate infrastructure facilities is vital for thediversification of asset holding of the banking system inacceleration of the economic development of a country.favour of corporate bonds. Several other instruments suchHowever, the financing of infrastructure projects is a1099C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004d) Risk Management and Corporate Governanceas ABS/MBS would also offer the scope for substantialbusiness potential.Presently, PDs measure market risk of their portfoliosbased on the internal VaR model and/or standardised model,c) Derivatives Marketwhile the banks are required to use a flat charge. In orderThe need for a well developed interest rateto implement the BIS guidelines on measuring andderivatives market cannot be overemphasized inmanaging market risk, banks have also been advised toproviding effective hedging tools for interest rate risksmeasure their market risk in a phased manner. It is ofpresent in the balance sheet and in facilitating tradingparamount importance that market participants ensure soundbased on two-way view on interest rates, which is notand reliable risk management system to handle credit,possible in the underlying cash market in the absencemarket and operational risks. How well we guard theof short selling. Deregulation of interest rates, whichsystem against the various risks would decide the futurehelped in making financial market operations efficientdirection of the market. I would also like to emphasiseand cost effective, has brought to the fore a wide arraythat the need for good corporate governance in all theof risks faced by market participants. To manage andinstitutions is some thing which we need to ensure in lettercontrol these risks, several instruments such as Forwardand spirit. I would like to quote George Bernard ShawRate Agreements (FRA) and Interest Rate Swaps (IRS)who said, “The only man who behaved sensibly was mywere introduced in July 1999, which could providetailor; he took my measurement anew every time he saweffective hedges against interest rate risks. Further, inme, while all the rest went on with their old measurementsJune 2003, the Reserve Bank of India had issuedand expected them to fit me.” Corporate governance isguidelines to banks/primary dealers/FIs for transactingconducting business in a transparent manner that meetsin exchange traded interest rate futures, which werethe ever changing needs of the customers, society,introduced on the exchanges. There has also been a sharpregulators, investors and other stake holders.increase in the volume of transactions in the OTCproducts. Though there has been a significant increasein the number and amount of contracts, participation inVI.EPILOGUEthe markets continues to remain limited mainly to selectDevelopment of debt market is not a one-off affair.foreign and private sector banks and PDs. I would liketo emphasise that the PDs are expected to be market This has to happen in a continuous way. I have tried togive you a flavour of what has been done, what couldmakers in this segment. This coupled with recenthave been done and, in that light, how does future lookmodifications in the IRD features by SEBI and thelike.expected clarification on the legality of OTC derivativeis expected to give thrust to the interest rate derivativesLet me conclude by submitting that while we havemarket in India. In this connection, I would like to stressbeen able to foster the development of a deep and liquidthe need and importance of sound and adequate riskG-Sec market in India, there are issues that needmanagement practices by market participants in thecontinued coordination and cooperation between thederivatives market. International experience teaches usmarket participants and the regulators, and opportunitiesthe need for greater care in handling these instruments.that offer excellent opportunities for making this a trulyI would expect that the market players not only put inglobal debt market. We are aware of the complexitiesplace an appropriate risk management policy andand the difficult road ahead, but are keen to approachprocedures for these products, but would also give equalthe task with flexibility through the active involvementimportance to the skills development of their humanof market participants. Let me also wish the deliberationsresources to handle these instruments and to appreciateall success and look forward to learning from the expertisethe underlying risks.and experience of the distinguished participants.1100C M Y K
