Managing Public Debt and Promoting Debt Markets in India*I welcome this opportunity to be with you and benefit from the deliberations.  There is anincreasing awareness of the importance of domestic-debt markets, particularly in our region.Recent events in the Asian region have bought to light the importance of avoiding excessivereliance on the banking system for financial intermediation even as the health of the bankingsystems is being improved.  Diversification of means of intermediation and competitiontherein within a country adds to both efficiency and stability of the domestic financial systemand avoids shift of financial intermediation outside the country.  Central bankers have aspecial interest in fixed income markets because they are to be addressed for ensuring atransmission channel of monetary policy.  In many countries government securities market iscritical in view of its role in creating the risk free yield curve as a benchmark for pricing othersecurities.  Of course, the investors and intermediaries do look for efficient, reasonably stableand transparent fixed income market, and the regulators do strive to ensure these.  In brief,the current challenge before us appears to be the mechanisms by which we encouragedevelopment of debt markets, as also carefully craft appropriate roles for manager of public-Perhaps, India has been reasonably successful in meeting this challenge so far.  No doubt, theprogress in equity markets has been impressive in India, as it has been in most of the Asianregion.  But, the recent compulsions of a larger access to market borrowings by governmentas a source of financing fiscal deficit, and greater opportunities for  to accesscapital markets for their debt needs in addition to Development Financial Institutions, haveprovided challenges and opportunities for the policy makers in managing public debt andorganisers suggested that we should share with you ourBefore narrating our experience, it is essential to recognise that country context is very verycritical, and generalisations would be inadvisable.  Apart from the size and structure of theeconomy, state of fiscal and financial sectors, pattern of corporate structures and cultures,degree of openness of the economy, the foreign currency component of public debt which islow in India, and the maturity pattern of such external obligations which is generally oflonger duration in India needs to be .  In brief, the domestic dimension of debt ingeneral and public debt in particular is dominant in India’s debt markets and this addressIn fact, I was happy to read in BIS review, a speech by Governor,  Mongol Sonakul ondevelopment of bond markets in Thailand, where he made a lucid presentation of the benefitsof bond market, necessary conditions for development of bond markets and the criticality of adeep and liquid government bond market.Similarly Mr. Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority saidrecently in May at Chang Mai : “there has been notably little disagreement about thedesirability of developing domestic and regional bond markets.  But there has also been littleprogress.  And there has been no lack of explanation of why this is the case”.Chatutoday would naturally reflect such an orientation.emphasisedapproaches, processes and strategies for our mutual benefit.promoting debt markets in India.  The corporatesdebt and regulator of debt markets as a whole.Friends,Background and Role of RBIRecent years have seen significant transformation in the debt market in India with farreaching implications. As the process of reform continues, the role of financial markets in theeconomy gets significantly enhanced. While this process essentially involves domesticliberalisation, the decision to open up the economy adds urgency and complexity to theprocess of developing financial markets in India. The Reserve Bank of India has been takingspecial efforts to develop the various segments of financial markets, in particular, money,Government securities and forex markets. Government securities market constitutes apredominant portion of debt markets in India. The relative share of non-Government bondshas also picked up in recent years, as a logical extension of reforms in the Governmentsecurities markets and opening up of the financial sector. Even so, given the size of thesovereign debt, central to the development of debt market is the development of theThe primary interest of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in financial markets is because of itscriticality in acting as the transmission channel of monetary policy especially while movingtowards reliance on indirect instruments of policy.  Currently, the Government  securitiesmarket is the overwhelming part of the overall debt market. Interest rates in this marketprovide benchmarks for the system as a whole. In the recent past, several initiatives havelaunched the market into a high growth trajectory, in terms of depth, liquidity and turnover,participants, etc. Several initiatives for development of this market have helped the success ofa large borrowing programme in recent years. This is critical not only from the point of viewof the Reserve Bank, which is both the debt manager and regulator, but also from the point ofview of investors who are concerned about the monetary and fiscal management in theThe Reserve Bank's strategy takes into account the considerations of both policy makers andinvestors.  Reform has encompassed market practices in both primary and secondary markets,strengthening the institutional structure, developing new and innovative instruments,widening the participant base, rationalising tax measures, establishing a regulatoryThe approach to reform in the Government Securities market has several features which mayinterest the observers. First, the reform process is characterised by the caution with a tiltthe  careful sequencing, by the mutually reinforcing monetarymeasures and by the complementarity with other policies. Creating a conducive policyenvironment as will be explained later has been a priority.  Further, the reform in this markethas always  been undertaken within the overall monetary policy framework and iscoordinated with reform in money and forex markets. Second, it progressed on the basis of aclear-cut agenda, which has aided the sequencing process. Third, major reforms wereimplemented in phases, allowing for transition so as not to detabilise market participants.Fourth, the entire process has been facilitated through collaborative approach impartingtransparency in intentions. The Reserve Bank and Government have been working in closecoordination on all issues.   At a policy level, this involves legislative changes and manyother parameters.  At an operating level, there is a Working Group consisting of seniorofficials from Reserve Bank of India and Government of India on cash and debt management,which helps the process of consultation on management of government debt. In fact, RBI has2towards preserving stability, by Approach to Reformframework, initiating changes in legal framework, and imparting transparency in operations.country.Government securities market.initiated a process of periodical meetings with Finance Secretaries at State level (India is afederation of States) which has helped treasury management as well as debt managementoperations at State level. Fifth, a formal consultative mechanism with market participants wasestablished by the Reserve Bank through a Technical Advisory Committee on Money andGovernment Securities Markets where important policy and operational changes proposed tobe implemented are discussed. The Technical Advisory Committee has appointed workinggroups to more closely look into the technical details of policy proposals. This Committeehas representation from banks - public sector, private and foreign, mutual funds, financialinstitutions, credit rating agencies, Primary Dealers Association and Fixed Income, MoneyMarket and Derivatives Association (a self-regulatory organisation) and independenteconomists, apart from representation from Government. The Reserve Bank also holdsseparate consultations with Primary Dealers Association on important issues concerningpublic debt. Sixth, before finalising important policy changes especially on operationalaspects, draft guidelines on issues are circulated as consultative papers to market participantsand their comments are given serious consideration before issuing final guidelines. Seventh,coordination with Securities and Exchange Board of India, the regulator of stock exchangesand corporate debt except those with initial maturities upto one year is ensured both at apolicy level and at operational level.  In particular, at a policy level, coordination is ensuredthrough a High Level Committee on Capital Markets presided by Governor, and at anoperational level through a technical group of officials, both of which include nominees ofMinistry of Finance. Eighth, international best practices are constantly reviewed in inter-departmental Working Groups within RBI before designing and opertionalising changes.Ninth, public debate is generated on the changes contemplated by announcing the intentionsand proposals for structural reform through Monetary and Credit Policy statements andspeeches of senior officials.  Consultation and transparency are at the core of the reformprocess.  Finally, in all these processes, the interests of investors and intermediaries are keptin view and these include a liquid market to facilitate easy entry and exit, tools for hedging,transparency in operations, an efficient settlement system, an enabling legal environment, anda clear and simple, but robust regulatory framework. Of course, development of technologicalThere are three main segments in the debt markets in India, viz., Government Securities,Public Sector Units (PSU) bonds and corporate securities. The market for GovernmentSecurities comprises the Centre, State and State-Sponsored securities. The PSU bonds aregenerally treated as surrogates of sovereign paper, sometimes due to explicit guarantee andoften due to the comfort of public ownership.  Some of the PSU bonds are tax free whilemost bonds, including government securities are not tax free. The Government Securitiessegment is the most dominant among these three segments. Many of the reforms in pre-1997period were fundamental, like introduction of auction systems and PDs. The reform in theGovernment Securities market which began in 1992, with Reserve Bank playing a lead role,entered into a very active phase since April 1997, with particular emphasis on developmentSince the sixties and until the nineties, the Government Securities market remained dormantsince the government was borrowing at preannounced coupon rates from basically a captivegroup of investors, such as banks.  In a way, we had a passive internal debt management3Creating a Conducive Policy Environmentof secondary and retail markets.Segments of Debt Marketsinfrastructure  overrides all these objectives in the sense that it facilitates these objectives.policy.  This, coupled with automatic monetisation of budget deficit prevented developmentof a deep and vibrant Government Securities market.  As long as automatic existed, it was difficult to assure a framework for Government securities market in terms ofmatching demand and supply through a price discovery mechanism.  Hence, a mostsignificant development has been the elimination of the practice of automatic monetisation ofthe Central Government budget deficit through Ad hoc Treasury Bills with effect from April1, 1997 and the introduction of a new scheme of Ways and Means Advances (WMA).  In thenineties, several other measures were taken for creating an enabling environment for efficientmarket conditions. For instance, the total effective statutory pre- of the bankingsystem has been progressively brought down, the administrative structure of interest rates hasalmost been dismantled, prudential norms have been introduced gradually in line withinternational best practices, banking supervision has been strengthened, transparency anddisclosure standards were enhanced to be on par with international standards, and riskThere are several ways of analysing market development, and perhaps a convenient way is toFrom the investor point of view, a range of Treasury Bills give a variety of options formanaging cash surpluses. At the same time, for Government spending long-term funds needed to be raised in a cost-effective manner. Keeping these in view, over the reform period,a variety of Treasury Bills of 14-day, 91-day, 182-day and 364-day maturity have beenintroduced. In the long-term segment, the vanilla or the fixed coupon bonds are the mostcommonly issued instruments. However, over the years, given the large market borrowingprogramme of the Government and a large variety of investors, we have tried to innovate andissued zero coupon bonds, floating rate bonds, and capital indexed bonds. Government datedsecurities have been issued in a maturity range of  2 to 20 years depending on prevailingconditions in the market. Currently, the weighted average maturity of outstanding marketableThe non-Government debt market has a wider variety of bonds from very short-term to long-term maturity. These bonds have many innovative features like step-up, call and put options,and include structured obligations, etc. Much of the PSU bonds and corporate securities areRepos are permitted in Government securities.  It has also been decided to extend repos inPSU bonds and private corporate debt securities, provided they are held in form in a depository and the transactions are done in recognised stock exchanges.  TheEarly during the reform process, the Reserve Bank promoted the Discount and Finance Houseof India and Securities Trading Corporation of India to promote the development of themoney market and secondary market for government securities. The Reserve Bank has4operationalised.Institution Developmentsystem is yet to be fully dematerialisedprivately placed.debt is 7.75 years.areInstrument Developmenttrack measures in regard to instruments, institutions and participants.Market Development Measuresmanagement practices have been prescribed.emptionsmonetisationsubsequently sold its majority shares to market participants and these institutions have sinceSince the inception in 1995, the number of Primary Dealers ( PDs) in Government Securitieshas progressively increased from 6 to 15. The obligations cast upon PDs include an annualminimum bidding commitment for dated securities and Treasury Bills with a minimumsuccess ratio and commitment to underwrite the gap between the subscribed/accepted amountin respect of dated securities and the notified amount, where there is a short-fall.  The PDs areallowed access to call money as well as repos/reverse repo markets and to trade in all moneymarket instruments.  They have access to Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) and currentaccount facility with the Reserve Bank.  The Reserve Bank also conducts exclusive OpenMarket Operations (OMO) in T-Bills through PDs.  A second level satellite dealer systemexits, with the main objective of retailing Government Securities. These satellite dealers areSDs have graduated asPDs.It may be of interest to some of you to note that among the Primary Dealers, the newlyThe Reserve Bank has also encouraged the setting up of mutual funds dealing exclusively ingilts, called gilt funds. Like PDs and SDs, these gilt funds are also provided with liquiditySignificant reforms in the non-Government debt market should also be recognised. Nationaland local stock exchanges have been set up with facility for trading in corporate debt, and forthat matter, even Government debt, through screen based systems. The securities andExchange Board of India regulates the primary issuances in capital and non-Government debtmarkets and ensures sound trading practices through stock exchanges. Depositories have beenAs is well known, a large participant base would result in lower cost of borrowing for theGovernment. In fact, retailing of Government Securities is high on the agenda of furtherBanks are the major investors in the Government Securities markets. Traditionally, banks arerequired to maintain a part of their net demand and time liabilities in the form of liquid assetsof which Government Securities have always formed the predominant share. Despitelowering the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) to the minimum of 25 per cent, banks areholding a much larger share of Government Stock as a portfolio choice. Other majorinvestors in Government Stock are financial institutions, insurance companies, mutual funds,corporates, individuals, non-resident Indians and overseas corporate bodies. Foreigninstitutional investors are permitted to invest in Treasury Bills and dated GovernmentOften, the same participants are present in the non-Government debt market also, either asissuers or investors. For example, banks are issuers in the debt market for their Tier-II capital.On the other hand, they are investors in PSU bonds and corporate securities. Foreign5Securities in both primary and secondary markets.reforms.Participantsset up to facilitate dematerialisation and quicker transfer mechanisms.support, among other facilities.are, J.P. Morgan, ABN Amro, Deutsche Bank, and DSP-Merrill Lynch. licensed also given some liquidity support by the Reserve Bank. A few of these obtained Primary Dealership in Government Securities.Institutional Investors are relatively more active in non-Government debt segment ascompared to the Government debt segment.It will be useful to identify the progress in primary and secondary market. Credible systemshave been established ensuring transparent mechanisms of issuance in the primary marketand creating efficient mechanisms for trading and settlement in the secondary market forPrimary MarketSince 1992, after the market orientation of Government borrowing programme, and later afterthe abolition of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit, the Reserve Bank has been resortingto primary market issues at greater frequency.  Efforts are made to raise all issues directlyfrom the market.  Dated Securities are generally issued through auctions or tap sale.  PrimaryDealers are permitted to underwrite the entire notified amount of the auctions.  Depending onprevailing market conditions, dated securities are sometimes privately placed with the RBI,and subsequently offloaded in the secondary market when conditions turn conducive.  IssuesUntil recently, Government dated securities were issued through yield based auctions. Abeginning has been made during the current year with regard to consolidation of Governmentdebt with a view to developing benchmark securities and development of a market forSTRIPS. Most of the current primary  issues are, therefore, reissuances of existing stockthrough reopening, and this has helped in consolidation of Government debt to some extentas also in creating a critical fungible mass for active trading and enhanced liquidity in thesecondary market.Treasury Bills are issued through auctions.  The notified amounts with respect to T-Bills havebeen rationalised in the recent period.  A calendar of T-Bills is announced in advance.  Non-competitive bids from select participants are accepted outside the notified amount.  Bothdiscriminatory and uniform price auction methods are used, as appropriate to each of the T-A large part of the issuance in the non-Government debt market is currently on privateplacement basis. Stringent entry and disclosure norms for public issues coupled with low costof issuance, ease of structuring instruments and saving of time lag in issuance has led to therapid growth of the private placement market in recent years.  Total resource from the private placement market has increased sharply over 4-fold between 1995-96 and1999-00, The share of private placement issues in total mobilisation from the primary capitalmarket (public issues and private placements) thus increased from about 40 per cent in 1995-96 to around 85 per cent by 1999-2000.Banks and Primary Dealers are the major players in the secondary market for GovernmentSecurities.  Most of Government Securities transactions in the secondary market are throughover-the-counter (OTC) negotiated deals.  However, banks are allowed to transact throughbrokers who are members of the National Stock Exchange and over-the-counter-Exchange of6Secondary MarketmobilisationBills.have occasionally devolved on the RBI.Government Securities.Progress in Primary and Secondary MarketsIndia, which facilitated screen based trading.  Since 1994, the National Stock Exchange(NSE) launched the Wholesale Debt Market (WDM) segment, which provides the onlyformal platform for trading in a wide range of debt securities, including GovernmentSecurities. The trading system known as National Exchange for Automated Trading (NEAT)is a fully automated screen based trading system that enables members across the country totrade simultaneously.  The trading system is an order driven  system which matches best buyand sell orders on a price-time priority. However, in actual practice, most of the trades inGovernment and non-Government debt are usually concluded over-the-counter and laterreported on screen. Thus, data regarding OTC deals are available on a near real time basis onthe NSE screen. Similarly, the dissemination of daily data by the RBI on price and volume ofCurrently the Reserve Bank operates the Government Securities Settlement system for thosehaving Subsidiary General Ledger Accounts in its Public Debt offices through DeliveryVersus payments System. Setting up of a Clearing Corporation for money and debt securitiesis in advanced stage of implementation. This will pave the way for further opening up of therepo market to PSU bonds and bonds of financial institutions held in demat form inThe aggregate volumes of trading in Government and non-Government debt in the secondarymarket have increased substantially over the years. However, Treasury Bills and Governmentdated securities accounted for the bulk of the trading volume at over 96 per cent of the totaltrades. The average annual growth in secondary market transactions since 1994-95 was over55 per cent, reflecting the increasing depth attained by secondary market in GovernmentSecurities.  For instance, the average annual transactions increased over 10-fold between1994-95 and 1999-2000.The turnover in Government securities (calculated by counting twice the volume oftransactions in the case of outright transactions and counting four times the volume oftransactions in the case of repos) fiscal 1999-2000 amounted to Rs.12 ,370 billion of whichthe outright turnover aggregated Rs. 9,060 billion. Thus, the average monthly turnover inCentral Government securities aggregated Rs. 1,030 billion in 1999-2000 of which theaverage monthly turnover of outright transactions amounted to Rs.755 billion.  The dailyturnover has also witnessed a significant increase and is about Rs. 34 billion.  Reflecting this,the turnover ratio in dated securities (defined as the ratio of total turnover to total outstandingsecurities) increased to 3.2 as on March 31, 2000 from 1.7 as on March 31, 1999.Development of technology is an integral part of reforming the debt market, especially in thecontext of providing a technologically superior dealing and settlement system.  Hence, theRBI has embarked upon the technological upgradation of debt market.  The RBI has justcommenced a project for complete automation of the operations of its Public Debt Office(PDO) where the settlement for all Government Securities Transactions takes place.  It willprovide for connectivity between different PDOs, and facilitate on-line screen basedexecution for trade and settlement in Government Securities transactions.  The project will beimplemented in phases.  The first phase will cover the PDO  at Mumbai andfacilitate screen based negotiated dealings in Government securities and money marketinstruments, tendering of screen based applications in auctions, full-fledged audit trail, debtservicing, information dissemination, price list for open market operations, central7computeristionTechnology Aspectsrecognised stock exchanges with essential safeguards. depositories and traded in Gilts traded in the secondary markets has greatly aided  the price discovery process.information system for access by monitoring and regulatory authorities, etc.  It is expectedthat the first phase will be operationalised well within a year.  In the second phase, otherPDOs would be linked with the central PDO system.  This phase will facilitate activeopen market operations of RBI through all regional PDOs.  The entire project is expected tooperationalised in about a year.  The RBI is also separately putting in place real time grossIn order to curb certain unhealthy trends that had developed in the securities market and toprevent undesirable speculation, the Government had prohibited forward trading in securitiesin June 1969 through a Notification. Recognising that rescinding the 1969 Notification isnecessary for developing the debt markets, at the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, theGovernment recently brought about amendments to Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act1956 which made it  possible for Government to delegate some responsibilities to the RBI.Currently the regulatory jurisdiction over the Government and non-Government debt marketshave been delegated to the Reserve Bank and Securities and Exchange Board of India by theGovernment. The Reserve Bank will regulate in relation to any contracts in Governmentsecurities, money market securities, gold related securities and in securities derived fromthese securities and in relation to ready forward contracts in bonds, debentures, debentureThese amendments help RBI to put in place, from time to time, appropriate regulatoryframework, keeping in view rapid changes in financial institutions, instruments and practicesgoverning money, Government Securities and forex markets, apart from gold-relatedfinancial products.  With the delegation of powers by Government to RBI in these matters,Transparency in operations and data dissemination is the hallmark of our GovernmentSecurities market. The process of policy making and implementation of reform are throughconsultative mechanisms. The entire market borrowing programme is announced at thebeginning of the year. Based on this, a calendar of Treasury Bills is pre-announced to themarket. Similarly, near real-time data is  available with regard to auctions of Treasury Billsand dated Government Securities. The Reserve Bank also publishes all relevant data The Government Securities and their management by the Reserve Bank of India is governedby the Public Debt Act, 1944. The procedures prescribed are archaic and some of theprovisions have ceased to be of relevance in the present context. A new legislation titled theGovernment Securities Act proposes to repeal and replace the Public Debt Act. TheGovernment Securities Bill has already been approved by the Cabinet and is awaitingParliament clearance. However, since the Public Debt Act, 1944, is applicable for marketableloans raised by the RBI on behalf of both the Central and State Governments, the proposalrequires consent of all State Governments. The State Governments have to pass a Resolutionfor the purpose either prior to enactment by the Centre or subsequently adopt the same by8Legal Changespertaining to Government securities market on daily, weekly, monthly and annual basis.Transparency Aspectsthe procedural delays and constraints can be eliminated.stock, securitised and other debt securities.Regulatory Aspectssettlement system, which is scheduled to be operational within the same time frame.be regional passing a Resolution. Once the new Act is enacted, the RBI will have substantive powers todesign and introduce an instrument of transfer suited to computer environment. Before concluding with the outlook, I must confess that there are several areas which areimportant but have not been presented in this address.  These include the dilemmas in theseparation of debt and monetary management; aspects of risk management arising on accountof issuance of long-term debt which may create asset-liability mismatches for banks, andshort term debt which creates recycling problems; determining the extent of transparencywithout preempting actions of the Reserve Bank; ensuring removal of impediments onaccount of taxation, etc.  These issues are significant and are being  continuously reviewed byus.Encouraged by the results of our efforts so far, we are now embarking on an activeprogramme of consolidation of the reform of debt markets on all fronts, consistent with theinterests of investors, intermediaries, the market borrowing programme of Government andThe outlook for debt markets cannot be divorced from outlook for the economy as a whole.The GDP growth has averaged close to 6 per cent in eighties and nineties and the market-analysts’ consensus for this year that it would be around 7 per cent while we in RBI place itaround 6.5 to 7 per cent.  Inflation has been on down trend and moderate in the range of 4 to6 percent in the last five years and most analysts expect inflation in the current year to be inthe range of 5 to 5.5, close to about 4.5 percent mentioned in RBI’s latest monetary policy.The interest rates have been generally on the down turn in the last few years, and currentlyprime lending rates are around 12 percent – close to market expectations. By and large, theThe exchange rate has been among the most stable and the exchange market continues to beThe current account deficit is universally expected to continue to be below 2 percent of GDP.Foreign currency reserves are high at $ 35 billion and have been rising every year in the lastthree years.  The trend may continue this year also.  The growth with stability was possibleI wish to add that while taking all measures to develop the Government Securities market andensure appropriate regulatory framework from time to time, continuous monitoring ofdevelopments on a day-to-day basis in the market is necessary to avoid excess volatility andIn all these efforts in managing policy and Government Securities market, we had unstintedsupport from several sources, including multinational banks and investment firms.  Some ofthem, either directly or through joint ventures with local firms are playing a very active rolein our debt markets, particularly as Primary Dealers in government markets, duly licensed byReserve Bank of India.  I am sure they will share their assessment of what we in RBI doing.  Let me advice you that exploring with them for a view on India’s debt markets will be9a worthwhile effort for all of you.intendmaintain orderliness.inspite of the well-known domestic and international uncertainties.characterised by non-volatile conditions by global standards.interest rates have been stable with general inclination towards south, till recently.within the broad framework of monetary policy.OutlookLet me wish you very fruitful deliberations and success in your efforts.* Keynote Address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Asia Debt Conferenceorganised by Finance Asia.com at Hong Kong on June 20, 2000.  Dr. Reddy is grateful to Dr. A. Prasad for the10assistance.
