Managing Talent in Banks: A Few ThoughtsBy V. LeeladharIt gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today. A hundred years is, indeed,a landmark event in the history of an institution and as Corporation Bankcelebrates its centenary, it joins the rank of the ‘venerables’. The establishmentof the Corporation Bank with its humble beginnings in 1906 was during aneventful period in India’s economic history. It was a brave new era which saw aflurry of activity when a host of what were then termed ‘native’ banks were set upin India, spurred, in no small measure, by the forces of a resurgent nationalismand the yearning for self determination. These forces, later coalesced into theSwadeshi Movement, helped draw out the latent entrepreneual talent of the timein the field of banking to set up banks oriented towards the indigenouscommunities which they sought to serve.With the onset of liberalization, banks in India are under pressure to change theways in which they do business. They now face an increasingly competitiveenvironment not only from banks but also from non-bank financial institutions.Explosive growth in IT has changed the way individuals interact with banks andthe way banks respond. In the changed scenario, success will depend on theability of banks to leverage the human potential and capabilities. This speech isan attempt to reflect on the new challenges facing banks in the management ofhuman resources.2. The period 1904 to 1913 saw a bank being set up virtually every year –prominent amongst these were the Bank of Burma established in 1904, the Bankof India, the Corporation Bank and the Canara Bank in 1906, the Indian Bank in 1907, the Bank of Baroda and the Punjab andSindh Bank in 1908, the Central Bank of India in 1911 and the Bank of Mysore in1913.  The Corporation Bank has come a long way since the heady days of thethearly 20 century. Today, we can proudly state that it has fulfilled the vision of itsfounders if ‘not in full measure, very substantially’. It has not only survived aSpeech delivered by V. Leeladhar on the occasion of the Centenary Celebrations of theCorporation Bank at Bangalore on March 12, 2005.hundred turbulent years, but is today one of the more agile PSB players in themarket. This has been possible in no small measure by the Bank’s ability tomanage and utilize its talent and potential. And this brings us to the theme of mydeliberation today - managing talent in banks.3. In the run up to the hundred years, banks and banking have changedsubstantially. As we view matters in retrospect, we see two landmark eventswhich constituted strategic inflexion points in the history of Indian Banking in theth20 century – one being the nationalization of banks in 1969-70 and the other,the financial sector reforms that commenced in the early 1990s. Nationalisationgenerated forces that took banking from an elite class to the masses. It led to theestablishment of a very substantial infrastructure across the geographicalexpanse of the sub-continent and more importantly to the financial empowermentlarge sections of society which substantially changed the Indian socio-economiclandscape. The second inflexion point in banking was the financial sector reformsinitiative that was launched in the early 1990s. These reforms heralded adramatic shift in the way banks functioned and operated in India. The changedenvironment and the internal compulsions arising from greater competition andthe need to improve their market share / profitability gave rise to the quest forgreater efficiency and the need to reposition themselves given the realities of theenvironment and their internal strengths and weaknesses.4. A response to competition and the need to shape up has been the quest forefficiency. This quest, like the task of Sisyphus, has been never ending. Everytarget met, every cost reduction constitutes the new threshold limit to be crossedin the next quarter or half year. Every achievement gives rise to ever greaterexpectations of greater efficiency and cost reductions and greater output – andthis is any CEO’s bane. Banking essentially consists of intermediating andmanaging risk and providing banking services. In the quest for efficiency whatdistinguishes one player from another is its human capital. As former RBIGovernor, Dr. Bimal Jalan had pointed out “capital and technology are replicablebut not human capital which needs to be viewed as a valuable resource for theachievement of competitive advantage.”25. Where an institution is, in its time trajectory, fundamentally dependent not juston the sum total of its individual human capital, but on how effectively it drawsout the best from its talent bank at any point of time, through effectiveplacements, performance appraisal, rewards and recognition mechanism. Howthe trajectory changes is dependent on how it builds capacities, through trainingand recruitment. What ever be the organizational goals, the key issues facingManagements today is how to draw out the best from its staff? How to buildcapacities to reposition to achieve the organizational vision and strategic goals ?And this boils down to one single factor that makes the difference – viz., talent.Today management itself has come to mean how to attract talented people, howto nurture them, how to develop them and to give them the necessary space6. Indeed, when it comes to Human Resources, it is a great humbling factor - thebest of knowledge workers who have ready answers for just about everytechnical issue are necessarily humbled when it comes to human resources.When we deal with humans, there are questions, issues and concerns – but noready answers, no quick fixes, no instant remedies. It is thus with humility, buthumility combined with a will to succeed that we can approach any HumanResource subject.7. The purpose of Human Resource Management is essentially to enhance theefficiency of the organization, to allow and indeed nurture the personal growthand well-being of the staff and to create a facilitating environment and anorganizational culture that removes impediments and irritants and fosters afeeling of pride and belonging – an internal brand building.  The first and primaryconcern is thus organizational efficiency - traditionally HRM addresses this issueby putting in place HR systems that address issues of recruitment, placements,training and capacity building, performance appraisal and finally what is broadlygrouped under the rubric - compensation, rewards and recognition. In laypersonsterms the questions that we ask are – are we recruiting the right people, are weplacing them as per their strengths, are we correctly assessing their trainingneeds, are we assessing the efficacy of training, are we having a succession3plan, do we have objective systems for performance appraisal and finally are wecompensating, rewarding and recognizing the performance of our human capital?8. Issues of personal growth and well-being are important as these not onlycontribute to a more healthy work environment but can be effectively harnessedto help align personal goals with organizational goals. It implies an approachwhere the organization attempts to build upon strengths of its human capitalcombined with appropriate placements where we can harness individualpassions and energies into fulfilling organizational objectives. Finally, it isimportant to sensitize ourselves to the fact that HR functions and systems arehere to facilitate and not to impede. An organizational culture that fosters trust,openness fairness and what is alluded to in institutional economics as a ‘securityof expectations’, goes a long way in employee satisfaction and a congenialatmosphere at the workplace. This in turn helps attract and retain talent.9. While these for long have been common knowledge, these have been difficultto implement in the absence of human resource management systems. Mappingcompetencies for every job requirement, mapping the competencies of the workforce and matching these, anticipating workforce requirements, providing trainingtailored to individual goals and finally measuring performance are by no meanssimple. It is in the proper management of talent that opportunities for verysubstantial gains in productivity, profitability and personnel development lie – It ishere that public sector banks can reap very substantial productivity gains. Thistakes HR and especially talent management from the shadows of theboardrooms on to the proscenium – on to the centre stage of concerns of thebanks CEOs.10. The preconditions for an effective talent management is clarity of where theorganisation is, i.e., the starting point and where it wishes to reach in a given timehorizon, i.e., the destination. Talents then constitute the prime resource neededto reach the destination laid out in the organisational goals and vision. To put anysuccessful talent management programme into action, we need data and arobust MIS. It is intrinsically linked with strategy, with technology, with processes,with the quality initiatives and the traditional HR subsystems such as recruitment,4placements, performance appraisal, and compensation. The questions that cometo mind are: do we have a comprehensive idea of all our processes, whatpercentage of staff is deployed for facilitating functions, can better systems andreengineering of processes release and free valuable talent to explore theirpotential in functional areas? What are the competency gaps that need to befilled through capacity building and what gaps need to be filled with new recruitsor lateral intake or contractual appointments? How do we gauge performance?Are we distinguishing between potential and performance? What forces comebetween potential and performance and is the institution addressing these? Whatis the reward mechanism which we have in place? What is the flexibility we canoffer to move from a compliance culture to and outcome oriented culture – tofoster a mindset driven by teleology rather than bureaucratic processes.11. These issues have always been important, it’s just that the imperatives toaddress them squarely in substance were not so compelling. There have beenbroadly three catalytic forces that have brought about this changed perception ofhuman resources: First, as the widespread use of the personal computer and theadvent of the internet in the 1990s attained a critical mass, it marked a specificinflexion point which ushered in the Information Age. In this age, the intangibleassets such as intellectual capital and talent have gradually supplanted hardassets of the Industrial Age such as capital, factories and inventories. The newreality is that people are increasingly the principal assets of an organization andsalaries and compensation one of the principal components of the profit and lossaccount.12. Secondly, a host of new industries, such as information technology, mediaand entertainment which changing technology and social needs have spawned,have given rise to a supply demand imbalance. Today, these new industriescompete with the old for talent and banks need to look afresh not only at theirrecruitment strategies but also how to retain their talent – an issue hitherto farfrom the ken of the staid banker. Thirdly, there is the issue of ownership.Organizations own physical, financial and property assets – their ownershiprights, however, do not extend to people.  In the pre 1990s, employment bondingworked on what was termed the ‘psychological contract’ or the ‘loyalty contract’ –5this involved the exchange of long term employment for employee loyalty. This intoday’s world has been seriously undermined, spurred not merely by a spurt injob opportunities, but also by the greater transparency in job opportunitiesbrought about by the internet revolution. The old values of loyalty have erodedand indeed it is fashionable to have multiple companies in ones resume.  Thisirreversible shift from Industrial age to information age, greater demand for highcaliber managerial talent and greater promiscuity of people shifting from one jobto another, has changed the playing field for the search and retention of talent –this is the new reality companies and banks in India have to contend with.13. The term ‘talent management’, though known to entrepreneurs for centuries,entered the business lexicon in a rather dramatic and perhaps eponymousphrase, ‘The War for Talent’ penned in a McKinsey article. While the articlespurred intense debate on both sides of the argument, it nonetheless brought theissue to the fore of the concerns of Management and is today of specialrelevance to Public Sector Bank in India. There is however a basic definitionalissue. What do we understand by talent? There is no consensus – there was atime when talent referred to persons with expertise in a functional area – personswith knowledge, skills, competence or effectiveness to achieve predeterminedtargets. Today in the age of ‘metrics’, most of these are taken for granted. Thereis an increasing realisation that it is not functional skills alone or intellectualcapacity that matters, but leadership qualities, the ability to straddle differentfunctional areas, businesses, and cultures. In essence, talent in leaders, refers tothe ability to effectively handle competing imperatives. While there would alwaysbe a place for the passionate niche specialist or the stellar uni-dimensionalperformer, the task of leaders would be to stitch together and harness theirabilities. It is thus that in most corporate training establishments there is anincreasing focus on softer skills such as ability to present, to carry a team,values, creativity, and the willingness to learn and to share.14. Talent in itself has little meaning unless it is woven into the weft and warp ofthe corporate strategy. The need for talent arises directly out of the businessstrategy adopted. The linkage between talent and an organisation’s businesschallenges and strategies, effective strategy execution requires sufficient6numbers of the right people with the right skills and knowledge, in the right roles.The inevitable next issue involves the approaches to talent management. Twoquite distinct approaches that come to mind are the (i) Talent based on stellarperformers and (ii) Talent based on robust systems. The first approach leveragesindividual and group performance of an elite group of the brightest people; thesecond focuses on recruiting and retaining ordinary people and gettingextraordinary performance from them. The focus is on systems – focusing on thecollective vision which brings together the disparate pieces and sews themtogether in a common purpose.  Whatever be the model followed, talentmanagement entails that the organization knows what it is looking for, that is,what talent one needs for business, now and in the foreseeable future; knowinghow best to source such talent; getting it and deploying it for optimum effectwithin the organisation.15. Having said that, one must admit that the ground reality in our country is suchthat there is a host of issues to contend with before putting in place an effectivetalent management strategy. Forced with legacy issues, constraints, and thesheer complexity of the task, most organizations abandon the attempt to makerational choices. Most treat their people with diverse skill sets as undifferentiatedresources and merely guess how best to assign employees to their job. Thisreality of course exists not just in India, where Public Sector Banks have theirown constraints – ground rules and framework for employment - which makethem less agile and responsive, but across the world.16. One issue that bedevils public sector banks is that of compensation. How dothey attract new talent and match the salaries and the compensation flexibilitybeing paid by consultants, by IT firms, by multinationals, by private sector banks?Is the quest for talent lost ab initio? Here it may be stated that while thetraditional psychological contract of long term employment for loyalty may havebeen undermined, quantitative solutions of the 1990s are not necessarily theanswer. Money can be matched and topped by competitors – the pay packetmay not be the only compensation that attracts talent. The monetary, social andpsychological needs of talent today are in a melting pot. It is this ambiguity that7can be a source of opportunity for Public Sector Banks. Today, the ‘loyaltycontract’ is being replaced by a complex mix. There are a host of non monetarybenefits that an organisation can offer ranging from job content, work exposure,project challenge, working at the cutting edge, working with a charismatic leader,flexible work environment, early leadership roles and positions of accountableinfluence, high-value, visible or high-profile assignments, cross-functional roles,training facilities, opportunities for personal growth, opportunities to build aresume in a particular work area, community bonding, location benefits or for thatmatter independence and space amongst others.17. Understanding what it takes to foster a productive work environment, oftenalluded to as the "employee value proposition", essentially entails non-discriminatory, hostile-free workplaces with flexible and dynamic HR policies thatenable an environment where employees feel included and valued, wherecommitment and motivation is maximized and where an organization needs tospend fewer resources on managing employee grievances. It is up to thecreativity of the Public Sector Banks to turn their constraints into an opportunityto create such employee value propositions that appeal to the talent these bankswish to recruit. It also forces them to revamp their own talent requirements, theirjob content and reposition themselves as more agile players in the talent market.18. In fact, effective recruiting is the beginning of effective retention. Matchingbetween tasks and talents is a challenging problem and it is essential forallocational efficiency that people get allocated to right occupations. Refashioningthe recruitment process may well therefore be the precursor of an effective talentmanagement strategy.  This may include identification of key positions andturnover risks associated with these positions, and competency/behavioural-based selection criteria that support the retention strategy and business drivers.Only a carefully designed and integrated set of initiatives that allow the employeeto align himself with the organisational goals and objectives, map competenciesfor diverse work areas, build up capacities through a well-crafted and sustainedstrategy and draw out latent possibilities optimally would ensure emergence ofleadership talent that is critical to any organisation’s prosperity and is therefore a8central element of talent management. The aim is to align the current and futuretalents of individuals with the strategic challenges of our business. So whileemployees need to understand how to be more effective in their current roles,deliver specific business challenges, and pull together a personal developmentplan for shaping future careers, organizations too have to strategize how best toutilize the people’s talents and identify areas for internal development necessaryfor ensuring future success.19. In a major push to banking reforms in our country, the Government of Indiahas recently announced a slew of HR autonomy incentives for the betterperforming banks. Differential pay structures, lateral entry, contract employmentand perhaps performance-linked pay as a sub-component of the compensationstructure may turn out to be a potent talent management instrument in publicsector banks too. While the debate on the merits of performance pay remainsopen and is contingent on an effective Performance Appraisal System being inplace, the risks may be manageable if the performance management system iswell designed and carefully implemented.  Of course this is an area where bankmanagements need to design carefully calibrated institution-specific responses.20. Talent management is thus a broad mandate. Today – more than everbefore – banks must be prepared to be collaborative, supportive, and nurturing oftheir people while at the same time being more exacting. Standing as we do atthe cusp of major role shifts and organizational transformations, every successfultalent management strategy would have to be the right mix of a set of ‘push’ –motivation, recognition, career progression, capacity building and drawing outplans - and ‘pull’ – more tangible factors like higher pay, better benefits andheftier perks - factors. Misalignment of mutual expectations, person-jobmismatch, perception of poor career advancement prospects and work-lifeimbalance can be huge setbacks which we can ill afford. In the roadmap that hasbeen envisaged for the Indian banking sector, Indian banks have about five yearsto shape up to face the challenges of unfettered competition. If they get their mixof talent management, performance management and their compensationincentives right, they should be on the threshold of a brave new era in Indianbanking. I trust that Corporation Bank with its time-tested track record would9convert these challenges into opportunities and emerge as a talent managementtrend-setter. On this momentous occasion, I wish you all every success in allyour future endeavours.10
