Managing Public Debt - Issues and Challenges*I thank the ASSOCHAM for inviting me at the Valedictory session of the Seminar onManaging Public Debt.During the course of Seminar, various aspects of Managing Public Debt have been discussed.Many suggestions have been made by the speakers.  I am sure these suggestions will be sentto Government for consideration.Practically, all aspects of Debt Management have been discussed in the Seminar.  I would,therefore, be supplementing to what has already been said.Role of RBIThe RBI is the debt manager for both the Central Government and the State Governments.  Itis also the regulator of Government securities market. RBI also advises the Government atthe time of formulation of annual Borrowing Programme.  The Public Debt Act, 1944,provides the framework under which government securities are issued and serviced. Underthe RBI Act, 1934, RBI is the manager of Central Government debt by statute. RBI managesthe debt of state governments on the basis of separate agreements. External debt of theGovernment is managed by the Ministry of Finance.  As a debt manager for the both Centraland State Governments, RBI in consultation with the Government, manages the maturityprofile, timing of issue, composition of debt and the type of instruments issued.Operationally, RBI deals with the issue, servicing and repayment of government debt.Debt Sustainability'Sustainability' of a country's public debt has become an important issue among policymakers, academicians, credit rating agencies and multilateral institutions. Sustainability ofdebt is critical from the central banking perspective also due to a variety of reasons. Anumber of central banks advise the government on debt management. Further, anunsustainable debt level is likely to have a major impact on monetary policy objectives. Alsothe government securities market is important for the domestic capital, money and forexmarket.The level and composition of public debt have a significant bearing on a country’s economicdevelopment and its ability to withstand shocks and crises. If public debt pre-empts a largepart of the savings of the economy, it leads to crowding out of private investment. Excessiveborrowing, apart from increasing the tax burden of future generations, can also increaseinterest rates, thus making private investment more expensive. If the cost of servicing debtaccounts for a large part of government revenue, funds available for desirable items likehealth, education and infrastructure get reduced. It is, therefore, essential, particularly fordeveloping countries, that not only is the level of debt kept within sustainable limits, but itscost, composition and risk profile is managed efficiently.During the seminar, various aspects of public debt were discussed.  Sustainability of publicdebt was also debated.We started reforms process in 1991-92.  Let us see how various indicators of public debt havebehaved since then.Revenue Deficit (Difference between revenue receipts and revenue expenditure)As regards Central Government, in 1990-91 the Revenue deficit as per cent of GDP was 3.3.There was improvement for the next few years.  Till 1997-98, with the exception of one year(1993-94 - 3.8%), the ratio was below that level and averaged 2.8%.  Thereafter, till 2001-02the ratio averaged 3.9%.  For the period from 1991-92 to 2001-02, the average was 3.1%.In recent years, interest payments have accounted for about 50% of Revenue Receipts ofCentre.  The ratio has increased from 40.3% in 1991-92 to 50.5% in 2001-02.As far as the States are concerned, the Revenue Deficit - GDP ratio was 0.9% in 1990-91.Till 1997-98 the ratio was more or less at that level (average 0.8%).  For subsequent fouryears, the average level was 2.6%.The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, 2000, which is before theParliament, envisages `Zero' revenue deficit for the Centre by 2006.  The Eleventh FinanceCommission has put the target at 1% for Centre and 0% for States by 2004.  These targets areindicative of future direction.Gross Fiscal Deficit [GFD = Total Expenditure (including loans, net of recoveries) minusrevenue receipts (including external grants) and non-debt capital receipts]In 1990-91, GFD of Centre was 6.6% of GDP.  There was some improvement in the positionin subsequent years.  The average ratio for the period worked out to 5.0% of GDP.  For thelast four years (1998-1999 to 2001-02) the ratio averaged 5.5%.The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, 2000 envisages the ratio at 2% byMarch 2006.  The Eleventh Finance Commission (2000) recommended the ratio at 4.5% forCentre, 2.5% for States and 6.5% combined by 2004-05.As far as States are concerned, the GFD as a per cent of GDP was 3.3 in 1990-91.  Insubsequent years, till 1997-98, the ratio declined and averaged 2.7%.  However, the ratioshowed increase thereafter and averaged 4.4% for the period 1998-99 to 2000-2001.For the Centre and States, the combined GFD ratio was 9.4% in 1990-91. The ratio improvedin subsequent years till 1997-98 (average 7.1%).  However, thereafter the ratio rose to anaverage of 9.5% (9.9% for 2001-02).Total LiabilitiesAnother way is to look at the total liabilities.  For 2001-02, total liabilities of Centre workedout to 58% of GDP against 55% in 1990-91.  For the States, the ratio was 26% in 2001-02against 19% in 1990-91.  For Centre  and States together the ratio was 70% in 2001-02against 62% in 1990-91.The Fiscal Responsibility Bill 2000 envisages the ratio below 50% by March 2011.Eleventh Finance Commission (2000) has recommended the ratio at 48% for Centre, and55% for Centre and States together.2State of Debt Market during 1980sIn India, fiscal policy compulsions rendered internal debt management before 1991-92passive. To keep government borrowing costs down, Treasury Bill rates were kept low, whilethe low coupon rates offered on government securities made real rates of return negative forseveral years till the mid-1980s. During the 1980s, the volume of debt expandedconsiderably, particularly short-term debt, due to automatic accommodation through themechanism of ad hoc Treasury Bills. With captive investor base and interest rates below themarket rate, secondary market for government bonds remained dormant. Artificial yields ongovernment securities distorted the yield structure of financial assets in the system and led tohigher lending rates and cross subsidisation. In view of the rising requirements ofGovernment, Reserve Bank’s monetary management was dominated by a regime ofadministered interest rates and rising CRR and SLR prescriptions. High CRR and SLR leftlittle room for monetary maneuvering. It is against this backdrop, and in the context of theoverall economic and financial sector reforms, that development of the government securitiesmarkets was initiated in the 1990s.Reforms during 1990sThe reforms undertaken since 1990s can be briefly viewed as a systematic exercise for thedevelopment of the debt market, as well as integration of the entire financial markets bymaking it deep, wide and transparent. The reforms aimed at increasing the operationalautonomy of the RBI, by measures such as abolition of automatic monetization of deficitthrough creation of ad-hoc Treasury Bills and introduction of Ways and Means Advances forthe Central Government. Secondly, government borrowing was made market-rate basedthrough the introduction of auctions in primary issues. Thirdly, improvements in institutionalinfrastructure were sought to be achieved through the setting up of Primary and SatelliteDealers. Fourthly, the breadth and depth of markets were sought to be improved byintroduction of a variety of new instruments, viz., Zero Coupon Bonds, Capital IndexedBonds, Floating Rate Bonds etc. Fifthly, since April 1999, the Reserve Bank has beenactively pursuing the consolidation of debt through reissuance through price based auctions.This has greatly improved the market liquidity and helped the emergence of benchmarksecurities.  It will also facilitate the introduction of STRIPS (Separate Trading for RegisteredInterest and Principal Securities). Sixthly, through re-issue of existing securities, the liquidityof the market improved and the process of development of benchmarks received a fillip.Seventhly, trading and settlement systems have been improved through introduction ofDelivery-versus-Payment (DvP) system and operationalisation of Negotiated Dealing System(NDS) and Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL). Eightly, a retail market in governmentsecurities is sought to be promoted through a system of non-competitive bidding at primaryauctions.  This is also sought to be done by encouraging banks/ PDs to provide an activesecondary market for small investors. Finally, increased transparency is sought to be achievedthrough announcement of calendar for dated securities, implementation of standardized codesand accounting norms and dissemination of information.Debt ManagementThe Reserve Bank in its role as adviser to Government is also concerned with the maturityprofile of debt, timing of issuances and types of instruments, depending on the marketconditions. In view of the large and growing fresh borrowings by the Government, the needto elongate the maturity profile of government debt has been felt, so as to minimize therefinancing risk.3The maximum maturity of new loan issues was reduced from 30 years in 1985-86 to 20 yearsin 1986-87.  Thereafter, since 1992-93 the maximum maturity had been telescoped from 20years to 10 years which continued till 1997-98.   In 1998-99, the maximum maturity of loansissued was again raised to 20 years.  In 2001-02, the Central Government issued a 25 yearbond and in the current year a 30 year bond, successfully.  The weighted average maturity ofloans issued during a year rose from 5.5 years in 1996-97 to 14.3 years in 2001-02 which atpresent in the current year is around 12.3 years.  Of the outstanding debt of CentralGovernment, the weighted average maturity was  8.2 years as at the end of March 2002 ascompared to   6.5 years at end March 1998.In contrast to the weighted average maturity, the weighted average yield on the borrowingsduring the year has been declining consistently, from 13.75 per cent in 1995-96 to 12.01 percent in 1997-98 and 9.44 per cent in 2001-02.  For the period April-August, 2002, theweighted average yield works out to 7.53 per cent. In the case of State Governments, the maximum maturity of new loan issues was reducedfrom 20 years in 1991-92 to 15 years in 1992-93 and further to 10 years in 1993-94. Sincethen, the maximum maturity for state loan has been maintained at 10 years.  The weightedaverage yield on state loans issued during a year declined from 14.0 per cent in 1995-96 to12.4 per cent in 1998-99 and 9.2 per cent in 2001-02.  For the period April-August, 2002 theweighted average yield is 7.8 per cent.The strategy followed by Reserve Bank revolved around timing of issues to coincide withfavourable liquidity and yield environment. As a result, Reserve Bank resorts to primaryacquisition of government bonds through private placement/devolvement in the case of theCentral Government, when it feels that market sentiment is uncertain or when liquidityconditions are not appropriate and to meet unanticipated requirements of the CentralGovernment, with a view to off-load in the market at appropriate times.Since 1992, new instruments like capital indexed bonds and floating rate bonds have beenintroduced. Bonds with call/put options have also been introduced in July 2002. ReserveBank is now actively pursuing the creation and development of the STRIPS (SeparateTrading for Registered Interest and Principal of Securities) market.  Under this method,separate tradable securities for principal and the coupon payments will be issued.  All thesecurities will have the characteristic of a zero coupon bond.  In addition to providing moreflexibility in managing interest rate risk, these will also help in addressing the asset-liabilitymismatch problem of banks.From the inception of the auction system, multiple price auction format (under whichindividual bidders have to pay according to respective prices quoted by them) has been usedfor auction of dated securities. With the experience of uniform price (same price for all)auctions in the issuance of 91-day Treasury Bills, the uniform price auction format has beenextended to the auctions of Government of India dated securities, on a selective andexperimental basis.Recently, RBI had introduced the Non-Competitive Bidding scheme in January 2002, toencourage retail participation in primary auctions, in particular by the mid-segment investorslike Urban Co-operative Banks, NBFCs, Trusts, etc., in the primary market of Governmentsecurities.  The scheme provides for allocation of up to 5 per cent of the notified amount atthe weighted average rate of accepted bids. Operationalisation of the Scheme for screen-4based order-driven trading on the stock exchanges to facilitate retailing is under activeconsideration. It is expected that the scheme will help to widen the investor base.Technological DevelopmentsIn the recent past, important landmarks in the development of Government securities marketwere : operationalisation of Negotiated Dealing System and setting up of ClearingCorporation of India Ltd. The Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) (Phase I) has beenoperationalised on February 15, 2002.  It provides on - line electronic bidding facility inprimary auctions, daily LAF auctions, screen - based electronic dealing and reporting oftransactions in money market instruments.  It also facilitates secondary market transactions inGovernment securities and dissemination of information on trades with minimal time lag.  Inaddition, the NDS enables “paperless” settlement of transactions in government securities.The system has electronic connectivity to CCIL and the Public Debt Office.The Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL) commenced its operations in clearing andsettlement of transactions in Government securities (including repos) on February 15, 2002.Acting as a central counterparty, the CCIL provides guaranteed settlement and has in placerisk management systems to limit settlement risk and operates a settlement guarantee fundbacked by lines of credit from commercial banks. All repo transactions have to be necessarilyput through the CCIL while all outright transactions up to Rs.20 crore have to be settledthrough CCIL.Legal DevelopmentsThere is a proposal to replace the existing Public Debt Act, 1944, by a new GovernmentSecurities Act.  All the States, except Jammu and Kashmir, have given their concurrence forthe proposal and the Bill is awaiting Parliamentary approval.  The new Act will simplify theprocedures for transactions in Government securities, allow for nomination, lien marking/pledging of securities, transfer of ownership in electronic form, etc.The amended Securities Contract (Regulation) Act, 1956 (SCRA) has conferred on RBI theresponsibility of regulation of government securities, money market securities which includerepos in all securities including corporate debt securities since March 1, 2000.The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, 2000, seeks to place limit onrevenue and fiscal deficit of the Government. The Bill has been examined by the StandingCommittee on Finance and is at present before the Parliament.Market MicrostructureThe system of Primary Dealers was introduced in 1995. The PDs are expected to absorbgovernment securities in primary markets, to provide two-way quotes in the secondarymarket and help develop the retail market. The capital adequacy requirements of PDs takeinto account both credit risk and market risk. They are required to maintain a minimumcapital of 15 per cent of aggregate risk weighted assets, including market risk capital (arrivedat using the Value at Risk method). ALM discipline has been extended to PDs. RBI is alsovested with the responsibility of on-site supervision of PDs. PDs have now been broughtunder the purview of the Board for Financial Supervision.The satellite dealer system was introduced in 1996 to act as a second tier to the PrimaryDealers in developing the market particularly the retail segment. The system which was in5operation for more than six years was discontinued because it did not yield the desiredresults.Liquidity ManagementThe short term liquidity management centered around the operations of Liquidity AdjustmentFacility through repo/ reverse repo transactions. The repo operations by the RBI have notonly helped in managing the liquidity in the system, but also facilitated the deepening of thegovernment securities market and providing signal to the market through the repo rate. TheLiquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) has been introduced since June 2000. Operating throughdaily repo and reverse repo auctions, the LAF has been assigned three broad objectives, viz.,(a) to meet primarily day to day liquidity mismatches in the system and not the fundingrequirements of the participants, (b) restricting volatility in short-term money market ratesand, (c) steering the movements in these rates consistent with monetary policy objectives.Since November 2001, fortnightly repos were introduced for developing term money market.A fixed rate repo was also introduced on March 5, 2002 to signal the market and therebystabilizing the interest rate.Contingent LiabilitiesReserve Bank does not manage the contingent liabilities of either the Centre or the StateGovernments. It, however, has been playing an active but indirect role in sensitizing StateGovernments to the fiscal risk inherent in the guarantees issued by them, in view of the sharpincrease in such guarantees in recent years. The Technical Committee on State GovernmentGuarantees (February 1999), constituted to examine the issue recommended, inter alia, onproper management of guarantees including setting a ceiling on them, setting up of aGuarantee Redemption Fund and comprehensive disclosure of guarantees in state budgets.Contingent liabilities of seventeen major States amount to Rs. 1,68,712 crore (or 8.1 per centof GDP) as at end of March 2001 as compared with Rs. 40,159 crore (or 6.1 per cent of GDP)at the end of March 1992. The Reserve Bank also issued guidelines to all the banks advisingto examine the commercial viability of projects before providing loans to State Governments/Institutions against guarantee. The guarantee should not be treated as a substitute forcommercial viability.Consolidated Sinking Fund and Guarantee Redemption FundAt the initiative of the Reserve Bank, Consolidated Sinking Funds (CSFs) have been set upby certain State Governments for redemption of the loans. So far 11 State Governments haveset up the Consolidated Sinking Fund.The Report of the Technical Committee on State Government Guarantees (1999)recommended that each State should set up a contingency fund or make some provision fordischarging the devolvement on guarantees provided by them. The guarantee fees collectedshould be credited to the fund set up for the purpose. Since the recommendations of theCommittee, several States have taken steps to set up Guarantee Redemption Fund (GRF) andearmarked guarantee fees received towards the Fund.  So far 5 States have set up theGuarantee Redemption Fund.Consultation ProcessCash and Debt Management6There is a Monitoring Group on Cash and Debt Management of Central Government whichconsist of officials of Government of India and the Reserve Bank.  The group deliberates onimportant debt management issues.Technical Advisory CommitteeThe Reserve Bank has constituted the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on Money andGovernment Securities markets to advise, on an ongoing basis, on the development of ahealthy and vibrant money and Government securities markets. The Committee, whichincludes important market participants, academicians and policy makers, has beencrystallizing the views and suggestions across various fields of the financial market andacting as a facilitator for the Reserve Bank in steering reforms in money and Governmentsecurities markets.Conference of State Finance SecretariesThe Reserve Bank organizes conference of State Finance Secretaries twice a year to discussthe issues and problems related to cash and debt management of the State Governments.These Conferences have emerged as a useful forum for interactions between the FinanceSecretaries of the States and senior officials of the Ministry of Finance, Planning Commissionand the Reserve Bank of India and helped the State Government address many issuesconcerning their finances viz., revisions in the Ways and Means Advances, guaranteesextended by States, market borrowing programme, consolidated sinking fund (CSF),transparency in fiscal operations, Guarantee Redemption Fund, interest burden on States andfinances of local bodies, accounting standard and information dissemination, fiscal reforms ofthe States, automatic debit mechanism etc.Transparency and Data DisseminationTo enable both institutional and retail investors to plan their investments better, an indicativecalendar for issuance of dated securities during the first half of the current year has beenannounced.Statistical information relating to both primary and secondary market for Governmentsecurities is disseminated at regular interval to ensure transparency of debt managementoperations as well as of secondary market activity. This is done through either press releasesor Bank’s publications viz., (e.g., daily press release of all the transactions settled throughSGL Accounts, RBI monthly Bulletin, Weekly Statistical Supplement, Handbook of Statisticson Indian Economy, Report on Currency and Finance and Annual Report)Outlook for Future DevelopmentDebt management in India has clearly come a long way from a passive system to a marketdriven exercise with developed institutions, instruments and markets. In terms ofinternational benchmarks, India ranks on par with some of the developed countries in areaslike institutional framework, risk management set-up, market development, clearing andsettlement procedures and transparency in debt management operations The artificiallyadministered interest rate system of government securities market has developed into amarket determined one and an inactive thin secondary market has grown into an activelytraded and reasonably liquid market. Settlement systems have developed significantly and weare moving towards a system which will be comparable with the best systems internationally.Some of the major issues in respect of which further development is being contemplated arethe following:7i) A working Group set up in 1997 had recommended separation of debt andmonetary management. However, separation of the two functions would bedependent on the fulfilment of certain pre-conditions, viz., development offinancial markets, reasonable control over fiscal deficit and necessary legislativechanges. The feasibility and further steps for separation of government debtmanagement from Reserve Bank is proposed to be taken up once legislativeaction with regard to Fiscal Responsibility Bill and amendments with regard tothe Reserve Bank of India Act are accomplished.ii) Measures to widen the base of the repo market including extending it to non-SGL account holders like CSGL account holders. Introduction of longer termrepo, rollover of repos, taxation and standardised accounting are the major areasto be focussed in the near future.iii) For the introduction of STRIPS in the government securities market, themodalities are being finalised.  This can be done only after GovernmentSecurities Act is passed by Parliament.  The Report of the Working Group set upin May 2002 for Suggesting Operational and Prudential Guidelines on STRIPShas been placed on the website of RBI in August 2002 for comments.iv) The issuance calendar for Government of India securities which was introducedfor the first time in April 2002 for the first six months of the year and has beensuccessfully completed, is to be finalised for the second half of the year.   It isexpected to be announced soon.v) The implementation of the next phase of the PDO-NDS project involvingintegration with security settlement system and primary markets operations,automation and inter-connectivity of PDOs, electronic maintenance of record ofownership, etc. is under way.? Valedictory Address by Shri Mohammad Tahir, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India,at the Seminar on Managing Public Debt organized by ASSOCHAM at New Delhi onSeptember 3, 2002.8
