Monetary and Fiscal Policy, and Poverty, andPublic Policy: What is New ?*I am thankful to Professor Rao for giving me the privilege of being part of thiscovered a wide spectrum of theory and practice; analysed a broad range of topics, from inter-governmental issues to poverty alleviation schemes and brought to bear varying experiences ofIn this address, I will focus on what appears to be new, in the context of economicreform, in the package of policies deliberated in this seminar. India orientation and a centralThe objective of monetary policy has been clearly enunciated as price stability whileensuring provision of adequate credit for productive purposes. The main contribution ofmonetary policy to poverty alleviation is thus ensuring price stability in a growth-environment,and significance of its role is brought out by the oft-quoted statement that containing inflation isTowards this e nd, as part of economic reform in the ‘nineties, monetary policy soughtclearer enunciation of objectives or mandate on price stability and operational flexibility in theconduct of the policy to fulfill the mandate. Among the measures taken in this direction, are:elimination of system of automatic monetisation of budget deficit, clearer delineation of rolesbetween the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and Government in financing of development bythrough market integration as part of financial sector reforms, especially in banking sector. Theimplications of each of these measures in terms of changing expectations on the role of the RBI,The introduction of Ways and Means Advance system, and termination of automaticmonetisation of budget deficit of the Government of India in 1997 implies that the RBI nowconsiders the extent of monetisation at its discretion, consistent with internal debt managementpolicy objectives in respect of timing, maturity structure and mode of primary issues ofGovernment debt. In a sense this imposes some limitations, if not a precise limit, onlonger-term perspective, however, such overall limit helps the cause of the poor by restrictingbuild up of inflationary potential. Dr. C. Rangarajan had researched to show that, in the currentstate of our economy, this approach helps the cause of the poor and that of growth far better, inIn the past as part of the regime of administered interest rates, the ba nking and financialinstitutions were providing loans on concessional terms to certain sectors and also certain1the medium-term.expansionary fiscal policy to fund all expenditures including poverty alleviation programme. In aperhaps need to be detailed.dominance by attempting to reduce deficits, and improvements in monetary policy-transmission,keeping levels of monetisation consistent with inflation and growth objectives, reduction in fiscalthe best anti-poverty programme.Monetary Policybanker’s perspective would, of course, be inevitable.landlocked Nepal, island economy of Sri Lanka and large continental-sized India.distinguished gathering assembled to honour Professor Chelliah. Papers presented in the seminarProfessor Raja Chelliah, Professor Govinda Rao, and distinguished participants.categories of borrowers, leading to cross-subsidisation. The credit allocation by banks was alsodirected to many such sectors/borrowers through various target prescriptions. RBI had also beencontributing regularly to Long-Term Operations (LTO) Funds to finance industrial oragricultural development through the Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI), NationalBank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), Small Industries Development Bankof India (SIDBI), etc., generally on concessional terms. Combined with automatic monetisationof budget deficits, such contributions also caused significant increases in primary or reservemoney. This practice has been gradually discontinued in the recent years on the ground that in aliberalised environment, institutions should expand the avenues of raising resources from themarket and if all such activities result in cross-subsidisation, it should rightfully be the primarythrough and to Government of India. Thus, while discontinuing LTO Funds, net transfer ofprofits of the RBI as dividend has increased from Rs.200 crore in 1991-92 to Rs. 2,000 crore in1998-99. No doubt, there still exists flow of concessional funds under General Line of CreditThe need for reduction of fiscal deficit and revenue deficit has been emphasised by theRBI for several reasons. In the context of use of resources raised through borrowings, it can bedisfavour. However, in order to be able to justify the uses of borrowings, under normalcircumstances for purposes which do not give direct financial return, there should be reasonableassurance that overall return on such of the assets that are funded by the total borrowing iscommensurate with overall cost. In other words, borrowings can be used to fund povertyalleviation programmes provided public enterprises which are also funded by borrowings yieldadequate returns to cover the cost of borrowing for all purposes put together. Unfortunately, thisis not the case in India. Choices become even more difficult if the return on assets alreadycreated with borrowed funds in the past do not generate adequate return or cash flows to financethe debt-servicing needs. In brief, the RBI advocates in the current context, reduction in revenueand fiscal deficits and adequate return on overall asset portfolio to ensure sustainability and, thisimplies that Government will have to consider a package of public policies that would combineanti-poverty elements and highly productive investments, in a way that the poor do not have toFinancial sector reform has several dimensions and of particular interest to the povertyissue is cost of credit as well as its availability. Interest rates have been deregulated to asignificant degree not only to aid movement of monetary policy to the use of more effectiveindirect instruments, but also because administered interest rate regime proved to be inefficientand costly, without necessarily ensuring flow of credit to the needy. The RBI’s recommendedapproach, however, does not preclude subsidisation by the Government but, it disfavourspoor. RBI favours a financial system that provides incentives to encourage flow of credit and atto size of credit limits, rather than to specified sectors or groups of borrowers. Thus, for small2Thus, the RBI has introduced modified interest rate prescriptions, linking concessionalitythe same time ensuring servicing of interest and principal, i.e., bankability of schemes.excessive use of banking system to cross subsidise especially, if it were to ultimately favour non-bear the burden of inflation, especially since most of them have no hedge against inflation.rightly argued that allocation of such resources for poverty alleviation should not be viewed withregard to use of such monetised resources have been clearly delineated.(GLC) to NABARD for rural development. Thus, the overall responsibility and accountability inresponsibility of Government of India and whatever support the RBI could give, should really be(PLR), which is the rate charged for the best borrowings by a bank. The only other interest rateprescriptions relate to differential interest rate (DIR) scheme and export credit. The rationale isthat since most of poor can afford to borrow only limited amounts, finance is being madeavailable to them at the best possible interest rates without impinging upon viability of thebanking system. The choice of borrowers is left to banks in these cases, except in regard toThere are two related issues on which the RBI’s initiative is sought, namely, regionaldimension and rural-urban divide. The regional variations or inter-State disparities in credit-deposit ratio existed in the past and continue to persist in the post-reform period also. Thevariations may be less pronounced in some cases if ratio of credit plus investments to deposits istaken into consideration. RBI has been sensitising banks to ensure flow of credit to all States,while at the same time, urging State Governments to create enabling environment for flow ofcredit. However, progressively, the instruments available with the RBI to ‘direct’ credit are lessin a de regulated environment, especially since financial intermediation through non-banksincluding mutual funds and NBFCs, is justifiably expanding. In fact, uneven distribution ofburden of social obligations between banks and non-banks could undermine the health ofas mentioned above, on the policy instruments available. The RBI therefore, encourages localcooperative banks which are also local, revitalising the Regional Rural Banks (whose bankingbusiness in recent years is growing faster than scheduled commercial banking activity),promoting local area banks, apart from efforts to improving the cooperative credit system as aIn brief, monetary policy is increasingly focussed on efficient discharge of its objectives,that no doubt help poverty alleviation,  indirectly, while the more direct attack on povertyalleviation would rightfully be the preserve of fiscal policy, aided by conducive monetary andfinancial conditions. Monetary policy in India, should, perhaps be focussing increasingly onwhat Dreaze and Sen call “growth mediated security” while “support-led security”, mainlyconsisting of direct anti-poverty interventions are addressed mainly by fiscal and otheras also tax exemptions or concessions to financial instruments and institutions. To the extent taxfree status is given to a large segment of financial instruments, those investors who are taxpayees’ benefit while those who are not in the tax bracket do not. Technically, this could betermed regressive, but in any case is not directly related to poverty alleviation programmes assuch. Similarly, the fact that services sector is not taxed or that tax as a proportion of GDP isfor poverty alleviation programmes though it has no direct bearing on specific programmes.Further, in regard to non-tax revenues, insufficient user charges, say for water, and inadequate3coming down, in a ways, restricts the maneuverability of fiscal management to identify resourcesAn important area of overlap between financial sector and fiscal policy relates to taxationFiscal Policygovernmental activities.albeitwhole.level financial intermediaries to address this issue. These include expanding the network of urbanSimilarly, on the rural-urban divide in flow of bank resources, there are some constraints,banking system, and health of banking is vital to our economy.Government sponsored subsidy lending schemes.borrowers with credit limits up to Rs.2 lakh, the maximum rate applicable is Prime Lending Ratereturns from public enterprises also constrain fiscal management to locate resources for povertyOn the expenditure side, intere st burden, salaries, pensions do preempt significantresources, while existence of subsidies not directly related to poverty alleviation programmes insince support-led security is possible essentially through public expenditures. Major issues inexpenditure policy relate to magnitudes, composition and quality encompassing allocational andtechnical efficiency aspects in regard to all expenditures. Further, merely increasing theand health would not necessarily mean that the objectives are actually achieved. There is,therefore, need to look at the link between instruments and objectives of expenditure policy inThere has been a view that decentralisation would enhance prospects for povertyalleviation. Genuine decentralisation would warrant significant local freedom in designing theprogrammes, which would be possible only when untied financial resources flow from the top.Since the poor are usually concentrated in poorer localities and regions, such transfers becomenecessary. It has been argued by some that without significant redesigning of approaches forfiscal management and, instruments of policies for poverty alleviation, mere decentralisation ofthere is scope for improved quality of services such as primary education and health and formore appropriate poverty alleviation programmes. I recall, about twenty years ago, there was aseminar in this very hall on decentralisation in which among others, Mr. C. Subramaniam,former Finance Minister, Dr. K.N. Raj, eminent economist and Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao, founder ofthis Institute, participated. I had made a strong plea for decentralisation and possibly a three-tierenhance efficiency in Andhra Pradesh, but could result in greater exploitation in Bihar, andhence there is need for caution. One is not sure whether such divergent outcomes are impossibleCurrently, there is an interesting debate on the impact of economic reform on povertyalleviation. The data and analysis, whether in terms of direct poverty ratios or indirectly lookingat unemployment and wages are reported to suggest that in the post-reform period, rural povertyreduction has been arrested while urban poverty recorded a decline. Though the conclusions ofstudies happen to be tentative, it is noteworthy that the arresting of a desirable trend happenedThe major explanation for this phenomenon could lie in the fact that acceleration in SDPgrowth was concentrated in a few States. Some fast growing States especially in Southern andWestern parts of India appear to have recorded a decline in poverty, while some others,especially in North India where SDP growth is lagging do not appear to show reduction in4poverty.though GDP growth has been around 5.7 per cent.Poverty Issueafter all these years.Government, Centre, State and District. Mr. C. Subramaniam remarked that decentralisation maypowers now may mean decentralisation of fiscal problems. However, it is useful to recognise thatour country.expenditure on the existing poverty alleviation programmes, or on merit goods such as educationthe poor. The critical role of expenditure policy in poverty alleviation must be clearly recognisedareas such as water, power, and fertilisers may indicate potential for maneuverability in favour ofalleviation programmes.counter factual, viz., if there were no reform, would the reduction in poverty ratios havecontinued. Perhaps, the policy package of the ‘eighties, which delivered a respectable ratio ofgrowth in GDP and comfortable reduction in poverty, was clearly unsustainable. The externalbe argued that the price for such unsustainable policies of the ‘eighties is being paid in thein the reform period, relates to whether the poverty reduction has taken place mainly in thoseStates which have demonstrated significant progress in reform and these States havesimultaneously registered impressive improvements in growth of State Domestic Product. Thus,State-level analysis deserves to be looked into carefully before arriving at the conclusion thatreforms have failed to reduce poverty or that the assumption of ‘trickle down’ has beeninvalidated. In fact, a detailed State-level analysis may even confirm ‘trickle down’ effect ofgrowth due to reform, or as some people would prefer to say, uplift of the poor through growth-In terms of public policy, it is necessary to recognise that we have the hindsight ofexperience besides excellent analytical studies to be able to revisit the policy package to enablepoverty reduction or poverty alleviation. Even assuming for a moment that as a result of reformthe poverty reduction has been arrested, the optimal solution may not be in questioning thereduction. The issues in this regard clearly appear to be many, and a few major ones are listedshould there be greater focus on public investment in agriculture which has been deceleratingSecond, is it possible that, as some studies indicate, expenditure on roads, agriculturalresearch and irrigation have more impact on poverty alleviation than the expenditure on directThird, is it possible that higher growth in agriculture facilitated byderegulation/liberalisation, at least in domestic/national market facilitating better terms of trade,Fourth, whether without improvements in design and implementation of povertyreduction programmes including the public distribution system, any increase in outlays wouldFifth, whether removal of all price based subsidies, direct or indirect, would ensurerelease of resources both for public investments in rural areas, especially agriculture and anti-5amount to larger wastage?would contribute to reduction in rural poverty?poverty alleviation programmes?recently?ant determinant of rural poverty, First, given the fact that status of agriculture is an importhere.reform policy framework but in fact, the solution may be in redesigning the strategies for povertyPublic Policyprocess.The second question, given the increasing inequalities among States in the rate of growth‘nineties, especially on poverty alleviation.in a sense, based on borrowed time and borrowed money, both domestic and external. It can evenposition as well as domestic developments indicated that achievements during the ‘eighties were,hat arises is with regard to the In linking poverty reduction with reform, the first question tpoverty programmes, and thus also contributing more effectively to the objective of growthSixth, studies have also shown that in periods of ‘distress’ such as drought, povertyalleviation programmes make impressive welfare impact. In such an event, is there a case forsubstantial and automatic launching of such programmes on a massive scale (such as in Orissa)while in normal circumstances, poverty alleviation programmes could be on only the most what would be the role of local bodies, which are being revamped in manyStates, and of non-Governmental organisations, in poverty alleviation programme? Would it beappropriate to consider them as good vehicles for such programmes only or should they beencouraged to take interest in multidimensional approach to poverty alleviation andIn brief, poverty alleviation requires provision to the poor of both indirect or ‘growthmediated security’ and direct or ‘support led security’. The reform process appears to havepre-reform era appear to continue virtually unchanged into the reform era. It is, perhapsnecessary to review and reform programmes that directly deal with poverty alleviation, to makeIn any case, significant progress in poverty alleviation is possible mainly through fiscalactions, especially expenditure policies. To release large resources for poverty reduction, it ispublic sector. Unfortunately, the constituency that is strongly pro-poor in our country is the onewhich often makes pro-poor policies difficult to implement or function since the sameconstituency pleads for continuation of price subsidies and many actions that lead to persistenceof low productivity in public sector. Perhaps, in our country we have to plead with all those whoare actively pro-poor to give overriding priority to poverty related issues, and thus expand theIn fact, the process of economic reform itself would be endangered if public policyneglects the issue of poor, not merely absolute poverty but also relative poverty. The cost ofemerging social tensions due to such inequalities may seriously undermine the benefit of reformitself. The public policy needs to relook at enhancing amounts of and quality of publicexpenditures addressed to both poverty alleviation and provision of merit-goods, especiallydrinking water, health/sanitation, and primary education. Such a reorientation requires arecognition of the fact that the tyranny of ten per cent, i.e., of organised work force, needs to beA time has come when a choice has to be made between being soft to what has beendescribed as ‘proletariat-aristocracy’ and the deprived poor since Government can no longerserve both. It is time we also recognise that the vague concept of ‘social justice’ has in many6overcome whenever it exists.reform process to the benefit of the poor.essential to phase out price-subsidies of commercial goods significantly and improve return fromthem more purposeful.succeeded in the first set of policies. As regards the second set, most of the policy instruments ofConclusionempowerment of the poor.Seventh,vulnerable sections addressing issues of physically handicapped or destitutes.besides poverty alleviation.ways diluted the attention to poor. It is time we preempt resources for real priority items. Interms of public policy, therefore, the objective of public-policy itself, viz., “growth with social* Valedictory Address by Dr.Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor RBI, at the International Seminar on January 18, 2000,7at the Institute for Social and Economic Change, Bangalore.Let me again thank the distinguished participants.justice” may need to be replaced by “growth with elimination of poverty and ignorance”.
