Summary of the Welcome Remarks by Jalan, Governor,at the 11 C.D. 7-12-2000On behalf of the Reserve Bank of India and myself, I am very happy to welcomeProfessor Charles Goodhart to Mumbai to deliver the Eleventh C.D. Deshmukh MemorialLecture. Prof. Goodhart’s work, both as a Central Banker and as an economic thinker, is wellknown and he hardly needs any introduction before this audience. Educated at Cambridgeand Harvard Universities, he has held several high academic positions, and is at present theNorman Sosnow Profesor of Banking and Finance at the London School of Economics. Hewas appointed as one of the first four independent outside Members of the Bank of EnglandProf. Goodhart has also written extensively on monetary history, monetary economicsand monetary policy. What I have admired most in Prof. Goodhart’s writings, and what youare going to hear, is his ability to take the unconventional and open-minded views on mostintricate technical as well as policy issues. With perhaps one or two exceptions, I can think ofno one else who has brought so much practical experience to his academic work and viceWe are indeed fortunate in having persuaded him to deliver this Lecture in honour ofone of India’s most distinguished thinkers and policy makers -  Shri Chintaman I do not wish to stand between you and Prof. Goodhart for very long.  The subject ofhis lecture “Whither Central Banking?” is both timely and interesting since the last few yearshave seen the most significant changes in redefining central banking.  Central banksthemselves are, of course, very old institutions – I think, Bank of England was founded by anAct of Parliament as long ago as 1694, and Bank of France recently celebrated its 200Anniversary. The Federal Reserve was set up in 1913. The Reserve Bank of India – althougha toddler or at most a young adult by these standards – was set up in 1935, but is one of theoldest central banks in the developing world. For a very very long time, all Central Banksperformed  more or less similar functions as bankers to Government, issuers of currency,However, in the last few years, several Central Banks around the globe have assumednewly defined roles and identity and are now concentrating on a single monetary policyobjective of inflation control with the use of a single instrument. Some have also given uptheir role as supervisors of banks or as Government debt managers, and concentrate solely onmonetary policy. The year 1998 was a landmark year – Bank of England gainedindependence, Bank of Japan was given operational independence, and the European CentralBank was set up. Their operational styles and methodologies are still evolving, and we inIndia are also watching current developments with considerable interest. I would like to takeadvantage of Prof. Goodhart’s presence to raise a couple of issues on which Reserve Bank isworking and on which there are some unsettled questions. These issues, I understand, willalso figure in his lecture.As I mentioned, there is a growing consensus now – in theory as well as practice - thatCentral Bank should have instrumental independence, and concentrate on a single target ofinflation control with the use of a single instrument. The position, no doubt, is theoreticallylenders of last resort, supervisors of banks, and so on.thDeshmukh.Dwarakanathversa.Monetary Committee in 1997.Deshmukh Memorial LecturethDr.Bimal sound, but as I look at the history of economic thought and changing fashions in economicpolicy making, I must  confess to a sense of some discomfort on whether the currentUltimately, Governments and Central Banks have to respond to the primary concernof the people, and the principal economic problem facing their countries during particularperiods of time. When growth is good, productivity and wages are rising in step, externalconditions are favourable and inflation is low – there is obviously no problem or conflict, andeveryone involved in policy making can concentrate on the objective of keeping things goingas they are.  Central Banks can do what they know best – inflation control; Government cankeep fiscal deficit under control; and businesses can go about doing their business inexpanding markets.But what happens when things are not so good, or there is a conflict between the goalof preventing inflation from going up in future, say, 18 months later by half a percentagepoint over a low target of 2 or 2.5 per cent, and a sharp down turn in industry here and now?This is when the real problem arises – partly because of transmission lags in the effect ofmonetary policy and uncertain projections about future outcomes. Under such circumstances,I feel that reliance on mechanistic, simple and narrow rules, designed to restrict CentralBanks or Government’s discretion or judgement to the maximum possible degree, may notsurvive the test of time. Already, there are some signs of discomfort emerging in differentparts of the world about the pitfalls of too narrow and “pre-set” approach to policy. For• There is some evidence or a fairly respectable view in at least one country, which wasa pioneer in introducing the independence of central bank and where an inflationtarget was prescribed under legislation, that growth was held back and recessionaryconditions intensified in the past, because of excessive caution on the part of the• The issue is also being debated in a couple of major industrial countries, includingone in our region. The recent small increase in interest rate in anticipation of recoveryhas raised some questions as deflationary conditions have persisted and recovery hasbeen much weaker than forecast.In developing countries, this whole question of trade-off - particularly at the margin -and during periods of external or domestic uncertainties, becomes even more relevantbecause of a large non-It is also a fact that one of the most respected Central Banks in the world, the FederalReserve, does not have a unitary narrow target or a mechanistic rule. It is enjoined to lookIt seems to me that a certain amount of target flexibility and balancing of conflictingobjectives are unavoidable, particularly when things are not so rosy and there are  multipleA related issue, which acquires particular significance in developing countries is thedefinitional issue. Granting that inflation should be the primary or exclusive target, howshould it be defined? Most countries, which have adopted a quantitative target, definechoices to be made and reconciled.after both price stability and employment, and does not have a declared inflation target.monetised and agricultural economy.central bank.example:dominant view on “one target, one instrument” will survive the test of time.inflation in terms of “core inflation” which excludes certain items such as food or oil, and notthe so-called “headline” inflation rate. In developing countries, where food can account formore than half the weight in CPI, and where cooking oil can constitute a further significantweight, defining inflation in terms of “core inflation”, after excluding these items, may not bevery meaningful. In India also, we have gone through periods where core inflation was 2 or 3per cent but headline inflation was 9 or 10 per cent. People are naturally more concernedabout the latter. Reserve Bank is doing some research on this and we are tracking inflationrates on different definitions. However, we have yet to arrive at a firm conclusion. I hope thisquestion will also receive greater attention of academic researchers here as well as abroad.Another iss ue concerns the question of importance that should be given to theexchange rates objectives in the operations of the central bank.  This issue is particularlycrucial for developing countries where foreign exchange markets are generally thin, which donot have automatic access to reserves of other central banks, and where large volatility inexchange markets can have significant real effect. There are three features of the exchange First, capital flows in “gross” terms, which affect exchange rates from day to day, areseveral times higher than “net” flows on any day – and these are also much moresensitive to what everybody else is saying or doing rather than to changes in economic During periods of large volatility in “gross” flows, herding becomes unavoidable.“Daily Earnings At Risk” minimisation models necessarily give rise to “herd”behaviour, since everyone prefers to be wrong with everyone else rather than beingwrong alone! Herding further accentuates movements in one direction in relation to a Unlike equity markets, where investors have a choice of holding a large number ofscrips, and diversifying their portfolio, such a possibility is limited in foreignexchange markets, as holdings are largely in one or two currencies. In this situation,volatility is unavoidable as there is a scramble to get out of Euro or dollars from Euroor Yen and vice versa on the slightest uncertainty or “news”. Expectations aregenerally self-fulfilling and speculation is likely to be “one way” particularly duringperiods when stabilisation is most needed. In such situations, the theory about thestabilising speculation” becomes highly obtuse.Most Central Banks which have adopted the ‘single target, single instrument’ ruleclaim not to be concerned about exchange rate unless it affects domestic inflation.Theoretically also, there is a strong case for the so-called “corner solution” – CurrencyBoards or Free floats – when there is capital account convertibility. Yet, with few exceptions,most Central Banks find themselves compelled to intervene in the forex markets in pursuit ofsome exchange rate objective, however, ill-defined. We have seen this happening inAustralia, ECB, Japan – even Fed in favour of Yen or Euro from time to time. Most EastAsian or Latin American countries also follow intermediate regimes. One country with aSo theory says ‘corner solution’, but the real experience says the opposite, and mostCentral Banks are somewhere between the corners. How do we reconcile the right theorywith actual practice?corner solution – that of Currency Board - in Latin America is currently in trouble.presence of so called “  iii.currency.  ii.fundamentals;  i.market, which deserve attention:I am sorry to have taken a bit of your time, but I hope I have sufficiently stimulatedProf. Goodhart to include some of these issues, from the developing countries perspective, inC.D.Deshmukh Memorial Lecture.I now invite him to deliver the Eleventh his future research agenda.
