Fiscal Transparency and Beyond *It has always been an extremely productive venture for me to visit Indian MerchantsChamber and interact with the gathering.  The subject chosen today has special relevance atthis juncture for several reasons.  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has released a Report onFiscal Transparency a few weeks ago and it is necessary to view it and debate it in the contextof fiscal challenges and their linkages with monetary policy.  The Fiscal Responsibility andBudget Management Bill (FRB) currently under consideration has a special relevance to theoverall policy relating to fiscal management.  Further, the parameters for the Tenth Five YearIn the first section of the presentation, there will be an overview of the fiscaltransparency issues.  It must be noted that the transparency issues are neutral to the substanceand the content of the policy, though transparency is aimed at enhancing the quality andaccountability of the policy.  It will be clear that, while Indian standards are by and large uptointernational ones, some improvements are possible and most of these are envisaged in theproposed FRB.  The second section elaborates on fiscal policy, narrating the variousproposals under consideration at the central and state levels encompassing taxes, expendituresand public debt.  It would be clear from the narration that there are several substantive issuesthat need to be addressed on an urgent basis, and almost all the proposals are well laid out.Indeed, a qualitative improvement in the fiscal management enhances the scope fortransparency in policies, and both these aspects are addressed in FRB, as summarised in thethird section.  The fourth section elaborates the links between fiscal, monetary and financialtransparency, in particular on management of public debt, where there is, understandably,convergence in the views of the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency; the Advisory Groupon Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies and FRB.  The fifth section explores theextent of fiscal accountability to Parliament as per the provisions of the Constitution andattempts to establish that FRB supplements and enhances such accountability.  The linkagesbetween fiscal and monetary policies are discussed in conceptual terms in the penultimatesection to establish that appropriate legal provisions and institutional structures such as thoseenvisaged under FRB are only of enabling nature and the actual conduct of macro policieswill have to address a complex set of issues.  The concluding section emphasises thecriticality of addressing the fiscal issues, and focuses on qualitative aspects in the mediumterm without which legislative changes and transparency practices will prove to be a burdenThe Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes wasconstituted in December 1999 to identify and monitor developments in global standards andcodes, consider aspects of applicability of these standards to the Indian financial system,periodically review the status and make available its Reports to all concerned  inpublic or private sector. The Standing Committee in turn established ten separate AdvisoryGroups to look into existing Codes and standards in specific areas.  One of these groups, viz.,Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency, under the chairmanship of Dr. Montek SinghAhluwalia, submitted its Report to the Standing Committee in June 2001. The Report hasbeen put on RBI website and is slated to be widely discussed, along with reports of otherGroups.organisationsFiscal Transparencyrather than a benefit.Plan under contemplation in the Planning Commission do impinge on the fiscal issues.Mr. Chairman and friends,The Group reviewed and analysed the transparency practices in relation tointernational standards in respect of various aspects of fiscal transparency. It has examined theextent to which fiscal practices in India comply with the International Monetary Fund's The IMF Manual on Fiscal Transparency provides four general principles of fiscaltransparency, which form the basic structure of Code of Good Practices. These principlesrelate to (a) clarity of roles and responsibilities within government and between governmentsand the rest of the economy; (b) public availability of information on fiscal outcomes; (c)open and transparent budget preparation, execution and reporting; and (d) assurances ofintegrity, including those relating to the quality of fiscal data and the need for independentThe overall assessment of the Group is that current fiscal practices at the CentralFirst, the roles and responsibilities of the central and state governments are welldefined and there is a clear legal framework governing the management of the budget andextra-budgetary funds. The responsibility of fiscal management is clearly specified. interface between the Government and the rest of the economy is governed by elaborateSecond, although the division of expenditure and tax powers is complex, with areas ofoverlapping responsibility and multiple channels for resource transfers, the basicrequirements of transparency are met.Third, the requirement that management of public funds should ensure accountabilityis fully met. The ethical standards of behaviour for public servants are clear and wellpublicized with statutory laws relating to the behaviour of civil servants, and prescribedpenalties for misconduct.Fourth, Indian practice complies fully with international standards regarding publicavailability of information for the year for which the Budget is presented and also forFifth, India subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS), andadvance release calendar dates have been announced for release of data on centralgovernment operations. The aggregate budget outturns of the central government coveringexpenditure, revenues and fiscal deficit are publicly available on a monthly basis based on theSixth, the institutional mechanisms for independent audit of fiscal data are verystrong. The accounts of both the central government and the State governments are auditedby the CAG, which has developed an enviable reputation for high standards of independentThe Group, however, indicated that there are deficiencies in some important areas First, current budget practices could be improved if the basic principles of budgetmanagement are embodied in a general budget system law with Constitutional or near2the relevant observations are worth noting.andand strict scrutiny.information provided by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA).preceding years.Constitutional and legal framework.TheGovernment level satisfy the minimum requirements of the Code in many areas.scrutiny of fiscal information.of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency.CodeConstitutional status. Hence, the Group recommends that the scope of the FRB be amplifiedto include the essential elements of a budget law, list macro-economic assumptions regarding growth, inflation, export and import growth, current account deficit, savings andinvestment rates, and project major categories of expenditure and revenue for two yearsSecond, since information provided on contingent liabilities, major tax expendituresand quasi-fiscal activities by both central and state governments and also quantification offiscal risks is inadequate, it recommends increased reporting of these elements, becauseThird, given the scale of fiscal activity and the size of state level fiscal imbalances andother relevant extra-budgetary transactions, the group suggests provision of information onconsolidated position of central and state governments, the overall public sector balance, asalso on government equity in public sector enterprises and outstanding loans to theseFourth, the simplification of the tax structure, with greater use of informationtechnology, especially electronic filing, is called for in view of the complexity of the taxstructure, especially the large number of exemptions, which create room for uncertainty andFifth, from the central bank’s perspective, the Group indicated that the most importantdeficiency relates to the prevalence of quasi-fiscal activities ( QFAs) undertaken by thebanking system and by non-financial public sector enterprises, which are not transparentlyidentified and quantified. It notes that the RBI continues to provide direct support togovernment securities at the primary issue stage, in order to limit the impact of governmentborrowing on the market interest rate for government securities. It recommends theimplementation of the FRB proposal, that the RBI end the practice of providing directsupport to government securities at the primary issue stage, by the end of 3 years, with effectThe overall assessment by the Group is: “To summarise, current fiscal practices at thecentral government level meet most of the minimum requirements of the Code and the gapsidentified above could be closed in a relatively short time.  We recommend that action shouldbe taken as outlined above to close these gaps so that India can be said to be complying fullywith the Code.  The FRB contains many of the important initiatives need in this context”.FRBMB for FRB).In regard to fiscal practices at the state level, they were felt to be generally behind thestandards achieved at the central government level, thus it recommends that the FinanceSecretaries Forum could review the Report of the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparencyand determine a set of minimum standards on transparency which all state governmentsshould achieve within a three year period.In brief, the Group focuses on provisions relating to Budget management in FRB asan adequate response to the need for enhancing fiscal transparency.  It must be noted that theGDP3Group’s recommendations are neutral to the actual content and conduct of fiscal policy.(The Group uses the acronym from April 2004.administrative discretion.enterprises and the Oil Pool Account deficit.ignoring these would understate the potential fiscal risk.ahead.Transparency in fiscal operations implies openness towards public about structure andfunctions of the Government, fiscal policy intention, public sector accounts and fiscalprojection.  Fiscal transparency is important because fiscal soundness is a core requirementfor financial stability and transparency is needed for markets to be able to assess fiscalsoundness accurately. However, there is a distinction between fiscal transparency and theother two ingredients of good fiscal management ., the soundness of public finances andthe efficiency of fiscal policy instruments.  The soundness of fiscal management relates to themacro-economic issue of the fiscal balance, which is essential for stability. The efficiency offiscal policy instruments relates to the micro-economic issues of the efficiency of particularexpenditure programmes in achieving their objectives and the efficiency of tax policies inThe challenges of fiscal policy in India are well known but the measures envisaged toenhance the quality of fiscal management need to be debated, not merely at the time of thebudget-presentation but on a more continuous basis preferably in a medium term framework.It may be worthwhile to briefly recall the current thinking as enunciated by  (a) strategy ofTenth Five Year Plan, (b) discussion paper on medium term fiscal strategy, (c) Report on TaxPolicy and Tax Administration,      (d) Reports on Expenditure Commission, (e) Report ofTax Reforms commission in ; and (f) observations of Finance Commission onPublic debt.The Macroeconomic parameters adopted for the Tenth Plan as set out in the DraftApproach Paper describes the base-line position and the Tenth Plan target.  The base-linescenario is described as one emerging from current macro-economic trends supplemented by(a) Average GDP growth rate per annum is expected to reach 8 per cent in the targetscenario from 6.5 per cent in the base line scenario. Gross investment rate is expected to increase to 32.6 per cent from 27.8 per cent in the(c) Implicit incremental capital out-put ratio ( ICOR) from 4.28 per cent in base line to(d) GDP to 2.8 per cent of (e) Gross domestic savings from 26.3 per cent in base line to increase to 29.8 per cent intarget scenario with public sector savings ratio rising from 2.4 per cent of GDP to 4.6per cent. Within public sector, Government savings would show a turn around from negative0.6 per cent to 1.7 per cent of GDP, while public enterprises would decline from 3 percent to 2.9 per cent.4(f)target scenario.GDP in Current account deficit to increase from 1.5 per cent of improve to 4.08 per cent in the target scenario.base line.(b)pipe line. the fiscal measures, which are already in the Tenth  Five Year Plan (2002-2007)  StrategyKarnatakaraising revenues with minimum economic distortion.viz Fiscal Policy(g) Private corporate sector savings to increase from 4.9 per cent to 5.8 per cent, whilehousehold sector savings would improve from 19.0 per cent to 19.4 per cent in theConsistent with the macro-parameters, the Tenth Plan approach paper presented afiscal correction scenario for the Central Government  needed to achieve GDP target. Theseare:(a) Fiscal Deficit of the Centre is to reduce from 5.0 per cent during the Ninth Plan to 2.6per cent of GDP in the Tenth Plan.  The combined gross fiscal deficit of the  Revenue Deficit of the Centre is to reduce from 3.4 per cent of GDP during Ninth(c) Revenue receipts of the Centre is to grow from 9.1 per cent of GDP in the ninth Plan(d) GDP in Ninth Plan to 10.7 per(e) GDP in the Ninth Plan to 14.0 percent of  Non-Debt Capital   receipts is to increase from 0.8 per cent of GDP in Ninth Plan toThe draft approach paper identified several decisions that have to be made to achievethe fiscal correction needed at the Centre. Gross Budgetary Support for the Plan should be steadily increased as percentage ofGDP to 5 per cent by the terminal year of the Plan, implying average annual growth Reduction in the number of government employees by 3 per cent per year with nonew recruitment during the five year period.  All additional requirements should be Non-Plan expenditure excluding interest payments, defence allocations and pay andallowances held constant in real terms to current level implying annual growth rate of5 per cent. Gross tax (including diesel cess) to GDP ratio rising from 9.16 per cent in 2001-02 toa buoyancy of 1.44 per cent. Disinvestment process to be accelerated, yielding Rs.16 ,000 crore - Rs.17,000  Higher tax revenue should be achieved mainly through buoyancy and expansion ofthe tax base.  Besides, a widespread and bold imposition of user  charges of all non-merit goods.5(vi)per year on the average over the first three years of the Tenth Plan.crore (v)11.7 per cent in 2006-07 implying (iv)(iii)rationalisation of various Ministries. made through redeployment and (ii)of 18.3 per cent per annum.(i)1.2 per cent in the Tenth Plan.(f)GDP in the Tenth Plan.Total expenditure is to reduce from 15.4 per cent of cent in the Tenth Plan.Revenue Expenditure is to reduce from 12.5 per cent of to 10.2 per cent in Tenth Plan.Plan to 0.5 per cent in the Tenth Plan.(b)and States is targeted at 3.3 per cent during the Tenth Plan.Centretarget scenario.It is obvious that fiscal corrections at the Centre and States, are critical to reach eventhe modest targets for growth indicated in the approach paper and decisions needed areperhaps of a hard nature.A Discussion Paper ., “India :  Primary Aspects of a Medium Term Fiscal Strategy”Shome in December 2000,  highlighted major fiscal policy issues inFirst, on Centre's tax reform the Paper notes that while bringing down customs tariffrates to internationally comparable levels is a challenge, a greater challenge remains in termsof streamlining the exemptions. While there has been palpable progress in restructuring, thecentral excise rate structure as well as in reducing distortions by minimising taxation ofinputs, existing leakages from the tax base through exemptions pose a major problem. Amajor medium term challenge remains the coordination of central excises ( CENVAT) with astate level VAT, with the objective of structuring a national VAT.  Finally, it is imperative tointroduce comprehensive taxation of services at the central level at the earliest.  It should alsoSecond, on State's tax reform,  Paper notes that some states are moving ahead withtheir own VAT reforms pertaining only to intra state sales.  These attempts are not as yetcoordinated fully among states and may conflict with agreements on the floor rates of theirsales tax regimes.  It is important to address the issue of a state level VAT that includesinterstate trade.  This will obviously require close coordination among states and also withthe centre Centre.Third, on expenditure policy, the Paper recommends that in accordance with the PayCommission and Expenditure Commission recommendations ,  the Ministry of Financeshould propose a definitive strategy to reduce non-Plan expenditures.  Its wage bill should bereduced through reduction in Government employment by a tenth as a first step, going upto athird in the final analysis in reflection of latest Expenditure Commission and PayFourth, turning to subsidies, the Paper reiterates that subsidy reforms should bedirected towards reduction in their size; making them of finite duration; using them for stricteconomic objectives; making them transparent; and administering them through final goods,with a view to  their reach towards the target population at minimum cost.Recovery rates, even for non-merit services are low.  Most important, an increase in usercharges in agriculture, irrigation, industries, power and transport would substantially mitigateFifth, if public debt is to be amortised completely in 5-20 years, the Paper drawsattention to the severe pressure on the primary balance-fiscal balance net of interest payments- that will ensue.  Of course, if disinvestment in public enterprises progresses with somesuccess, the proceeds could be utilised to amortise public debt.  In the absence of any suchindication, however, the debt sustainability simulations of the Paper do not assume any roledisinvestment proceeds in retiring public debt.Finally, the performance of individual states in terms of their fiscal deficit to ratios has not changed much over the past decade, with poor performers remaining below theGDP6of pressures on the fiscal deficit.maximisingCommission recommendations.which  should be facilitated by guidance from the thebe seriously considered for appropriate assignment at the levels of states and local bodies.India.  Major observations of the Discussion Paper are:Parthasarathi prepared by vizMedium Term Fiscal Strategybetter performers. This indicates as per the Paper that the Centre's revenue sharing andredistribution across states have not necessarily encouraged states to improve theirThe Planning Commission constituted an Advisory Group under the Chairmanship ofProf. Parthasarathi Shome in July 2000 to study tax policy and tax administration issues andmake appropriate recommendations at different levels of Government with the purpose ofgenerating adequate resources for the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-03 to 2006-07). The GroupThe Group has made revenue projections for Tenth Plan period based on an overallgrowth in GDP of 15 per cent in normal terms during the Tenth Plan period.  The Group hasobserved that the Tax- GDP ratio of Centre and States has declined from 16.07 per cent ofGDP in 1989-90 to 14.18 per cent in 1999-2000.  Consistent with the GDP target, the Grouphas set in a target of Tax- GDP ratio of 17.78 per cent by the terminal year of 2006-07 from14.09 per cent in 1999-2000.  This would imply a 3.69 percentage point increase in Tax-ratio.  Of this increase, the Centre would have to achieve 2.08 percentage points of GDP andthe States 1.61 percentage points of GDP through intensified tax revenue effort.  In the caseof Central Taxes, the Group assigns increase in terms of  in excise duties from 3.2 percent to 3.5 per cent (+0.3 per cent), corporation tax 1.6 per cent to 2.4 per cent (+0.8 per cent)and personal income tax from 1.4 per cent to 1.9 per cent (+0.5 per cent).  Service tax isprojected to increase from 0.10 per cent of GDP in 1999-2000 to 0.57 per cent of GDP in2006-07 (+0.47 per cent). At the State level, sales tax is projected to increase from 3.1 percent of GDP to 4.1 per cent (+1.0 per cent), and State excise from 0.8 per cent to 1.0 per cent(+0.2 per cent).Some of the major recommendations on Tax  policy measures which have revenueimplications are:  (a) m aximum marginal rate of personal income tax rate be retained at 30per cent and retention of the existing three rate structure with modification in slabs.  (b) corporate tax rate not to exceed the maximum marginal personal income tax (30 per cent),coupled with abolition of the distribution tax on dividends and consequent reduction of thetax rate for foreign companies to the level recommended for domestic companies, (c) the 20per cent dividend tax should be abolished, and instead, the Minimum Alternative Tax shouldbe reconstituted as a tax equal to the aggregate of 0.75 per cent of adjusted net worth plus 10per cent of the dividend distributed, (d) the income of the Funds should be subjected to tax atthe lowest marginal rate of personal income tax, i.e., at 10 per cent, (e) in respect of UnionExcise Duty, a two-rate structure of 16 per cent together with a higher rate which should beintroduced with an increasing number of items to be converged to fall under the 16 per centrate to minimise classification problems. (The rates would have to be adjusted for inclusionCENVAT ),  (f) the median tariff rate in regard to Customs Duties should bebrought down to 25 percent in the 2002-03 budget since the objective should be to bringdown the median tariff rate to 20 percent in 2003-04 and 15 per cent in 2004-05.The Group recommended that States should adopt a consumption type Value AddedTax (VAT) i.e. there should be no distinction between raw materials and capital goods inallowing VAT credit. The consumption base must comprehensively include manufacturersand dealers of all  goods indicated in sales tax schedules.  Further, the VAT on servicesshould be fully integrated with the VAT on goods, both in its design and administration, withGDPGDP7of services in the thesubmitted its Final Report in May 2001.Tax AdministrationReport of the Advisory Group on Tax Policy andperformance.an appropriate mechanism to set-off service input tax against goods output tax and .A destination based, invoice credit method, dual VAT one at the Central level and another atthe level of States comprising both goods and services could be envisaged by the end of the.Of particular reference to financial sector and conduct of monetary policy are therecommendations relating to elimination of tax incentives on savings .  The Group suggeststhat tax incentives under Sections 80CCC, 80, 80L and 10(15) of the Income Tax Act beabolished, at least in phases.  Tax concessions under Sections 80D, 80DD, 80DDB and 80Eare to be given in the form of tax credit rather than as deduction from income to improveequity.  The rollover provision relating to capital gains under Section 54, 54B. 54D, 54EAand 54EB are sought to be removed.  It may be noted that the Union Budget 2001-02 hasThe Group also suggested that Provisions of Sections 10(8), 10(8A), 10(8B), and.The Government has set up an Expenditure Reforms Commission to improveexpenditure management and to find solution to the process of downsizing of Government ina systematic way so that the role and administrative structure of the Government are reduced.The first report deals with Food Subsidy and the second report mainly dealt with optimising Government staff strength.The Union Budget 2001-02 has effected some of the recommendations of theFirst, the Budget has proposed that instead of providing subsidised financial assistance will be provided to the State Governments to enable them to procure  to Below Poverty Line families at subsidised rates.Second, Government has decided to implement the recommendations of theExpenditure Reforms Commission for a phased programme of complete decontrol of urea byApril 1, 2006.T hird, downsizing in six Ministries will be implemented by July 31, 2001 andidentified surplus staff transferred to the surplus pool.There are several aspects of fiscal stress at state level, which have been articulated, inthe annual publication on State Finances brought out by RBI.  Hence, in the current narration,The Government of Karnataka as a part of efforts towards economic restructuring, setup the Tax Reforms Commission to ( i) study the existing tax structure and tax collectionprocedures in Karnataka and (ii) to recommend measures for augmenting State’s tax revenueThe Report dealt with  ( ) extension of the tax base by increasing coverage andremoving exemptions and concessions, (ii)  and reduction in tax slabs with an8rationalisationiby widening tax base and preventing tax evasion.only a latest report on tax reform at state level is described.Karnataka Report of the Tax Reforms Commission in foodgrainsfoodgrains,Expenditure Reforms Commission.fertiliser subsidy and rationalisingExpenditure Reforms Commission10(9) be deleted, which provide exemption of foreign income and remunerationalready initiated measures in this direction.Tenth Planvice versaeye on the basic growth and equity objectives of each tax, (iii) tax rates (whether ad or specific) and their effects on distribution of the tax burden and the incentive-disincentivestructure for economic agents and consumers and (iv) improvements required in governanceWith regard to sales tax, the Commission has recommended elimination ofexemptions and concessions, broadening of the tax base and simplification of tax structure.The Commission has suggested restructuring of sales tax rates by classifying commoditiesunder three tax rates 4 per cent, 8 per cent and 12 per cent.The Commission has recommended introduction of value added tax (VAT) at theState level with a view to minimizing distortions and improving revenue productivity. Tofacilitate this, the Report has detailed sequential steps that are required to ensure smoothThe Report has also noted certain inter-State issues with regard to introduction ofVAT.  It is observed that given the floor rates agreed to by States, it would be difficult todesign a VAT that is single rated or two rated by any particular State.  Further, it would benecessary for the Center to give up power to levy Sales Tax on certain commodities. Yetanother issue relates to revenue loss for the State on account of VAT. The States arepresumably expecting that the Centre will make up the revenue loss emanating from theprocess of change. There is a need to consider the issue of revenue compensation to losingstates in a comprehensive manner. Otherwise, the process of VAT introduction in all States isThe commission has recommended that a list of beneficiaries of tax exemptions andconcessions above a limit should be placed before the legislature and the public as a part ofthe annual budget exercise. The Report recommends strengthening of the information systemcomputerisation of the tax returns.One of the terms of reference of the Eleventh Finance Commission ( ) was toreview the state of finances of the Union and the States and suggest ways and means wherebyGovernments, collectively and severally, may bring about a restructuring of public finances soas to restore budgetary balance and maintain macroeconomic stability. Regarding public debt,§  First, the ratio of government debt (including external debt) to GDP is currently about 65per cent. At the current level of indebtedness, over 40 per cent of the gross revenues of theCentre go into interest payments alone. In case of States, interest payments constitute on anaverage about 22 per cent of the revenue receipts.  If the public finances are to berestructured, the level of government debt should be brought down to a level that wouldhelp to contain interest payments to a reasonable proportion of revenue receipts so that§ Second, the growth of domestic debt of the Government had slowed down in the ninetiesfollowing the fiscal corrections in the early years of the reforms with a narrowing of thewide gap between debt growth and nominal  growth that prevailed in the eighties (19.4per cent as against 14.9 per cent). Yet, domestic debt growth continued to outpace growth inGDP9adequate revenues are available for providing essential public services.EFC were: the major observation of the EFC Eleventh Finance Commission’s Observations on Public Debtin the State by creating a database on major taxpayers and likely to become less viable and it is certain to slow down.transition to the VAT by drawing a road map for adoption of VAT at State level.to improve voluntary tax compliance as also to facilitate administration.valoremGDP in the nineties as well (15.2 per cent as against 12.5 per cent), pointing to the§  Third, currently, the sustainability condition is violated in the budgets of the Centre, in thecombined accounts of the Centre and States and individually in many States. Unless thepresent trends are reversed, and the deficits are brought down, the debt- GDP ratio will keepgrowing undermining the solvency of the public sector.§ Fourth, one of the basic structural weaknesses of the fiscal system is the ballooning of thepension liabilities of the public sector, a “ticking time bomb,” which may require some§ Finally, from the angle of solvency and the likely impact of the high debt- ratio on theeconomy and the Government budget, for the system as a whole, i.e.,  and Statescombined, the debt- ratio needs to be reduced to around 55 per cent from its currentlevel of 65 per cent. For this level to be attained and sustained, the proportion of interestpayments to revenue receipts should not go beyond 25 per cent as against the current levelof 35 per cent. This will further require raising the level of revenue receipts to GDP to 20per cent. While for the Centre the desirable norm for interest payments would be 35 per centThe Government of India constituted the Committee on Fiscal ResponsibilityLegislation  on January 17, 2000 to go into various aspects of the fiscal system andrecommended a draft legislation  on fiscal responsibility.  This was followed by anannouncement in the Budget 2000-01 for a strong institutional mechanism embodied in a“Fiscal Responsibility Act” and bring the necessary legislative proposals to the Parliament.Accordingly, the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, 2000 was introduced inLok The Bill envisages that the Central Government is to lay before both Houses ofParliament, along with the annual Budget in each financial year, three statements of fiscalpolicy, viz., Medium-term Fiscal Policy Statement; Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement andMacro-economic Framework Statement.  Further, the Central Government is required to  takeappropriate measures to eliminate the revenue deficit, bring down the fiscal deficit and buildup adequate revenue surplus and in particular  (a) reduce revenue deficit by an amountequivalent to one-half per cent, or more of the estimated gross domestic product at the end ofeach financial year beginning on the 1 day of April 2001; (b) reduce revenue deficit to nilwithin a period of five financial years beginning from the initial financial year on the 1 dayof April 2001 and ending on the 31 day of March 2006; (c) build up surplus amount ofrevenue and utilise such amount for discharging liabilities in excess of assets; (d) reducefiscal deficit by an amount equivalent to one-half per cent or more of the estimated grossst domestic product at the end of each financial year beginning on the 1 day of April; (e)reduce fiscal deficit for a financial year to not more than two per cent of the estimated grossdomestic product for that year within a period of five financial years beginning from theinitial financial year on the first day of April 2001 and ending on the 31 day of March 2006,and (f) not give guarantee for any amount exceeding one-half per cent of the estimated grossGDPGDP10domestic product in any financial year and;ststststSabha in December 2000.Fiscal Responsibilityof revenue receipts, for the States this ratio should be at about 18 per cent.Centreviable scheme of pension funding.unsustainability of the fiscal deficit.Further, the Central Government has to ensure within a period of ten financial years,beginning from the initial financial year on the 1 day of April 2001, and ending on the 31day of March 2011, that the total liabilities (including external debt at current exchange rateat the end of a financial year) do not exceed fifty per cent of the estimated gross domesticproduct for that year.  There are provisions for relaxation from deficit reduction to deal withunforeseen demands on the finances of the Central Government on account of nationalOf particular relevance to Reserve Bank is the prohibition of direct borrowings by theCentral Government from the Reserve Bank of India after three years, except by way ofadvances to meet temporary cash needs under certain circumstances.  It must be noted thatthis provision does not prohibit participation of Reserve Bank in secondary market and doesnot eliminate monetisation.  However, the scope for private placement of debt with RBI ordevolvement of auctions of public debt on RBI is eliminated.  In other words, the extent andterms of such monetisation would depend on the judgement of Reserve Bank in regard tooverall stability.  Such operational freedom to RBI, whether enshrined in the FRB or not, isessential to assure the system that conduct of monetary policy balances the three relevantelements, namely, the fiscal needs of Government, the compulsion of deregulated interest rateregime and requirements of a more open external sector.  In fact, separation of functions of apublic debt manager from that of monetary authority should be viewed in this context.In view of the linkage between fiscal and monetary policies, fiscal transparencyshould be accompanied by transparency in monetary and financial policies. Thus, theAdvisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies (Chairman: Shri M.Narasimham) indicated an overall concept and context of transparency, evaluated India’sFirst, in the context of their Report, the Advisory Group explained that transparencyrefers to an environment in which the objective of policy, its legal, institutional and economicframework, policy decisions and their rationale, data and information relating to monetaryand financial policies and the specifics of accountability of different agencies are provided tothe public in an unequivocal and understandable manner and accessible on a timely basis.Transparency should not be viewed as an end in itself, but a necessary prerequisite of goodgovernance as policy actions pass through the test of public scrutiny.  The Advisory Groupwas of the view that greater transparency would compel the authorities to bring about agreater degree of rigour in the formulation of strategies and choice of instruments and thereare distinct advantages in a well-informed public debate on the objectives and instruments.At the same time, the Advisory Group recognized that there may be good reason, for centralbanks not to disclose certain internal deliberations and documentation and near-termmonetary and exchange rate policy implementation strategies.  The authorities have todisplay considerable finesse while drawing the line on disclosures.  The Advisory Groupfurther observed that monetary policy is only an aspect of overall economic policy and,therefore, there is need for convergence in policies as also transparency in other aspects ofSecondly, on the basis of a critical evaluation of India’s compliance with InternationalCodes, the Advisory Group noted that the RBI’s policies and operations largely conform tothe  Code, but there are clearly a number of areas where improvements need to be madebefore India can be said to be fully compliant with the  Code.  In the area of11IMFIMFeconomic policy.compliance with international codes and made several recommendations.Links between Fiscal, Monetary and Financial Transparencysecurity or natural calamities of national dimension.st stdissemination of information and the rationale of policies, the RBI could be considered asbeing in accord with international best practices though there could be scope for furtherimprovement, especially in providing precision to the monetary policy mandate and revealingof the process of monetary policy formulation.  The Advisory Group recommends that theprocess of communicating the policy process, albeit on a post facto basis, needs to beThirdly, the Advisory Group recommended that the determination of interest ratesshould be exclusively a monetary policy function and that there should be well calibratedlegislative measures to separate debt management and monetary policy functions.  TheGovernment should set up its own independent Debt Management Office to take over, in aphased manner, the present debt management functions discharged by the RBI.  TheAdvisory Group recognized that separation of debt management and monetary policy is anecessary but not a sufficient condition for an effective monetary policy, which would alsoFourthly, the Advisory Group was of the view that what the RBI needs, by way ofautonomy is headroom to operate monetary policy and this it would have once debtmanagement is separated from monetary policy and the fisc is in reasonable balance.  Over aphased period, as debt management is gradually distanced from monetary policy, theGovernment and RBI should progressively work towards greater clarity in publicly settingout the objectives of monetary policy.  The RBI should evolve a move to greater transparencyin setting out the process of monetary policy formulation so that accountability of the RBIFifthly, the Advisory Group made several other recommendations relating todesirability of single objective for monetary policy with inflation as the objective, setting upof a Monetary Policy Committee, disclosure requirements in respect of banks, financialinstitutions, supervisory authorities, regulators, etc., but these have indirect linkage withOf particular relevance is the fact that the Fiscal Transparency Group agrees thattransparency requires that the RBI should not intervene in the primary issue of Governmentsecurities, but only in the secondary market where it can independently determine the trade-off between risking monetary expansion and tolerating high interest rates. It notes that theRBI as the debt manager is responsible for the success of the Government securities issue,and is also allowed to pick up Government securities at the primary issue stage; thus, there isa conflict between this role and its role as the monetary authority. As a debt manager, the RBIwishes to minimize the cost of raising debt and is, therefore, often tempted to pick upsubstantial amounts of Government securities to avoid creating interest rate spikes.  It notesthat the FRB seeks to prohibit RBI support of Government securities in the primary marketafter 3 years, and views the same as a desirable step. It should be accompanied by theGovernment taking over the debt management function from the RBI as recommended by theIn this regard, it is gratifying to note that Reserve Bank has made a formalannouncement in favour of separation of debt management function in the statement onMonetary and Credit Policy of April 2001.  As implied in the statement, such separation is12predicated on a manageable level of fiscal deficit and Government borrowings.Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies.fiscal transparency.can be properly assessed.require a reasonable degree of fiscal responsibility.institutionalised.In this context, it would be useful to critically examine the occasional suggestions inthe media in favour of some special arrangements between the RBI and Government in orderto reduce the growing interest burden on the Government.  Essentially, such specialarrangements imply write off of amounts due from Government or lending to Government bythe RBI at interest rates that are not market-related.  Basically, if a consolidated balance-sheetview of Government and the RBI is taken, it would make no difference, but precisely for thatreason transparency may be preferred and the integrity of RBI having a separate balancesheet maintained.  The case for transparency can be addressed on several grounds.  First, at aphilosophical level, authority to spend public money should be distinct from the authority tocreate money and their relations accounted for properly.  Secondly, at a pragmatic level, thepolitical horizon is short term and hence some authority with a longer term view should bejuxtaposed.  Thirdly, operationally, to enable a central bank to conduct Open MarketOperations, especially in the context of external capital flows, there is need to havemarketable securities.  Fourthly, from a developmental perspective, development of debtmarkets requires that market for Government securities is well developed, particularly forfinancing of infrastructural needs.  Finally, it is necessary to distinguish between marketrelated operations in primary market, in secondary market and operations in non-marketrelated securities.  It can be argued, with some justification, that participation of RBI shouldcontinue in primary market as long as fiscal deficit is relatively high and financial-marketsare not well developed.  However, such a justification, as a transitional measure, will not befavour of non-market related interest rates to be charged by a central bank.In any case, there should be addition to profits that necessarily accrue as a result of marketrelated rather than concessional rates.  Thus, movement towards transparency in relationsbetween RBI and Government in this regard proceeds in stages viz., elimination of automaticmonetisation; movement to market related interest rates in public-debt ;  exit from primaryIt is well recognised that transparency augments the scope for accountability in itsbroadest sense.  However, in the context of Parliamentary system, the arrangements foraccountability of fiscal management to Parliament gains significance.  In fact, it can beargued that measures relating to fiscal transparency and fiscal responsibility explained so farFirstly, it must be noted that currently according to the Constitutional requirement,Parliamentary approval is needed for levying of taxes and incurring of expenditures.  As perArticle 112, the Annual Financial Statement ( AFS) which corresponds to the popularconception of a Budget refers to estimated receipts with no distinction between current orcapital; and estimated expenditure divided into charged and otherwise.  In regard to the latter,however, a distinction is made between revenue expenditure and others.  The AFS is notrequired to be approved by Parliament and as such the deviations also do not requireParliamentary ratification.  No doubt, the object of presenting AFS is to provide transparencyAFS provides a clear and unambiguous pictureof the state of Government accounts.  Since taxes require approval of Parliament andexpenditure needs Parliamentary authorisation, it can be argued that AFS placed beforeParliament for information is adequate to ensure accountability.  In this context, the proposedFiscal Responsibility Bill (FRB), by requiring the placement of medium-term fiscal13framework etc., before Parliament, partly addresses the issue of enhanced accountability.on Government account and it is essential that complement and enhance accountability, as enshrined in the Constitution of India.Fiscal Accountabilitymarket for Government debt; and  finally removal of public debt function from RBI.easy to advance in Secondly, the Parliamentary control over incurring of Government debt, whetherdomestic or external is not explicit.  Thus, to the extent that only demands for grants as perArticle 113 and Appropriation Bill as per Article 114, as also supplementary grants as perArticle 115 are approved by Parliament, all expenditures need to be authorised by Parliament.However, the entire debt servicing is charged as per Article 112(3)(c) and is thus not asubject matter of Parliamentary approval. In brief, and in practice, Parliament seems to haveno role in formally approving the incurring of public debt or its servicing as per budgetaryprocedure set out in the Constitution, although there are separate provisions in theConstitution on the question of limits to borrowing only, on which Parliament has not yetlegislated. The FRB seeks to address the issue of imposing some overall limits on incurringdebt.Thirdly, there are Constitutional provisions on public debt, some aspects of borrowingand guarantees.  Debt is defined in Article 366 to include all liabilities to repay capital sumsor liability under guarantee.  Further, Article 112(3)(c) includes a reference to Sinking Fundcharges also, but establishment of such a fund is not mandatory.  Sinking Fund is not beingoperated now except by a few States.  Most important, Article 292 provides for an enablinglegislation by Parliament fixing limits on borrowing and issue of guarantees and Parliamenthas not passed any such legislation so far.  In this connection, it is worth noting that theArticle does not cover “other liabilities” which constitute debt but are not borrowings uponthe security of the Consolidated Fund of India.  FRB envisages a ceiling on debt whichincludes total liabilities, though not contingent liabilities.  Thus the FRB covers some groundIn considering the issues of linkages between fiscal and monetary policies, it would beuseful to clarify what constitutes fiscal policy and what monetary policy is about.  As Mr.Premchand puts it, “Government action can be considered to be purely a fiscal policy matteronly when the effect of borrowing is neutral in terms of the availability of money to theprivate sector.  Pure fiscal policy is, however, rare, because any change in revenues andexpenditures involves changes in the financing of the budget surplus or deficit and, hence,always has an interface with monetary policy.  Management of the debt – particularly, thecomposition of the instruments, the timing of their issue, and their duration – are aspectsmore closely associated with monetary policy”.  While in the academic literature, the optimalmix of monetary and fiscal policies has been  with respect to different exchange rateregimes, at an applied level, the relationship between fiscal and monetary policies may be in the context of public debt, especially in terms of choice between bond financingFiscal deficit, defined to be on cash basis for this discussion, can be financed eitherthrough bond issuance or money creation, and financing of the fiscal deficit may be non-voluntary or voluntary. Thus, a central bank may be obligated to extend credit to Governmentthrough what has been described as “automatic monetisation”.  Similarly Governmentsecurities may be placed in captive market by legal stipulations, say on provident funds,Moreover, the financing of fiscal deficit may be at market determined or marketrelated rates or at rates, the latter being a by-product of non-voluntary financing.Arguably, captive market finances Government bonds at concessional rates, private sector14concessional insurance and banking.and money financing of fiscal deficit.analysedanalysedIssues and CoordinationFiscal and Monetary Policy Linkagesand in some ways goes beyond what Article 292 envisages.may bear the burden; and when a central bank finances in a similar fashion, the GovernmentIt must also be noted that while  of Government deficit could provideprimary liquidity to the market, liquidity creation could take place through other channelsalso, viz., the central bank enlarging its holding of foreign currency assets; expanding itslending to the commercial sector, and conducting open market operations divested from theGovernment’s budgetary considerations.  On the whole, the analytics of fiscal-monetarypolicy interface is thus not confined only to the quantum of monetisation of fiscal deficit, butextends to optimal financing mix for the fiscal deficit that stabilises inflation, interest ratesIn the light of this broad framework, it would be useful to clarify three importantissues relating to linkages at an operational level which are often debated and sometimesmisunderstood.First, there is no ideal level of fiscal deficit, and critical factors are : How is itfinanced and what is it used for?  While the size of public debt is determined by fiscal policy,the composition of debt is decided by debt management policy.  The monetary impactdepends on who holds the debt and how the holding changes rather than by who initiallyissues or subscribes to the debt.  The fiscal effect depends on the rate at which the size of debtis changing and the cost of servicing the debt.  The monetary effect is determined by theeffect of public debt on aggregate demand and level of interest rates.Secondly, the actions of monetary authority also affect public debt in mainly twoways.  The initial financial cost to Government of placing debt depends, to some extent, onthe stance of monetary policy.  The choice, design and operation of monetary policyinstruments also impact the debt service costs.  For example, liquidity of Governmentsecurities may be enhanced by monetary authority, through open market operations andThirdly, the management of public debt affects the conduct of monetary policy,especially the operational autonomy of the central bank in at least three different ways.  Theperceived sustainability of public debt often affects interest rates.  The public debtmanagement affects the demand for money.  Above all, the management of public debt, incountries like India, plays a critical role in development of domestic financial markets andIn view of the complex nature of linkages, coordination between fiscal and monetarypolicies has to be considered from several angles.  Since both are aspects of shared overallmacro-economic policy objectives, at the first level the question is whether the relevantfiscal-monetary policy mix is conducive to the macro objectives.  The relevant policy mixrelates to the level of fiscal deficit and the pattern of financing, especially the extent ofSecondly, whether operating procedures of monetary and fiscal authorities, especiallydebt and cash management Thirdly, whether credibility of both monetary and fiscal policies is achieved in adesirable direction.  Thus, a credible monetary policy can help moderate interest rates15provided the fiscal authority does not give rise to a different set of expectations.are consistent and mutually reinforcing.monetisation and the flow of external savings.thus on the conduct of monetary policy, especially for its effective transmission.reserve requirements.and exchange rates at levels conducive for macroeconomic stability.monetisationas owner foregoes the revenue as profit transfer, except that “burden” is less transparent.Fourthly, whether due cognizance has been taken of the fact that monetary and fiscalFinally, harmonious implementation of policies may require that one policy is notIt should be clear that fiscal issues are wide-ranging and need to be approached fromseveral angles, transparency being one of them.  It is necessary to appreciate thattransparency is no substitute for sound policy and their inter-relationship is somewhatcomplex.  I had an occasion to briefly describe this link recently.  “It is also possible toattempt a construct of the link between transparency and macroeconomic policy.  Goodmacroeconomic policy and good standards is perhaps an ideal situation for a country.  Goodmacroeconomic policy and poor transparency though not ideal is perhaps not risk by itself.Bad macroeconomic policy and good transparency has large elements of risk and warrantschange in policy before launching into transparency.  The most risky combination perhaps isbad macroeconomic policy and bad standards.  In a more dynamic sense, it can be argued thatAs regards the importance and indeed criticality of fiscal policy, Governor Jalan hasarticulated it in his recent Dr. Lecture : “At the same time, it is alsoclear that unless we put our fiscal house in order and improve our public delivery systems, noamount of macro-policy reforms by themselves will be sustainable or yield permanentresults”. Dr. Jalan adds : “Above all, we need fiscal empowerment as, without financialresources, it is not feasible to lay a road or build a school.  The last is a most difficult task inWhile considering the fiscal issues, it is not enough to consider quantities and ratiosand in fact, quality of adjustment is indeed more important.  This aspect was eloquentlyexpressed in the Seventh Conference of State Finance Secretaries.  They argued, thatwhenever fiscal adjustment is attempted, there is a cut in non-committed expenditure, but notin non-essential one.  A predominant part of the budget is committed expenditure, especiallyinterest, pensions and salaries, which have no flexibility.  As a consequence, there is often anatrophy of delivery of services in as much as there may be hospitals manned by doctors andnurses but no medicines, electricity or water supply.  Grants to several institutions performingvital services are often postponed or reduced on account of fiscal  adjustment.  Theyapprehend that cuts in output tend to be highly disproportional to cuts in expenditure makingexpenditure cuts of non-committed items highly unproductive, thus undermining the reformprocess.Most important, some measures adopted for reducing fiscal deficit in one year couldhave the potential to understate the deficit in the short run and exacerbate the problem in themedium term.  For example, tax exemptions in lieu of budgetary support for a limited periodmay give an impression of effort to reduce fiscal deficit but in reality could erode theanticipated tax revenues, thus defeating the purpose.  In fact, the actual loss of revenue mayturnout to be more than the expenditures that were necessary to serve the purpose.  Time-bound offers of tax-concessions have yet another problem of making it difficult for concernedinstitution/activities to transit from tax-concessions to tax-payment.  Similarly, intra public-sector transactions to reduce the fiscal deficit without a change in overall public-sector deficitcan be misleading.  Further, guarantees or letters of comfort may understate fiscal deficit at16view of the deadweight of the past, but it can no longer be avoided”.C.D.Deshmukh Memorial transparency provides incentives to adopt good macroeconomic policies”.Conclusionunduly burdening the other for too long.policy adjustments operate in different timeframes.the current juncture, but may have the potential to worsen it in future years.  The plea forFinally, the related issues of transparency, policy, and institutional arrangements haveto be assessed, not in abstract or in absolutes, but in the current context of budget systems;processes and practices as they operate now; levels of deficit and structural nature of deficits;patterns of expenditures, taxes as well as tax-concessions; returns on public investments; andfinally, the maneuverability and flexibility needed for both fiscal and monetary authorities torendered by Shri.S.M.Pillai, Dr.B.N.Ananthaswamy, Smt.Abha Prasad, Smt.R.Kaushalya and Singh.17Shri.BhupalDr.Reddy is thankful for the prompt assistance of  the Indian Merchants’ Chamber on July 17, 2001, at Mumbai. Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, to members of the Managing Committee * Address by ensure that outcomes are consistent with the intent.transparency helps resolve these types of policy errors as well.
