March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004*Understanding ReformsY.V. REDDYI have great pleasure in welcoming you weak economic reform ten years ago, to aon behalf of Finance Minister, Mr. Jaswant strong consensus for a stronger than beforeSingh, on behalf of Reserve Bank of India reform; and this happened smoothly overand, on my own behalf.  India has been several electoral events, both at State andplaying active role in researching and debating Central levels.  The financial markets did notissues relating to development, particularly in turn unduly volatile during these electoralthe context of developing nations.  We believe events.  This shows, I believe, the strength,that holding of the Global Development the resilience, and the stability of the politicalNetowrk (GDN) Annual Conference in India is system.  Perhaps one should make aa tribute to our approach to reform, and is distinction between contextual political stabilityalso a recognition of the need to continue with and stability of political system, the systemdebating on policies with open mind.  It is stability being more conducive to reform.most appropriate that the complex issue ofThe second issue relates to financial“Understanding Reform” is being addressedmarkets. Indian experience shows thatby a global gathering of researchers, policydomestic financial markets are varied inmakers and institutions.  With your permission,different developing countries, and actualI will mention a few issues in understandingresponses of international financial marketsof reform in India.to a developing country seldom fit theThe first issue relates to political economy assumptions behind the mainstreamconsiderations. India has the unique distinction economic thinking.  So, while we doof practicing, with some amount of understand theory and use it as a good tool,doggedness, freedom of speech and political care is taken in policy to avoid ideological orfreedom in an extremely diverse society and dogmatic approach to reform. Thepolity.  In India, compared to most other accountability of policy-maker in reforms incountries, the electoral cycles have not India is essentially to domestic constituencysignificantly impacted economic policy cycles, i.e., to domestic political economy, intellectualthough political debates try to highlight atmosphere within the country; the state ofdifferences among political parties, especially markets in the country; and  perceptions ofon burden sharing during reform period.  We the media in the country, while at the samehave moved, from a strong consensus for time being sensitive  to global responses toIntroductory remarks by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, welcoming Dr. Amartya Sen at Global*Development Network (GDN) at New Delhi on January 1, 2004.301March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Indian reforms.  A deep understanding of this of Indian Industry (CII) in Hyderabad a fewaspect,  generally described in literature as weeks ago.  That gave us one view of reform.“country context” perhaps requires not only We had meetings of World Social Forum a fewintellect but also sensitivity and empathy. days ago in Mumbai, and they gave us severalother views of development and reform.  TheThe third issue relates to role ofGlobal Development Network will have itseconomists in public policy. All economic ideasdeliberations here which will also give severalneed not be economists’ ideas.  The role ofviews of reforms.  The unique feature of India’seconomists in government is very complex,reforms is that we play host to all views andand we had the good fortune of havingchart a course  that appears most suitable toseveral  distinguished economists associatedthe country, recognising that reforms, in thewith reform – Professor Manmohan Singh,ultimate analysis do not flow from the top butDr. Rangarajan and Dr. Bimal Jalan, to namehave to be understood, and  absorbed in thea few of my predecessors in the Reserveminds and hearts of the people – through theirBank. What are the unique qualities thatfreewill.helped them lead the reforms in India?  First,personal and professional integrity; second, And I will conclude with a few words aboutcapacity to make appropriate value the distinguished speaker. Dr. Amartya Senjudgements consistent with national ethos; is not merely a great son of India, not just athird, and above all, willingness to appreciate nobel laureate in economics, not just anthe non-economists’ views on matters relating outstanding intellectual but and above all ato reform.  All of them have a broader scholar with a heart.  I believe that reformperspective of what governance of a country process in India happens to capture somein a democracy is about and economic reform of the ideas that Professor Sen articulatedis one, very important, but certainly not the in his book “Development as Freedom”. Wesole end of good governance.  Perhaps, the are honoured today, Sir, to be able to hearword “development” as we understand your words of wisdom that blends highencompasses both, the means and the ends. intellect and compassionate heart.The fourth issue relates to the diverse May I express deep debt of gratitude todimensions of reform. We had meetings of you, Sir, and also welcome heartily all theWorld Economic Forum alongwith Confederation distinguished participants who are here today.302
