Reserve Bank of India – Federal Reserve SystemMarket Risk Analysis Seminar- New Delhi 21 to 25 January 2013Inaugural speech by G.Gopalakrishna, Executive Director, RBI1) I extend a warm welcome to the faculty from the Federal Reserve and all theparticipants of this programme. I am happy to inaugurate the Market RiskAnalysis Programme. The periodic programmes involving the Fed Reserveexperts have been welcomed wholeheartedly by the participants and we areglad to have another edition of the training programme, with focus on marketrisk. I hope the participants would be immensely benefited by thisprogramme, just like the participants in the earlier programmes.  Theprogramme also comes in the context of the proposed seminal change in theRBI’s banking supervision methodology and process this year. I refer to theintroduction of the risk based supervision covering nearly half of thecommercial banks in the first phase from the ensuing cycle onwards. Focuson risks and tailoring our supervisory stance based on the specific risks in afinancial institution would be the cornerstone of the new approach towardsbanking supervision. In this milieu, there is a need for an enhancedunderstanding of the major risk categories individually as well from acollective perspective in terms of the interactions among the major risks.2) It has now come to be accepted that the inter-connected world has ensuredthat the uncertainties in the advanced economies find their way to developingnations through various channels like the trade, finance, commodity price andconfidence channels. Critically, the uncertainties are reflected in the volatilityof capital flows to emerging market which in turn reflects on the volatility ofdomestic financial market variables. To understand some indicators of thelinkages, we can see that the ratio of India’s external trade to GDP hasincreased four-fold – from 8 per cent of GDP in 1972 to nearly 40 per centnow while the ratio of two- way flow of goods and finance in and out of Indiato its GDP which incorporates non trade related flows, has increased eightfold over last four decades, from 14 per cent in 1972 to well over 100 per centnow. Apart from linkages with the global developments, there are severaldomestic factors which are also important in the context of increasing trend ofvolatility in domestic financial markets such as widening current accountdeficit, growth slowdown, growing fiscal deficit and sticky inflation, to namejust a few. The uncertainty and volatility associated with the financial marketsare expected to continue at least for the foreseeable future, as the ‘newnormal’. Managing the market risks in this context is a major challenge for thecorporates and the banks alike.3) Market risk is the most dynamic among the major risks, positions and hencethe risks can change much more frequently in quick time in comparison toother risks. The Financial Stability Reports of the Reserve Bank havepresented the results of coordinated stress tests of scheduled commercialbanks in respect of, inter alia, market risk. These tests conducted on balancesheet and off balance sheet positions show that banks are indeed vulnerableto sharp movements in market prices. Market risk is a risk practitionersdelight at least from the perspective of quantifying them while it is not sostraightforward for credit risk and would border on the difficult in respect ofoperational risk. Of course, there are major issues in respect of statisticalmethodologies in measuring market risk and VaR based measures havebeen derided for underestimating risks. The issue is about the lack of havingacceptable alternatives vis-à-vis accepting the imperfections andsupplementing with other measures. I will further elaborate later in myspeech.4) With a view to adopting the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)framework on capital adequacy which takes into account the elements ofcredit risk in various types of assets in the balance sheet as well as off-balance sheet business and also to strengthen the capital base of banks,Reserve Bank of India decided in April 1992 to introduce a risk asset ratiosystem for banks (including foreign banks) in India as a capital adequacymeasure. Reserve Bank had issued guidelines to banks in June 2004 onmaintenance of capital charge for market risks on the lines of ‘Amendment tothe Capital Accord to incorporate market risks’ issued by the BCBS in 1996.The market risk positions subject to capital charge requirement are: (i) Therisks pertaining to interest rate related instruments and equities in the tradingbook; and (ii) Foreign exchange risk (including open position in preciousmetals) throughout the bank (both banking and trading books). With theintroduction of CDS, calculation of capital charge has been specified forbanks using CDS as a protection buyer or seller.5) A major action as part of Basel III framework is the introduction of theincremental risk charge for the trading book. In 2005, the Basel Committeebecame concerned that banks were reducing their capital requirements byshifting exposures from the banking book to the trading book. Structuredproducts whose values depended on the credit worthiness of companieswere increasingly put under trading book. The products were less liquid thanother instruments in the trading book. Regulators had proposed an“incremental default risk capital charge”(IDRC) that would be calculated witha 99.9% confidence level and a one year time horizon for instruments in thetrading book that were sensitive to default risk. These instruments wouldtherefore be treated in much the same way as similar instruments in thebanking book. In 2008, Basel Committee recognised that most of the lossessustained in the credit market turmoil of 2007 and 2008 were from changes incredit ratings, widening of credit spreads and loss of liquidity, rather thansolely as a result of defaults. It therefore amended its previous proposals sothat these risks were included. The IDRC became generalised as“Incremental Capital Charge”(ICC). These measures are expected to reducethe incentive for regulatory arbitrage between the banking and trading books.6) An additional response to the crisis is the introduction of a stressed value-at-risk requirement. Losses in most banks’ trading books during the financialcrisis have been significantly higher than the minimum capital requirementsunder the former Pillar 1 market risk rules. The Committee therefore requiresbanks to calculate a stressed value-at-risk taking into account a one-yearobservation period relating to significant losses, which must be calculated inaddition to the value-at-risk based on the most recent one-year observationperiod. The additional stressed value-at-risk requirement will also help reducethe procyclicality of the minimum capital requirements for market risk. This isexpected to possibly double or triple the capital that banks would have tokeep for market risks, particularly for international banks. Perhaps this is themain reason for lukewarm response in applying for advanced Internal ModelsApproach for calculating market risk capital in India. As the recent FinancialStability Report of RBI issued last month points out, only three commercialbanks have applied for the advanced approach for market risk as opposed to15 banks who have applied for migrating to IRB approach for calculation ofcredit risk capital and 9 banks for migrating to AMA for calculation ofoperational risk capital charge. Under Basel III, even under Standardisedapproach banks are required to specifically consider the various valuationadjustments while valuing their derivatives portfolios like – (i) incurred CVAlosses, (ii) closeout costs, (iii) operational risks, (iv)  early termination,investing and funding costs, and  (v) future administrative costs and whereappropriate, model risk.7) RBI has indicated that the capital requirement under IMA would be a functionof three components: (i) Normal VaR Measure (for general market risk andspecific risk) (ii) Stressed VaR Measure (for general market risk and specificrisk) (iii) Incremental Risk Charge (IRC) (for positions subject to interest ratespecific-risk capital charge). General market risk and specific risk can bemodelled together or separately for normal VaR measure and stressed VaRmeasure. In other words, a bank could calculate either a combined VaRmeasure for the two risk categories (general market risk and specific risk) orseparate VaR measures for each of them. For example, the most extensiveapproach to model equity risk would be having risk factors corresponding tothe volatility of individual equity issues. In such a case, bank would havemodelled both general market risk and specific risk together. However, incases where a bank calculates a combined VaR measure, it should be ableto isolate the VaR for each component so as to enable its backtesting anduse in the day-to-day risk management. In addition, in the case of interestrate-sensitive positions, which have credit risk, the banks will also have tocompute incremental risk charge for default and migration risks, which aregenerally not captured by the VaR model.  To start with, banks in India arerequired to model general market risk and use the present StandardisedMeasurement Method for specific risk.8) On measurement of market risks, VaR methodology has proved to be themain method of assessing the overall market risk of trading positions over ashort horizon, such as a 10 day period, and under “normal” marketconditions. The mechanics of VaR has been variously described at one endof spectrum as “a benchmark for managing financial risk” and at the otherend of the spectrum as an “intellectual fraud” along with various shades ofopinions in between the two extremes. In effect, the methodology allows us tocapture in a single number the multiple components of market risk such ascurve risk, basis risk and volatility risk. However, each time there is a turmoilin the worlds markets, the limitations of it as a market risk measure arerevealed.9)  VaR has proved unreliable as a measure of risk over long time periods orunder abnormal market conditions. The danger posed by exceptional marketshocks such as the 2007-08 financial crisis or the LTCM crisis in the worldmarkets in 1998 - shocks that are often accompanied by a drying up ofmarket liquidity- can be captured only by means of supplementalmethodologies. The potential of VaR to exacerbate market volatility has alsobeen acknowledged. The herd mentality that is so typical of the financialindustry means that market sensitive risk management systems, such asVaR, actually make markets less stable and more prone to crisis. This isbecause financial institutions may have to sell assets in the affected classeswhen markets become volatile in order to keep within the VaR limits set bysenior management; this depresses market prices even further and increasesthe volatility and correlation of the risk factors for these assets. This in turnmight cause another set of financial institutions to exceed their VaR limits,forcing them to reduce their exposure by selling still more of the same assets– perpetuating a vicious cycle.10) Thus the VaR measure works well as a risk measure only for marketsoperating under normal conditions and only over a short period, such as onetrading day. Potentially, it’s a very poor and misleading measure of risk inabnormal markets, over longer time periods, or for illiquid portfolios. Also,VaR, like all risk measures, depends for its integrity on a robust controlenvironment. In many instances of rogue-trading cases, hundreds of millionsof dollars of losses have been suffered by trading desks that had orders notto assume VaR exposures of more than a few million dollars. The reason forthe discrepancy is reportedly due to trading desks finding some way ofcircumventing trading controls and suppressing risk measures. For example,a trader might falsify transaction details entered into the trade reportingsystems, by using fictitious trades to balance out the risk of real trades, or bytampering with the inputs to risk models, such as volatility estimates thatdetermine the valuation and risk estimation for an options portfolio. As youwould agree, opportunity to carry out such tasks is facilitated by inadequatemanagement oversight arising from lack of appreciation of the importance ofthe internal controls in trading environment. Further, there were instancesreported in recent years about management deliberately turning a blind eyeto risk measures or to the apprehension of the risk managers.11) For a good risk measure, some properties have been propounded. Theseinclude monotonicity, translation invariance, homogeneity and sub-additivity.The risk measures satisfying all the conditions are referred to as coherent. Ithas been observed that while VaR satisfies the first three conditions, it doesnot always satisfy the fourth condition of “sub additivity” which requires thatthe risk measure of two portfolios after they have been merged should be nogreater than the sum of the their risk measure before they were merged.However, given the simplicity and want of better alternative, VaR continues tobe used supplemented with many other aspects like back testing to check theaccuracy of the VaR model, stress testing and scenario analysis to assessthe potential impact of plausible adverse market conditions among othermeasures.12) For the advanced market risk approach, a bank will need to classify its back-testing outcomes into three zones depending on the number of exceptionsarising from back-testing.The extreme zone is the red zone if the back-testingresults produce ten or more exceptions in which case the multiplicationfactors for both VaR and stressed VaR will be increased from three to four.RBI will allow 10 or more exceptions under the most extraordinarycircumstances. RBI may require banks whose model for market risk fall inRed Zone to either discontinue the model or begin work on improving themodel immediately. RBI may also consider further increase in the capitalrequirements if the bank is not able to demonstrate that its models arecapturing all market (general market risk and specific risk, if any) risks it isexposed to.13) Banks that use the internal models approach for meeting market risk capitalrequirements must have in place a rigorous and comprehensive stress testingprogramme to capture such potential stresses. The stress testing programmemust particularly address: (i) concentration risk; (ii) illiquidity of markets instressed market conditions; (iii) one way markets; (iv) event and jump todefault risks; (v) non linearity of products; (vi) deep out of the moneypositions; (vii) positions subject to the gapping of prices; and (viii) other risksthat may not be captured appropriately in the VaR model (for example,recovery rate uncertainty, implied correlations and skew risk).14) In the aftermath of the financial crisis, model risk has come under intensescrutiny, and the governance of risk model supervision, assessment andvalidation has taken on ever greater importance for the risk function and thefinancial industry as a whole. A bank is required to l have a model validationprocess which addresses three  components of the model: (a) a model inputscomponent, which delivers data and assumptions to the model;(b) a modelprocessing component, which encompasses the theoretical model and thecomputer codes which transform the model inputs into mathematicalestimates; and (c) a reporting component, which translates the mathematicalestimates into useful business information.15) An interesting perspective is the interaction between credit risks and marketrisks. For many reasons, both historical and practical, market and credit riskhave often been treated as if they are unrelated sources of risk: the risk typeshave been measured separately, managed separately, and economic capitalagainst each risk type has been assessed separately. The development ofcredit risk transfer markets and the moves to mark-to-market accounting forportions of held-to-maturity banking book positions, however, have blurreddistinctions between them and raise questions regarding approaches thattreat the two types of risks separately. Market participants have argued thatthere are significant diversification benefits to be reaped from the integratedmeasurement and management of market and credit risks. The recentfinancial crisis, however, has illustrated how the two risks may reinforce eachother and that in such stress situations illiquidity can worsen losses further.16) Market risk and credit risk are often distinguished by identifying the latter with(actual or expected) default. We define default as the failure to meet acontractually pre-determined obligation.  As the same economic factors tendto affect both types of risk, drawing a clear distinction between them inpractical risk measurement and management is, however, very difficult. Evenif distinct factors could be separately associated with the two types of risk, thefactors often interact significantly in determining asset values, and thereforerisk measurement and management needs to explicitly account for their jointinfluence. In practice, market and credit risk are often distinguished inrelatively simple ways on the basis of instruments, market liquidity,accounting treatments or holding periods. It is being increasinglyacknowledged that care should be exercised to ensure that such pragmaticdistinctions do not lead risk managers to ignore important risks that emanatefrom the interactions between market and credit risk. Examples of positions inwhich such compounding effects may be present include foreign currencyloans, floating rate loans (including sub-prime mortgage loans) or matchinglong and short positions in OTC derivatives.17) As a BIS study states, Non-linear interaction emerges when losses fromdefault on an instrument depend on movements in market risk factors, orconversely, when changes in the values of instruments due to movements ofmarket risk factors depend on whether there is a default or rating migration.In these circumstances, the two types of risk are inextricably linked, andattempts to measure them separately and then combine them can lead tosubstantial biases.In fact, research shows cases in which the combined riskis actually higher than the sum of the components leading to “compoundingeffects” as opposed to diversification effects. A particularly clear example isforeign currency loans, which constitute a sizable part of lending in certaincountries. Consider a bank lending in foreign currency to domestic borrowers.These positions contain market risk (exchange rate risk) and credit risk(default risk of borrowers). Now assess the two risks separately. When forexample the domestic economy slows, ceteris paribus, the probability ofdomestic borrowers defaulting increases. When the domestic currencydepreciates, ceteris paribus, the value of the loan in domestic currencyincreases as it is denominated in foreign currency. So, on the surface onecould think that the two effects offset each other. But this reasoning wouldneglect the strong relationship between exchange rate changes and defaultrisk in this type of contract. The ability of a domestic borrower to repay a loanin foreign currency depends in a non-linear way on fluctuations in theexchange rate (unless the domestic borrower has other revenues in theforeign currency in which the loan is denominated). A home currencydepreciation has a particularly major effect on the repayment amount andtherefore repayment probability of a  foreign currency loan by an unhedgeddomestic borrower, which tends to be stronger than the valuation effectmentioned above.18) Similarly, floating or adjustable rate loans have coupons that change asinterest rates change. Therefore, if the coupons on the loans adjust frequently(or in the limit continuously), then the interest rate risk of the loan is passedon to borrowers, and therefore, assuming the loans do not default, they haveno market risk for the bank.  If credit risk is computed separately from marketrisk, then the credit risk of the loans is computed while holding interest ratesconstant. This treatment of credit risk can miss an important interactionbetween market and credit risk. For example, if probabilities of default areincreasing in interest rates, then holding rates constant can easily lead to anunderstatement of the true probability of default and hence the sum of marketand credit risk, when computed separately, would lead to an understatementof total risk.  The same is the case with matching long and short positions inOTC derivatives . The practical challenges of moving to a fully integratedmeasurement and management of economic risk, however, are currentlysubstantial. A first major obstacle to integrating market and credit riskmeasurement and management is that the metrics typically used for each ofthem are not fully comparable, with market risk models capturing a fulldistribution of returns and credit risk models focusing on losses from defaultand neglecting gains.19)   Successful management of market and credit risk often relies on liquidmarkets to hedge risks and unwind positions, as the ongoing financial crisishas abundantly illustrated. Liquidity conditions interact with market risk andcredit risk through the horizon over which assets can be liquidated. Inparticular, deteriorating market liquidity often forces banks to lengthen thehorizon over which they can execute their risk management strategies. Asthis time horizon lengthens, overall risk exposures increase, as does thecontribution of credit risk relative to market risk. The liquidity of tradedproducts can vary substantially over time and in unpredictable ways.Theoretical research indicates that such liquidity fluctuations, all else equal,should have a larger impact on prices of products with greater credit risk.Conversely, as the financial crisis illustrated, valuation uncertainties or othershocks that enhance actual or perceived credit risks can have adverse effectson liquidity and put in motion a downward spiral between market prices andliquidity of traded credit products (see for example the case of tranches fromcollateralised debt obligations based on sub-prime loans).20) As regards securitisation, the securitisation market is primarily intended toredistribute the credit risk away from the originators to a wide spectrum ofinvestors who can bear the risk, thus aiding financial stability and provide anadditional source of funding. The recent crisis in the credit markets has calledinto question the desirability of certain aspects of securitisation activity as wellas of many elements of the 'originate to distribute' business model, becauseof their possible influence on originators' incentives and the potentialmisalignment of interests of the originators and investors. For example, if theincentives of originators are not sufficiently aligned with those of the holdersof risk then banks’ intermediation function, including screening andmonitoring of borrowers, can be severely impaired. Once these problemsbecome apparent to the wider market, risk sharing markets becomedysfunctional or even disappear. If securitisation markets become illiquid,banks can be exposed to heightened risk from exposures to both credit risk(defaults), for example as loans can no longer be securitised, and to marketrisk from changes in the mark-to-market value of the securitised assets. Inaddition, when risk-sharing markets become illiquid, the signals from pricescan become distorted or even disappear, rendering risk measurementespecially challenging.A further requirement for well-functioning markets isthat investors in securitisation instruments should have a firm understandingof the associated risks. Recent events exposed deficits in this understandingthat were partly related to problems with the availability of information and tothe complexity of certain securitisation structures that obscured the linksbetween the performance of the underlying assets and the price of theinstruments.21) While the securitisation framework in India has been reasonably prudent,certain imprudent practices have reportedly developed like origination ofloans with the sole intention of immediate securitisation and securitisation oftranches of project loans even before the total disbursement is complete,thereby passing on the project implementation risk to investors.With a view todeveloping an orderly and healthy securitisation market, to ensure greateralignment of the interests of the originators and the investors as also toencourage the development of the securitisation activity in a mannerconsistent with the aforesaid objectives, several proposals for post-crisisreform were being considered internationally. Central to this is the idea thatoriginators should retain a portion of each securitisation originated, as amechanism to better align incentives and ensure more effective screening ofloans. In addition, a minimum period of retention of loans prior tosecuritisation is also considered desirable, to give comfort to the investorsregarding the due diligence exercised by the originators. Keeping in view theabove objectives and the international work, RBI had framed guidelinesregarding the Minimum Holding Period and Minimum Retention Requirementamong other measures and the revision in its securitisation guidelines wasissued in May, 2012.22) In the context of banks applying for moving over to advanced approaches,there is a need to clearly distinguish between different Pillar I risks.  Forexample, we need to be clear as to under which risk category the followingevents would be classified - under market risk or under operational risk? - (i)Incorrect mark-to-market valuations and VaR, due to, for instance, erroneousbooking of a trade into the trading system and the market moves in negativedirection resulting in losses (ii) incorrect specification of deals in the term-sheet (errors related to the transaction amount, maturities and financialfeatures) (iii) unauthorised trading in excess of risk limits  (iv) failures inproperly executing a stop loss .  Those of you who have answered asoperational risk perhaps could be proud of having some level of detailedunderstanding of the major risk categories. It is important to remember thatwith reference to the interaction between operational risk and the other Pillar1 risk types, for banks intending to follow AMA for operational risk, theboundaries between operational risk and credit and market risks involvedifferent treatments. While credit-related operational risk losses are excludedfrom the operational risk capital requirement (as long as they continue to betreated as credit risk for the purpose of calculating minimum regulatorycapital), operational risk/market risk boundary events are included in thescope of operational risk rather than under market risk for regulatory capitalcalculation.23) When distinguishing between operational risk (events or losses) and marketrisk (events or losses) the following criteria should be applied:  The events(and the related losses) which  should be included in the “scope ofoperational risk” are: (a) Events due to operational errors;  (b) Events due tofailures in internal controls;  (c) Events due to wrong selection of the model,made outside a defined business process/formalised procedure and without aformalized, conscious risk-taking process; and (d) Events due to wrongimplementation of the model. In all these cases, the whole amount of the lossincurred should be included in the “scope of operational risk loss”, unless theposition is intentionally kept open after the operational risk event isrecognized. In the latter case any portion of the loss due to adverse marketconditions after the decision to keep the position open should be ascribed tomarket risk. The events (and the related losses) which should be excludedfrom the “scope of operational risk” include those arising from wrong selectionof a model, made through a formalized corporate process where the pros andcons of the model itself are carefully weighed up.24) Participants would recall that a few days back the FED and OCC appliedenforcement action against JP Morgan after they found weaknesses ininternal controls in its London office which lost about $6 billion in early 2012on derivatives bets through synthetic credit portfolio which looked more likespeculation than hedging. Some of the key requirements forming part of theenforcement order included implementing risk management programmeeffectively and consistently across the firms with respect to trading activities,measures to ensure that controls for trading activities across lines of businessare consistent, enhanced model risk governance, measures to ensure thatmaterial risk management issues relating to trading activities are escalated ina timely manner to senior management and the BoD or a committee thereof,as appropriate. In respect of internal audit, the requirements includedenhanced escalation procedures for timely resolution if material auditexceptions and recommendations and measures to strengthen the ongoingquality assurance review of audit practices. Similarly, in respect to a $2 billionloss at UBS, FSA while penalising the bank last year had observed that riskmanagement of the desk was not effective in controlling the risk ofunauthorised trading. The trade capture and processing system also hadweakness which were exploited in order to conceal unauthorised trading. Thesystem allowed trades to be booked to an internal counterparty withoutsufficient details, there were no effective methods in place to detect trades atmaterial off-market prices and there was a lack of integration betweensystems. There was an understanding among personnel supporting the deskthat the operation divisions main role was that of facilitation . Their main focuswas on efficiency as opposed to risk control and they did not adequatelychallenge the front-office.  All these are instances are indicative of what ismissing in terms of management and control processes that lead to suchinstances and are instructive to us. However, notwithstanding plethora ofsimilar historical cases with perhaps slightly different modus operandi, newcases keep coming now and then. Perhaps, the  underlying causative factorsarise from the system of incentives and disincentives, which have also beenfactored in as part of measures to address the issues causing the financialcrisis of 2007-08.25) I am happy to note that the course coverage is comprehensive coveringvarious areas like sound internal controls and risk management systems for abank’s trading book, tools to measure, monitor and control market risks,discussion on emerging issues in derivatives markets, discussion onsecuritisation and basic accounting aspects relating to derivatives. I hope theparticipants use the opportunity to further clarify their doubts relating to thesubject area of this programme from the Fed Reserve experts.  I thank theFederal Reserve System for their continuing support in training our officialson various supervisory areas. I am certain that the inputs received from thisprogramme would assist in improving knowledge and understanding of therelevant subject areas both for the relatively new as well as experiencedinspecting officials who have gathered here, which is of particular significancein the present context of moving to a risk based approach to supervisioncoupled with proposed migration of some of the banks to advancedapproaches for computation of capital in the near future. I wish theprogramme a great success and wish the participants a fruitful learningexperience.I acknowledge the contribution of Mr. N Suganandh, Dy.General Manager,Dept. of Banking Supervision, in preparing this speech.ReferencesBank for International Settlements (2011), ‘Revisions to the Basel II Market RiskFramework ‘, FebruaryReserve Bank of India (2012), ‘Financial Stability Report’, DecemberRBI Guidelines on Implementation of Internal Models Approach (IMA) for market risk(2010)Philippe Jorion(2009),’Value at Risk- The New Benchmark for managing FinancialRisk’, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private LtdBoard of Governors of Federal Reserve System (2013), Consent Order withJPMorgan Chase and Co, JanuaryFSA (2012), Notice to UBS AG, NovemberReserve Bank of India ‘Guidelines on implementation of Basel III Capital Regulationsin India (2012)Nassim Nicholas Taleb (2010), ‘The Black Swan- The impact of the HighlyImprobable’, Penguin BooksBank for International Settlements (2009),’Findings on the interaction of market andcredit risk’, Working Paper No.16, MayRBI Guidelines on Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) for CalculatingOperational Risk Capital Charge (2011)
