*I am glad to be amidst you on this important occasion which is the culmination of a jointinitiative undertaken by the Indian Banks’ Association and the National Association ofSoftware and Service Companies (NASSCOM) to discuss issues surrounding IT for bankingand other financial institutions. I congratulate both the IBA and the NASSCOM on theirchoice of the theme for the Conference, which in my view is critical to the growth of theindustry. I believe that IT revolution in the banking industry will help to cope with theexplosive growth in the number of transactions and to provide improved customer service. Inthe process, decision-making in banks would We have been witnessing since about the early eighties the phenomenon of widespread use ofcomputers and communication technology in most of the industrialised and emerging marketeconomies. This has resulted in faster funds movement across nations and borders.Globalisation of economies and financial liberalisation within the economies have openednew opportunities of growth for techno-savvy institutions, while for the others these haveresulted in shrinkage of revenues. The use of IT in the banking industry in our country hashowever been somewhat limited and has, as a result, restricted our presence in internationaloperations. Even in critical spheres such as those involving funds transfer, and MIS baseddecision making, there has been little evidence of proactive movement towards wholesaleThe question to ask is: why is it so in India when we have such a large reservoir of humancapital trained and skilled in Information Technology, and when we are aware of the fact thata number of countries have developed their financial sector through an extensive use of IT asthe medium of growth? It is only with the growing recognition of the need for having in placefinancial reforms, has the interest in IT application in the banking sector in India increased.Perhaps the Year 2000 problem too has in a way contributed to the growing technologyadaptations in the banks. The sharp growth of computer use in new consumer goods ofdurable nature has also given rise to the need for use of computers in the services sector aswell. Banking industry as a service provider cannot naturally lag behind in this movementtoward the new Computerisation in BanksTo say that banks in future cannot survive without the support of Information Technology ismerely stating the obvious. The point to ponder over is whether the industry is now poised forthe challenges that arise as a result .  From all indications, banks seem to be prepared toglobalisation and financial  provide.In this context, let me refer to the environment in which banks are operating in India, and tothe compulsions that work to make computerisation in banks an imperative. Computerisationof branch operations, Controlling Offices and the Head Offices has been going apaceparticularly sharply in recent times since that is the only way by which senior in banks can gain information on the size of operations on a daily basis. The banking industryis clearly cognisant of the imperatives of financial liberalisation and has therefore attemptedto centres across the countryand account for over 65 per cent of banking business of the respective banks in terms ofvalue. In terms of numbers, there are 65,300 PCs and nodes in about 3,800 fullycomputerisation.computerise branches that are located in commercially important managementsliberalisation exploit the opportunities that techno-age.get  immensely facilitated.Ladies and Gentlemen,IT and the Banking Sectorcomputerised branches across the country. There are an additional 14,000 PCs in theRegional offices and Head Offices of banks, along with 2745 LAN systems. Banks have alsoThe large functional and geographical spread of banks has led to a sharp growth in thenumber of accounts and in the areas of operation of banks. This has necessitated switchoverfrom hard cash to paper based instruments. This has been facilitated with India adoptingMICR clearing at the four metropolitan cities in the second half of the eighties. Now MICRclearing is operational at another ten cities; these are set up and operated by Public Sectorbanks. Efforts are on to extend the MICR technology to another six centres by the end of thisComputerisation of Service branch operations, as you are aware of, serves as a vital fulcrumpoint for all clearing operations. All paper based payment instruments whether presented bythe bank in clearing or drawn on it, are routed through the Service branch, where the relevantaccounting entries are passed for inter-branch reconciliation. The average daily volume ofcheques processed in clearing operations in the four metropolitan cities has been staggeringlyhigh: during 1998 it was 17.98 lakhs, with daily average value of Rs.2 ,297 crores. Bankshave had to therefore computerise the operations of nearly 90 per cent of the servicebranches. Further, resort to Table Top Reader Encoders – 822 of them currently, is beingmade by the Service branches to ensure accuracy in encoding the amounts on the MICRinstruments. Use of this technology has contributed to the reduction in the reconciliationproblems in the clearing operations.The development and use of communication networks has also helped the banking industry togain in terms of improved bank services. First we started with BANKNET network, a leasedline terrestrial network connecting seven major cities in the country viz., Mumbai, Delhi,Calcutta, Chennai, Hyderabad, Bangalore and Nagpur. RBINet, a communication software,uses the BANKNET infrastructure for providing the facility of message and file transferbetween branches of banks and across banks. Another significant milestone in this area is theoperationalisation of the Shared Payment Network System (SPNS) of ATMs of the IndianBanks Association in Mumbai. The Network, operational since February 1997, providesround the year electronic banking services to the customers of twenty eight member banks.As on June 30, 1999, the network in Mumbai is operational with 101 ATMs of 28 memberbanks with a card base of 90,000 customers. It is expected that as volumes increase, thecentres.As all of you know, a landmark development is the setting up of the INFINET, IndianFinancial Network – a Wide Area Satellite based network using VSAT technology in June,1999 at the Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology, Hyderabad. TheINFINET is expected to interconnect 433 branches of banks in the first phase, given thelimited transponder capacity at present. As additional transponder space is made available,the network connectivity of 5000 branches would be rendered possible. Theoperationalisation of the INFINET is a milestone in that the critical inter-bank transactionscould be conducted on it in future. In addition, around ten banks are already using the VSATnetworks of third party service providers for various applications such as cheque collection, e-mail and some MIS related applications.Banks and financial institutions in India are members of SWIFT - Society for WorldwideInterbank Financial Telecommunication Network. SWIFT is used for the transmission and2number of ATMs will increase and will spread to other commercially important advicesyear.installed 17 mainframes, 5 Super minis, and 803 mini systems.receipt of all international financial messages by the member banks and financial institutionsin the country. We have 81 users of SWIFT in India with 568 branches connected to theSWIFT Computer Based Terminals of the Users.Other important developments in the payments area have a bearing on the speed ofcomputerisation in banks. Electronic payment products such as Electronic Clearing Service(Credit and Debit) are becoming increasingly popular with corporates. The Reserve Bankresponding to the needs of business entities has been offering ECS products. ElectronicClearing Service (Credit) is available at fifteen centres where the Reserve Bank has itsoffices, in addition to Pune where the service is being offered by State Bank of India. Thenumber of transactions under ECS Credit has increased from 2.3 million in 1997 to 4.3million as on December 31, 1998. The number of corporate institutions availing the ECSCredit service has increased from 69 in 1997-98 to 88 in 1998-99. The scope for widening itscoverage further seems to be very substantial. Electronic Clearing Service (Debit) is availableat the four metropolitan cities. A pilot project on Retail Electronic Funds Transfer on a T+1Given the infrastructure and level of computerisation in the industry, it is clear that banks infuture are going to be modern with interconnectivities facilitated by emerging technologies.In such a context, there is no other option left for banks than to evolve a strategic vision thatbuilds over the present technology base. Besides, the compulsions of law will drive banks tocomputerise over seventy per cent of the total banking business in the country by January2001. The Central Vigilance Commissioner’s Notification on the subject will help banks toimprove their internal vigilance administration.It is interesting as well as important to note that in order to minimise frauds, the CentralVigilance Commissioner (CVC) has directed all banks to compulsorily offer ElectronicClearing Services (ECS) to their customers. The communication backbone for the ECSservice would be provided by the INFINET network. ECS services will ensure that customersget the credit on the notified date. This will lead to significant improvements in systemicefficiency, customer service, as also reduce frauds (for example – the fraudulent of dividend / interest warrants). Further, extensive computerisation would lead to betterresource management, and substantially reduce inter-branch reconciliation entries especiallyof those related to clearing and funds transfers. E-commerce will add new dimensions toinformation highway and thus lead to higher business volumes, One of the major issues plaguing the banking industry is the lack of standardisation. For thepayment system reform to take-off successfully, the standardisation of operating systems,systems software and application software throughout the banking industry is a necessarycondition which may have to be pursued.This issue was discussed in-depth by the Committee on Technology Upgradation in theBanking Sector, set up by the Reserve Bank of India. The Committee has recommended theneed for standards in various areas apart from highlighting the need for an appropriateinstitutional arrangement for key management and authentication by way of a certificationagency. The Report also recommended adoption of the widely used cryptography proceduresto prevent data tampering during transmission. This should be implemented at the applicationlevel supplementing the security already provided at the network level, in view of the critical3nature of financial message transfer over communication networks.efficiency and profitability.encashmentFuture Perspectivesbasis is also made operational at the four metropolitan cities.We are addressing this issue by first standardising our message formats in tune with acceptedinternational standards. A Working Group on the Design of Message Formats has beenformed for this purpose. The Group has finished phase one of its activity. Message formatsfor applications such as Customer Payments and Cheques, Financial Institution Transfers,Treasury Markets, Collections and Cash Letters, Securities Markets, Documentary Creditsand Guarantees, Cash Management and Customer Status and Common Group Messages havealready been finalised. The work of designing the message formats pertaining to GovernmentAccount Transactions, Currency Chest Transfer, and some segments of GovernmentSecurities Transactions will be completed in phase two by the Working Group. In addition,the RBI has also constituted a few sub-groups for standardisation of different informationtechnology components like networking products and system software. These measures havebeen initiated as the INFINET is essentially an Internet Protocol (IP) and all the applicationsshould be built around TCP/IP, to optimise use of the communication resources and toCoupled with computerisation of branches of the banks, the Reserve Bank has been exhortingthe banks to network their branches for intra-bank connectivity for addressing the twin issuesof intra-bank funds transfer and transmission of critical MIS information between thebranches and the controlling offices. Intra-bank connectivity will ensure that Treasury orFunds Department is connected to the Controlling office on the one hand and with the largebusiness centres on the other hand. This will provide the bank a global vision of its fundsposition and optimal utilisation thereof.As you are perhaps aware, the Reserve Bank is now in the process of putting in place aCentralised Funds Management System for the benefit of the banks. The Centralised FundsManagement System envisages connecting all the Deposit Accounts Department of theReserve Bank located at seventeen Regional offices with the Apex Level Server located inMumbai. The system envisages periodical updation of Current Account balances in the ApexLevel Server whenever a transaction is put through at the local or remote Deposit AccountsDepartment. The Bank Level Server will be able to query the Apex Level Server to check onits “global” or overall funds position. Eventually, funds transfer facility will be madeAt the bedrock of the design of an integrated payments and settlement system is the RealTime Gross Settlement System. The Real Time Gross Settlement system is being designed toprovide large value funds transfer and settlement in an on-line real time environment to thebanking industry, with settlement on a gross basis. An integral component of the Real TimeGross Settlement System will be the Delivery versus Payment module for trading andsettlement in Government Securities transactions. The system would have link with othernetting systems like Clearing, Automated Clearing House transactions comprising ofElectronic Clearing Service, Retail Electronic Funds Transfer, all Plastic Money and SmartCard transactions and EFTPOS (Electronic Funds Transfer at Point of Sale). Work in settingup the RTGS system has already started in the Reserve Bank with the setting up of a WorkingGroup for the Appointment of Consultant for the implementation of the RTGS project. Infact, Request for Proposals have been invited from leading vendors intimately associated withPayment System applications.Last but not the least are the initiatives we have taken to ensure Year 2000 compliance in thebanking and financial industry. We are confident that there would be no problem on this4available.facilitate smooth implementation of the applications on the network.account. Within the Reserve Bank we have achieved more than ninety per cent compliance ofall our systems by end June 1999. We are in the process of operationalising state-of-the-artY2K compliant Mainframe systems IBM’s S/390, for the MICR Clearing operations at thefour metropolitan cities. In the next couple of months these new systems will be madeoperational.Our contingency plans for handling clearing operations include switching over to theMagnetic Media Based Input Clearing system, which can work both in a LAN environmentand on a stand-alone PC. Our other measures include stocking adequate amounts of cash inall the offices of the Bank as well as the over four thousand currency chests across theAs regards the commercial banking sector, ninety per cent of the banks have reportedcompliance by the end of June 1999. Efforts are currently on to ensure compliance by theremaining ten percent by July 1999. Ninety two per cent of the financial institutions havereported that their systems are Y2K compliant. The remaining financial institutions areexpected to become Y2K compliant by the end of this month.The Reserve Bank has advised the banks and financial institutions, to go in for extensivetesting of their systems with reference to sensitive dates. All such test results should bedocumented and made available for verification by Controlling Offices, Internal Inspectionteams, Reserve Bank inspectors etc. In addition banks and financial institutions have beenasked to put in place Contingency Plans to ensure Business Continuity in operations .  As partof the Contingency Plan, banks have been advised to have proper documentation in place foroperationalising the Contingency Plan in the event of systems failure. Business Continuity isto be facilitated through processing on standalone PCs or manually or a combination of PCsand manual processing. One should not forget to factor in human resources planning byidentifying the key personnel and their availability during the transition phase i.e. lateDecember 1999, roll over period and the first few months of the new year. In addition, hardcopies of all important books of Accounts and Customers Accounts, Treasury operations ason December 31, 1999 are to be made to ease in temporary switchover to manual processingif required and also to avoid default in meeting contractual obligations. Moreover, the Boardof Directors and Senior Management need to be fully aware and responsible for theContingency Plans.It is important to appreciate that the issues involved in Y2K are both too complex, as well asunpredictable. We, therefore, believe that the need exists for building additional tiers ofassurance in regard to the compliance efforts that have already been carried out. Anindependent assessment of Y2K compliance will clearly enhance existing comfort levels byproviding such additional assurance.Such an independent assessment or third party certification would call for high standards ofprofessional competence and ethics on the part of agencies that are entrusted with theresponsibility of Y2K compliance audits. This area has a good potential for the emerging co-operative links between the IT industry and the banking sector. NASSCOM may thereforehave to seriously explore various possibilities by which the existing gap in this regard can besatisfactorily met. The experience gained through this process can lay the foundation for anew brand of IT firms 5country.specialising in information system audits.The countdown to the new millennium has started. We are confident that on December 31,1999 all systems in the banking and financial sector will perform normally, having beenremedied and tested for Y2K compliance. January 1, 2000 will be a working day as usual forthe banks. The problems if any in the systems will surface only during the Live Runs onJanuary 1, 2000. However, January 1, 2000 being a Saturday the volume of transactions willbe less compared to other days. The ensuing weekend will enable the banks to rectify thesystems and ensure business continuity by having their systems in place and in operation forfull business volumes on January 3, 2000.Technological obsolescence on account of Y2K is inevitable. In order, to optimally utilise theavailable resources, redeployment of systems for non-date sensitive applications couldperhaps be thought of. The systems can be used in areas which do not demand the latesttechnology and where technological obsolescence is not of primary importance. NASSCOMmay work in this direction and prepare a list of such users for the benefit of variousInterface with IT VendorsThere are several areas where the IT industry has to play a proactive role in helping thebanking and financial sector in achieving international standards of excellence and inrealising our vision. Let me indicate a few areas where there could be co-operation betweenthe IT industry and the banks. A customer goes into a fully computerised branch and he isstill issued demand drafts and fixed deposit receipts manually. What we have achieved inbranch computerisation is automation of back office functions and not the front end customerinterface. This is an area where more efforts are required to be put in by both the IT industryand the banks to remove this seemingly minor problem, and yet very necessary to gaincustomer satisfaction. The process of re-engineering the total branch computerisationpackage should therefore start in right earnest to address this issue.I have indicated that we have a vision of an integrated payments and settlement system forthe country with a network of branches with Straight through Processing as the goal. For sucha system to be functional we need to have standards based solutions for the banking andfinancial sector from multiple vendors. The standards based solutions should necessarilyconsist of open system architecture, with scalability as its main feature for taking care offuture volumes in growth. The IT industry should closely collaborate with the banking sectorThere is one threat in electronic banking that we face but is rarely mentioned openly, namelythe fear of hacking and tampering of data. Secrecy is the essence of banking transactions. Thesecurity products both hardware based and application software based, should address the The IT industry should be in readiness to provide such fool proof solutions of securityincluding the encryption of data based on internationally   recognised  security  standards.Authority has to be clearly defined in this regard. Should the network service provider be theCertification Authority or should it be a trusted third party, or an association of banksthemselves? For example, SWIFT, though a Service Provider, also acts as CertificationAuthority. It is not clear whether the service providers in India are ready to do so at this6The role of Certificationtwin issues of taking care of customers interests and also ensure secure funds transfer.in providing such services at cost-effective prices.institutions.juncture. The IT industry should help us in resolving this issue by recommending andeducating the banking sector on the best  that are followed globally in this regard.This is where transparency is not visible and I would strongly suggest that your Associationshould come out with simple, readable literature on the subject.Another vital area where the IT industry can contribute significantly is in the setting upCredit Information Bureaux. The Reserve Bank has in fact set up a Working Group toexamine the modalities of setting up a Credit Information Bureaux. The help of banks inmonitoring their assets as also in providing instantaneous information on defaulters to theparticipants of the Credit Information Bureaux without getting into legal hassles is of utmostimportance but not sufficient attention has been given to providing information to banks onthe part of service providers. In particular, data warehousing and data mining would come toplay a crucial role in giving such information, and in helping to reduce the NPAs of banks.As the challenges before us are manifold and varied we need to have a co-ordinatedapproach. Banks, Indian Banks Association, Service Providers, Vendors, Government ofIndia  - Ministry of Finance, Department of Telecommunications and the Reserve Bank needto evolve a consensus approach on issues that need resolution. Constitution of a NationalPayment Council by the RBI to design and develop the Integrated Payment and SettlementSystems is a step in this direction. Many more steps need be taken in future.NASSCOM with various software vendors under its umbrella and outside and the IndianBanks’ Association have been initiators of change. More steps are required to be taken tofacilitate greater co-ordination. The IT industry should gear itself to meet the requirements ofthe banking and financial sector with a spirit of co-operation, and partnership in making thebanking industry scale the heights of international excellence. A productive approach istherefore, essential between the two sectors.Thank You.* Inaugural Address delivered by Deputy Governor  Shri S.P.Talwar, Reserve Bank of India, on July 22, 1999 atthe National Conference on IT for Banking and Financial Institutions, organised by NASSCOM and IBA atMumbai.7practises
