The pursuit of financial stability*thIt gives me great pleasure to address this gathering at the 7 AnnualConference on Money and Finance in the Indian economy organised by theIndira Gandhi Institute of Development Research (IGIDR). Issues related tomonetary policy and financial sector continue to attract a lot of research interestall over the world and this is all the more true for emerging economies like Indiawhich are gradually integrating with the rest of the world. Accordingly, theinitiatives taken by the IGIDR to hold annual conferences on the topic of Moneyand Finance to bring together researchers and policymakers are indeedwelcome.2. With growing financial openness, globalisation and liberalisation, financialstability issues have come to the forefront. These issues have ranged fromdiscussions on basic issues of the definition of financial stability itself to issues ofmeasurement, issues of choice of instruments to achieve the objective offinancial stability and even issues on the degree of activism that central banksshould adopt in pursuing this objective.3. Traditionally, it has been believed that monetary stability leads to financialstability. However, as the events of the 1990s show, it need not necessarily bethe case. While there are complementarities between these two objectives,especially in the long run, the same need not hold in the short-run. A stablemacroeconomic environment - low and stable inflation, sustained growth and lowinterest rates - can generate excessive optimism about the future economicprospects and often the risks are downplayed. Accordingly, episodes of financialinstability often have their origins in environment of macroeconomic stability.Thus, macro economic stability need not necessarily always place an economy infinancial stability in the medium/long term and central banks, therefore, nowbestow a more focussed attention to the objective of maintaining financialstability. Historically, central banks have been concerned with both price stabilityand financial stability, albeit not at the same time (Crockett, 2004). What is ratherunique since the 1990s has been a simultaneous pursuit of price and financialstability by central banks.th * Speech by Smt. K. J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 7Money and Finance Conference organised by Indira Gandhi Institute of DevelopmentResearch (IGIDR) on  February 10, 2005______________Forces affecting financial stability4. The basic forces affecting financial stability are the quickening pace oftechnological innovation and the growing acceptance of market processes asbasic determinant of resource allocation. Due to sectoral distinctions gettingblurred, financial intermediaries have the ability to effectively compete in sectorsbeyond their domain by deconstructing and recombining risks. Further, thesource of financial disturbances has become more unpredictable mainly due tointegration of financial markets. Financial liberalisation has led to the emergenceof financial conglomerates, cutting across not only various financial sectors suchas banking and insurance, but also a number of countries. Therefore, a contagionmeans the problems of distant economies can become problems of our own.The progressive opening up of the economies to external flows since 1990s hasled to massive cross-border capital flows and volatile exchange rates. Sharpmovements in exchange rates can have an adverse impact upon the balancesheets of both financial and non-financial entities. This is especially true foremerging economies as they usually need to resort to borrowing in foreigncurrencies.5. If we recall the banking crisis and the resultant financial crisis of LatinAmerica (IMF 2004), we can broadly categorise the trigger points as:• A boom in credit to the private sector, for both investment andconsumption (Mexico, 1994; and Colombia, 1999). A particular form ofboom and bust cycle is generated by the end of hyperinflationary episodes(Bolivia, 1986);• Wholesale liberalization in the absence of an appropriate and effectiveprudential regulatory framework (Mexico, 1994; and Chile, 1984). It isworth stressing, however, that highly regulated systems have also sufferedcrises (Peru, 1987);• Direct effects of fiscal difficulties on the domestic banking system, a factorthat seems to have become an increasingly important source of strain onLatin American banks (Argentina, 2001);• Contagion and spillovers, where a crisis in one country induces economicagents to reassess their expectations and thus reduce investment in othercountries (Argentina, 1995), or where a crisis in one country has a directeffect on economic conditions in another country (Uruguay, 2001);• Terms of trade shocks and movements in real exchange rates (Venezuela,1994; and Ecuador, 1998); and2• Political instability, unrest, and, in some cases, civil conflict.6. Deficiencies in the following areas have detracted from good bankingpractices and increased vulnerability to crisis in some Latin American countries:• Inappropriate and ineffective prudential regulation and supervision;• Inefficacy of bank intervention and resolution;• Policy-induced distortions, and, in particular, government influence overpublic sector banks;• Poor structure and composition of government finances;• Inadequate accounting practices, property rights, and corporategovernance; and• Inefficiency of the judicial system and poor observance and enforcementof laws.7. Financial markets are different from other markets and therefore, greaterliberalisation goes along with deeper supervision and higher degree of regulation.This is because in financial markets the herd mentality catches up fast makingmarkets volatile.  Any destabilisation in financial markets affects even those whoare not in financial markets.  On the other hand, financial markets can drive thereal economy.   Central banks, therefore, need to pursue a multifaceted approachtowards ensuring financial stability through (i) payments system oversight, (ii)contingency planning against market disruption, (iii) lender of last resort (LOLR),(iv) share in procedures for financial regulation and (v) analysis andcommunication through reports such as Financial Stability Reviews ( FSRs)(Goodhart, 2004). The importance assigned by central banks nowadays to theobjective of financial stability is evident from the fact that a number of centralbanks have started publishing FSRs, giving their assessment of the health of thefinancial sector and its ability to withstand various shocks. The European CentralBank is a recent addition to this growing list of central banks that come out withregular FSR-type reports.8. At the global level, crisis prevention initiatives have prominently centredaround strengthened IMF surveillance and include a number of aspects: datadissemination, greater transparency, development of standards and codes,constructive involvement of the private sector, Sovereign Debt Restructuring3Mechanism (SDRM) and introduction of facilities like Contingent Credit Line(CCL).Financial Stability: An Indian Perspective9. In India too, financial stability has emerged as a key consideration in theconduct of monetary policy since the 1990s, consequent to the structural reformsinitiated in the early 1990s, the gradual opening up of the Indian economy andthe transformation of the financial system from a planned and administeredregime to a market-oriented financial system.  As observed by Governor Dr.Reddy, contextually,  financial stability in India would mean (a) ensuringuninterrupted settlements of financial transactions (both internal and external), (b)maintenance of a level of confidence in the financial system amongst all theparticipants and stakeholders and (c) absence of excess volatility that unduly andadversely affects real economic activity (Reddy, 2004b).10. The overall approach of the Reserve Bank to maintain financial stability isthree-pronged: maintenance of overall macroeconomic balance; improvement inthe macro-prudential functioning of institutions and markets; and strengtheningmicro-prudential institutional soundness through regulation and supervision.Monetary stability is an important precondition for financial stability and,therefore, the most significant contribution that monetary policy can make tofinancial stability is through maintaining low and stable inflation. Since the secondhalf of the 1990s, inflation has been brought down to an average of five per centper annum compared to an average of around 8-9 per cent per annum in thepreceding two and a half decades. The reduction in inflation since the early1990s has also enabled inflation expectations to stabilise. Low and stableinflation expectations increase confidence in the domestic financial system and,thereby contribute in an important way to the stability of the domestic financialsystem.11. Second, a number of measures have been taken to widen, deepen andintegrate various segments of the financial markets in order to strengthen pricediscovery mechanism, lower the transaction costs and enhance the liquidity in themarkets. At the same time, it is recognised that the capacity of economic agents4in developing economies to manage volatility in all prices, goods or foreignexchange is highly constrained and there is a legitimate role for non-volatility as apublic good (Reddy, 2004a). Accordingly, ensuring orderly conditions in thefinancial markets is an important aspect of the Reserve Bank's approach towardsmaintaining financial stability. Operating procedures and instruments of monetarypolicy have evolved over time to meet these objectives. For instance, withpersistent capital flows, a new facility in the form of Market Stabilisation Scheme(MSS) was put in place effective April 2004. The MSS has provided the ReserveBank greater flexibility in its market operations. Similarly, India's exchange ratepolicy of focusing on managing volatility with no fixed rate target, while allowingthe underlying demand and supply conditions to determine the exchange ratemovements over a period in an orderly way has stood the test of time. Prudentexternal sector management with a cautious approach to capital accountliberalisation has been an important component of macroeconomic policies toensure financial stability. Overall, the Reserve Bank's approach is to minimisevolatility in the financial markets and minimise knee-jerk reactions, while focusingon price stability and the underlying inflation. The objective has been to ensurethat there are no avoidable uncertainties in policy, while mitigating unduepressures on the functioning of markets without undermining market efficiency.12. A robust financial system is often characterised by smooth and securepayment systems and a word here about the several initiatives undertaken byRBI towards lifting the Indian payment system to global standards would be inorder. While clearing houses were strengthened with MICR clearing processes,electronic clearing initiatives were undertaken through promotion of ElectronicClearing Services (ECS), Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), establishment of anexclusive secured private network (INFINET) which serves as private geteway tothe Indian financial system.  A Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) hasbeen operationalised as an effective, quick and secure system for inter bankfunds transfers. Introduction of Negotiated Dealing System (NDS), a CentralisedFunds Management System (CFMS) and the Structured Financial MessagingSystem (SFMS) are other key components that were put into the paymentsystem. All these measures have quickened the settlement processes,  reducedrisks in settlements and built confidence in the payment and settlement systems.513. In the pursuit of financial stability, effective regulatory and supervisoryinitiatives along with a calibrated approach to financial sector liberalisation have acritical role to play. The Indian approach towards financial sector reforms hasbeen based on pancha sutra or five principles (Reddy, 1998): (a) cautious andappropriate sequencing of reform measures; (b) introduction of norms that aremutually reinforcing; (c) introduction of complementary reforms across sectors(most importantly, monetary, fiscal and external sector); (d) development offinancial institutions; and, (e) development of financial markets. The reforms haveaimed at enhancing productivity and efficiency of the financial sector, improvingthe transparency of operations and ensuring that it is capable of withstandingidiosyncratic shocks.Regulatory measures:14. Keeping in pace with times, various regulatory prescriptions were beingissued by the central bank from time to time. These steps are taken to basicallyensure banking stability vis-à-vis exposures and risks. I shall outline some of thekey measures:• Capital adequacy norms at 9% which is higher than the 8% internationalnorm• Income Recognition and Asset Classification (IRAC) norms• Exposure norms – individual and group norms 15% and 40%, respectivelywith additional 10% in case of infrastructure funding.• Cap on foreign currency borrowing and lending as well as policy measureson hedging of such foreign currency loans• Cap on Capital market and sensitive sector exposures• Building up of Investment Fluctuation Reserve (IFR) to a minimum of 5%by March 2006.15. As a result of improvements in the regulatory and supervisory framework,the degree of compliance with Basel Core Principles has generally been high,and observed areas of weaknesses, primarily with respect to country riskguidelines have been addressed. Consolidated accounting for banks has beenintroduced along with a system of Risk-Based Supervision (RBS) for intensified6monitoring of vulnerabilities. A scheme of Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) wasintroduced effective December 2002 to undertake 'structured' and 'discretionary'actions against banks exhibiting vulnerabilities in certain prudential/financialparameters. With liberalisation, financial conglomerates are emerging. Bankshave accordingly been advised to prepare and disclose consolidated financialstatements and prepare consolidated prudential reports. The inter-regulatorycoordination has also been streamlined with the establishment of a monitoringsystem in respect of Systemically Important Financial Intermediaries ( SIFIs),coupled with the establishment of three Standing Technical Committeesconstituted by the High Level Coordination Committee on Financial and CapitalMarkets (HLCCFCM) to provide a more focused inter-agency forum for sharing ofinformation and intelligence.16. A major initiative towards preventing crisis has been the strengthening ofthe effectiveness of surveillance and incorporating a fresh perspective to itsanalysis and policy recommendations. To identify the strengths andvulnerabilities of the financial system (which includes banks, financial institutions,NBFCs, Primary dealers, and markets – forex, debt, money/call, and capital), ahalf yearly review based on financial soundness indicators (also known as macro-prudential indicators MPI) is undertaken. The MPI review comprises bothaggregated micro-prudential indicators (AMPIs) of the health of individualfinancial institutions and macroeconomic indicators (MEIs) associated withfinancial system soundness.17. This macro approach to financial supervision has helped the policy makersto refine their regulatory stance so as to achieve the fine balance between growthand financial stability. For instance, thanks to exhaustive data being collectedunder off-site surveillance, Reserve Bank could closely monitor the ratio of grossnon-performing loans (NPL) to total loans which was at a high of 15.7 per cent forschedule commercial banks (SCBs) at end-March 1997. This ratio witnessed amarked decline to 7.2 per cent at end-March 2004. Net NPLs also witnessed asignificant decline, driven by the improvements in loan loss provisioning, whichcomprises over half of the total provisions and contingencies. Also, based on thedata on the maturity patterns of banks’ assets and liabilities and on the unrealised7gains on the investment portfolios, RBI could regularly gauge the impact of risingbond yields on the banks’ balance sheets after taking into account the cushionavailable, both for the system as a whole and for the individual banks. We thusidentified the outliers in the system on the basis of their capacity to withstandinterest rate shock and sensitized them to take corrective steps.18. From financial stability perspective, issues of ownership, size andgovernance in banks are extremely relevant. In view of the importance ofcorporate governance in banks, we issued guidelines for effective corporategovernance and also identified the criteria for determining the fit and properstatus of owners and directors. It was also considered necessary to lay down acomprehensive framework of policy on ownership and governance in banks in atransparent manner.  Accordingly, we have placed in public domain a draft paperon ‘A comprehensive policy framework for ownership and governance in privatesector banks’. The Reserve Bank has adopted a consultative approach,encouraging a debate on this issue and the draft is being reviewed on the basisof the feedback received from various quarters.19. The stability of a financial system can be achieved only when institutionsand markets function on the basis of informed decisions. In India, the bankingsystem has witnessed greater levels of transparency and standards of disclosure.The range of disclosures have gradually been expanded over the years andpresently includes a host of indicators relating to capital adequacy (Tier I and TierII capital separately), NPAs, Government shareholding, movements in NPAs,exposure to sensitive sectors (capital market, real estate and commodities),movements in provisions for NPAs and investments as also information oncorporate debt restructuring. These are being further enhanced to incorporateasset-liability management, risk management policies, concentrations, connectedlending, evaluation of investment in subsidiaries, various performance measuresand indicators thereof. Banks are providing information on various indicators inthe form of notes to accounts and schedules in their balance sheets. Guidelinesin regard to Fair Practices Code for Lenders were framed and the banks/all-IndiaFIs have been advised to adopt these guidelines. The Reserve Bank has beentaking several steps from time to time to enhance the transparency in banks’8operations by prescribing comprehensive requirements for disclosure in tune withthe international best practices. In view of the added emphasis on the role ofmarket discipline under Basel II and with a view to enhancing furthertransparency, banks have been advised on October 19, 2004 that all cases ofpenalty imposed by the Reserve Bank as also strictures/directions on specificmatters including those arising out of inspection will be placed in the publicdomain with effect from November 1, 2004.Conclusion20. To conclude, ensuring an acceptable degree of financial stability is anever-ending process.21. Looking ahead, the vulnerability to real sector shocks has the potential tosignificantly affect financial stability in India. The major sources of shocks in Indiaare very sharp increases in oil prices and extraordinary monsoon failures andother natural calamities with consequent impact on the agricultural sector, spillingover to other sectors of the economy. Therefore, the weight to financial stability inIndia is higher than in many other countries.22. Financial stability has moved to centre-stage nationally as well as indiscussions relating to the future of the global monetary and financial system.Several factors have brought this about: the disturbing intensity and frequency offinancial crises in the decade gone, the move to strengthen domestic financialsystems under Basel II and the unfinished quest for the appropriate internationalfinancial architecture for crisis prevention and management.  Unlike in somecountries where the responsibility for financial stability has been located in anindependent authority, our approach has been to exploit the synergies that existbetween the conduct of monetary policy and the function of financial regulation.Accordingly, financial stability in India is an integral responsibility of the ReserveBank. Appropriate governance has enabled us to mitigate areas of conflict ofinterest even as we have reaped the benefits of (i) a deep understanding of thedynamics of India’s financial sector – which, in essence, has evolved around theReserve Bank over the years – (ii) oversight of money, debt and foreignexchange markets and (iii) the accumulation of the technical skills associated9with regulation and supervision. The experience with the tumultuous 1990s hasshown that our approach has stood the test of time in ensuring a stable, vibrantand well-functioning financial system in the country. We have a well-capitalisedfinancial system even by international standards, with low levels of loandelinquency despite our prudential standards being set tighter than internationalstandards. Our financial markets are orderly and smoothly functioning and theability of our financial intermediaries to deal in various segments of the financialmarket spectrum is improving almost continuously. Periodic monitoring and self-assessment of the quality of financial supervision is buttressed by external audits,including by the IMF. In the years ahead, we will continue to vigorously pursuethe objective of financial stability by developing and refining our approach,modulating the pace and sequencing of regulatory function with the financialdynamics and benchmarking ourselves against international best practices sothat our financial institutions emerge as global players and India becomes theinternational financial centre of the new millennium.Acknowledgements for inputs are due to Shri Ajit Mittal, GM, DBS, CO, RBI andShri Muneesh Kapur, Director, DEAP, RBI10ReferencesCrockett, A. “The Interaction of Monetary and Financial Stability”,Monetary Bulletin, Central Bank of Iceland, 2004/3.Goodhart, C.A.E. “Some New Directions for Financial Stability”. PerJacobsson Foundation Lecture at Zurich, June 2004.Reddy, Y.V. “Financial Sector Reforms: Review and Prospects”. RBIBulletin, December 1998.-------. “Towards Globalisation of the Financial Sector in India”. RBIBulletin, January 2004a.--------. “Financial Stability: Indian Experience”. RBI Bulletin, July 2004b.   Finance & Development, IMF, September 200411
