*Strengthening Indian Banking and Finance: Progress and ProspectsThe Bank Economists’ Conference has become an important annual event forconstructive interactions and informed debate on the state of our financial system. Thetheme chosen for this year, “Indian Banking: Managing Transformation”, provides anexcellent opportunity to reflect on the ground that has been covered in transformingIndian banking into a vibrant, sound and a well-functioning system, and to chart out aplan for the future. I am happy to be here with you again to deliver the inaugural addressth to the 24 Conference of Bank Economists.As I have emphasised during our earlier interactions, there are several elements that mustcome together in order to make the Indian banking system stronger, efficient and low-cost. These ‘fundamentals’ include:? strengthening of prudential norms and market discipline;? adoption of international benchmarks as appropriate to our situation;? management of organisational change and consolidation within the financial system;? upgradation of the technological infrastructure of the financial system, and? human resource development as the catalyst of the transformation.We have made some progress in each of these areas; yet some concerns persist regardingthe pace and quality of our progress. Macroeconomic and financial conditions around usare also changing swiftly, posing new challenges and lending urgency to accelerating ourefforts towards our vision. In my address today, I propose to take stock of the groundcovered in each of the areas that I have outlined. I hope this will help to shed some lighton the road ahead.II. Recent Macroeconomic and Financial DevelopmentsThe global financial markets have weakened significantly since end-March 2002,reflecting a downward revision in profit forecasts and concerns about the sustainability ofthe recovery. Corporate sector distress and auditing and accounting irregularities in Juneand early July 2002 severely undermined investor confidence and deepened the slump inequity markets. Negative sentiment spilled over into the corporate bond market, reflectedin a sharp rise in interest rate spreads; and portfolio changes indicate a continuing flightto quality and safety. International banking activity experienced a slowdown, affected bysubdued demand for credit and consolidation of off-shore lending. Adjustments areunderway between the major currencies, driven by the decline in equity markets and therealignment of the US dollar. Emerging markets have also witnessed turbulence, largelydue to country-specific factors, including concerns about debt dynamics and politicaluncertainties.The current phase of the banking cycle appears to be driven by the downturn in economicactivity rather than financial distress. Significantly, the largest financial institutions areamong those affected by credit concerns. The slowdown in the demand for financing hasbeen aggravated by a deterioration in the quality of portfolios on the assets side and theconsequent tightening of lending norms. All this has rendered the short-term outlookuncertain. The silver lining in the otherwise sombre global macroeconomic and financialsituation has been Asia. Emerging Asia has been experiencing a stronger than expectedrecovery. Although equity markets have exhibited a decline, most countries of the regionhave retained access to international capital markets and international bank lending.The Indian economy has recently been exhibiting signs of staying ahead of globalactivity. Some signs of cyclical recovery are currently evident, although border tensions,a relatively weak and uneven monsoon and concerns relating to the fiscal position aredownside risks restraining a fuller surge of growth. Real GDP in agriculture could declineby about 1.5 per cent for the year as a whole, reflecting mainly the anticipated shortfall infoodgrains production. Industrial performance in the first half of the year appears to haveshrugged off the sluggishness experienced in the preceding year. All constituent sectorsof industry have recorded improvement in growth, led by manufacturing. Significantly,the production of the infrastructure industries and capital goods growth has also revived.Export growth has turned out to be robust in the first half of the year. Non-oil importshave risen over last year’s level suggesting that the slackening of domestic demand seemsto be flattening out. Given these lead indicators, real GDP growth of 5.0 to 5.5 per centduring 2002-03 appears feasible. Inflation, measured as year-on-year variations in thewholesale price index (WPI), has been hovering around 3.0 per cent in recent weeks. Therange of inflation indicators has shifted down to 2.3-3.9 per cent from 3.0-6.3 per cent ayear ago. Nevertheless, the inflation outlook is uncertain with international oil pricesvolatile with perceptions of war risk, and with domestic oilseeds and edible oil pricesrising. For the year as a whole, inflation is expected to remain within 4.0 per cent in thecurrent year.The financial system is also providing clear indications of a pick up in activity. There hasbeen improvement in the growth of non-food bank credit reflecting a better outlook forindustrial growth. There has been an increase in the credit disbursed to the housing sectorand industries like coal, iron and steel, textiles, fertiliser, drugs and pharmaceuticals,cement, construction, petroleum, computer software, automobiles, gems and jewelleryand power. The increase in credit demand is not, however, evenly spread. The investmentof scheduled commercial banks in non-SLR instruments has shown a distinctimprovement from a comparatively negligible level last year. Money supply (M ) has3been tracking real output developments and inflation conditions with a continuingpreference for safety reflected in the appetite for bank deposits.Although various segments of the Indian financial markets have remained relativelyunaffected by international financial developments, equity markets have moved downalong with global equity markets. On the other hand, the strength of capital flows hasresulted in a modest appreciation of the exchange rate of the rupee vis-a-vis the USdollar. First quarter balance of payments data indicate that the current account remains insurplus as in the preceding year. The foreign exchange reserves have risen to a level ofUS $ 67 billion, currently the seventh largest in the world. Under these conditions, thestance of monetary policy, reiterated recently in the Statement on the mid-term review ofmonetary and credit policy on October 29, 2002, is provision of adequate liquidity tomeet credit growth and support investment demand, consistent with price stability; tocontinue the soft interest rate stance and greater flexibility in the interest rate structureover the medium term. The policy stance was signalled through 25 basis points cuts eachin the Bank Rate and the repo rate. Monetary policy also renewed its commitment tomonitoring conditions in the foreign exchange market with watchfulness as well asflexibility.Financial intermediation is not just a mirror of the real economy; it is also a derivative.Around us, the prolonged global slowdown is increasingly reflected in heightened riskaversion in international financial markets. Fortunately for us in India, we seem to bebreaking out early from the synchronised global downturn. Our banks, financialinstitutions and financial markets have responded encouragingly to the impulses forgrowth, reinforcing the virtuous aspects of the movement between real and financialactivity. It is vital that we take advantage of this early lead and seize the opportunities forfinancial intermediation in the recovery phase of the business cycle.III. Strengthening the Financial SystemStrengthening of the financial sector and improving the functioning of financial marketscan be described as the core principles of financial sector reforms in India. The centralplank is a set of prudential norms that are aimed at imparting strength to banks andfinancial institutions, and inducing greater accountability and market discipline. Thesenorms include not only capital adequacy, asset classification and provisioning but alsoaccounting standards, exposure and disclosure norms and guidelines for investment, riskmanagement and asset-liability management. Our approach has been to benchmark ournorms against international standards.By the end of March 2002, 25 out of 27 public sector banks had risk weighted capitaladequacy ratios above the prescribed minimum of 9 per cent with 23 in excess of 10 percent. Strategies are being worked out to turn around the two weak public sector banksincluding recapitalisation. Capital adequacy has improved significantly in other segmentstoo i.e., financial institutions in the regulatory domain of the Reserve Bank (except forIFCI), non-bank financial companies (NBFCs) and other segments of the bankingindustry except for cooperative banks. Banks have been making equity offerings andissuances of subordinated debt for inclusion under tier-II capital under transparent andnon-discretionary guidelines. A cumulative amount of capital of Rs.867 crore has beenreturned by public sector banks to the Government.Capital adequacy in banks and financial institutions has become a matter of considerableinternational attention, particularly after the Asian crisis. The draft of a new CapitalAccord, proposed for implementation in 2006, envisages increased risk sensitivity ofcapital ratios, refinement of measures of credit risk including a greater role for externalcredit rating, flexibility and national discretion rather than a one-size-fits-all approach.The Reserve Bank’s position has been that the new Accord should focus primarily oncomplex and internationally active banks while national choices of methodologies forassigning risk weights on capital ratios be accommodated within its framework. India isalso engaging in collaborative studies to assess the potential impact of the new Accord.Banks are being prepared for tightening of the norms for asset classification withconvergence to international standards by March 2005. The 90-day norm for recognitionof loan impairment will come into operation from 2004-05 and this is now applicable forall segments of the financial system. Phased provisioning and charging of interest onmonthly rests are seen as immediate steps in the preparation.Exposure norms in respect of single/group borrowers have been set up to limit the creditrisk in banks’ portfolios and are linked to capital. Additional disclosures have beenprescribed in notes to accounts of balance sheets. Asset liability management systems arebeing constantly refined with tolerance levels prescribed on all time bands forliquidity/interest rate sensitivity mismatches. There has been considerable progress in theimplementation of risk management systems although there is a need for substantialupgradation of management information systems, preparation of contingency plans andstress testing. Internal systems need to be developed further for quantifying andmonitoring operational risk.A major drag on financial sector reforms in India is the slow progress in the managementof non-performing assets (NPA). Although net NPAs have undergone a steady declinesince 1992-93, they are still high by the international standard of about 2 per cent. Thecumulative provisions against loan losses at 43 per cent of gross NPAs is also extremelylow by international standards. From the regulator’s perspective, NPA managementinvolves four steps i.e., assessment, provisioning, recovery and prevention. A menuapproach is adopted in India which involves intensification of recovery with ongoingtightening of norms for assessment and provisioning.Settlement advisory committees were introduced in 1999 to provide a simplified non-discretionary and non-discriminatory mechanism to deal with the stock or ‘overhang’ ofNPAs especially in the small sector. The effectiveness of debt recovery tribunals wasenhanced through the amendment of relevant legislation in 2000. In the recent period,there has been a substantial increase in the number of cases disposed of by thesetribunals. In 2001, a corporate debt restructuring mechanism as prevalent in the UK andSouth East Asian countries was finalised for restructuring debts of viable corporateentities. Lok Adalats have proved to be an effective institution for settlement of similardues. The Union Budget for 2002-03 announced the setting up of a pilot AssetReconstruction Company with the participation of banks, financial institutions andmultilateral agencies. The new Credit Information Bureau will provide an institutionalmechanism for sharing of information on borrowers.A recent landmark development which should have a long term favourable impact inreducing the level of NPAs is the passage of the Securitisation and Reconstruction ofFinancial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act. It lays out the conditions to besatisfied for the establishment of securitisation or reconstruction companies, the terms foracquisition of financial assets by these companies, enforcement of security interest,dispute settlement procedures, prudential norms, offences and penalties. The Actempowers banks and financial institutions with appropriate legal authority to speed up therecovery of the stock of impaired assets through a one-time cleaning of balance sheets.This is expected to improve their financial health and functioning considerably.Efforts have been simultaneously undertaken to broaden and deepen the various segmentsof the financial market spectrum. The call money market is emerging as a pure inter-bankmarket and activity is rising in the repo market for non-banks. The development ofmoney market segments has gone hand in hand with rationalisation of standing liquidityfacilities at the Reserve Bank. In the gilt market, there is greater transparency, newinstruments have been introduced, and there is a progressive widening of the investorbase. With the operationalisation of the Negotiated Dealing System, price and tradeinformation is available on a near real time basis. The Clearing Corporation of India hasalso launched net foreign exchange clearing in India on a guaranteed settlement basis.These developments bring us closer to our goal of transforming our financial system intoa resilient and competitive structure with market participants operating in differentsegments of the financial markets catering to varying classes of financial assets andliabilities.IV. Transparency and Market DisciplineThere is now a wider appreciation that high quality financial reporting – described as the‘cornerstone of market discipline’ - is essential for the efficiency and stability of thefinancial system. Structural changes underway in the financial system have only served toraise the premium on market disclosure. Globalisation has brought with it stringentquality criteria as the emphasis is increasingly on comparability of information. Pillar IIIin the revised Basel Capital Accord is the most recent example. Financial innovationshave made the interpretation of disclosures more difficult, testing severely existingmeasurement techniques. At the same time, availability of information is vital since it isthe basis on which perceptions and expectations are formed, which ultimately drivemarkets and even business cycles.Information conveyed by the balance sheet, income and cash flow statements is the breadand butter of traditional accounting. Risk information is supplied primarily throughsupplementary risk disclosures. Both are important for an efficient allocation of resourcesand financial discipline. We have been intensifying ongoing efforts to make the balancesheet and profit and loss accounts of banks more reflective of their true financial health.From March, 2003 banks would be required to conform to Accounting Standards issuedby the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India. Banks are also required to makeadditional disclosures in notes to accounts on risk features such as movement inprovisions held towards non-performing assets and depreciation of investments, capitalmarket exposures and loans subject to corporate debt restructuring. These requirementsare applicable to financial institutions as well. In the April, 2002 Monetary and CreditPolicy Statement banks have been required to announce the maximum spread over theirprime lending rates (PLR) along with their PLR announcements, the minimum andmaximum rates charged to borrowers, deposit rates, the effective annualised return to thedepositor and processing and service charges. These disclosures serve the interests ofcustomers, besides fostering healthy competition among banks. The Reserve Bank, too, isexpanding its disclosure to the markets, even while setting for itself exacting standards ofquality and timeliness. A recent example is the release of daily cumulative balances heldby banks with the Reserve Bank, over and above its daily, weekly, monthly and lessfrequent disclosure of information and analysis of a wide array of macroeconomic andfinancial variables.In India, credit-related information in the banking sector is confidential in nature andlenders are bound by the secrecy embodied in the present legal framework. The CreditInformation Bureau is intended to economise on the production costs associated with thesupply of financial information for a potential clientele comprising 101 banks, 22 non-banking finance companies and 30 housing finance companies in India, as well as a largenumber of co-operative banks and other regional credit grantors. The Bureau expects toprovide more effectively organised information and to circumvent the constraint oflimited infrastructure of some of the participants in the financial system. The Bureau isexpected to launch commercial operations in the first quarter of 2003.The content of information is important and perhaps the most difficult to address in thecontext of financial sector reforms. The key challenge is to close the gap betweeneconomic and accounting valuations. The prevailing mixture of historical cost and mark-to-market accounting is unsatisfactory. For traded assets and liabilities, marking tomarket is suitable. For non-traded instruments, imputing valuations in a verifiable manneris a major challenge. Since September 30, 2000 in line with international best practice,banks are required to classify their investment portfolios into ‘held to maturity’,‘available for sale’ and ‘held for trading’ categories, the first being in the nature ofpermanent investments at historical valuation, not exceeding 25 per cent of totalinvestments, but the latter two categories being marked-to-market at yearly and monthlyintervals (or even more frequently), respectively.Banks are being encouraged to set up Investment Fluctuation Reserve (IFR) accounts aspart of prudent policies for utilising the gains from sale of investments in securities in thecurrent benign interest rate regime so that they are adequately protected against anyreversal of the interest rate environment. Realised gains from sale of securities can betransferred to these IFRs, which vary between 5 and 10 per cent of bank portfolios andqualify for inclusion in tier II capital. Unrealised gains should not be taken to the incomeaccount or to the IFR.As regards the reliability of disclosure, the choice is narrowing down world wide to rule-based versus principle-based standards. Undoubtedly, principles need to be given addedcontent before they can be applied effectively and enforced. The growing complexity offinancial innovations is defeating the sustainable application of detailed rules: they can becircumvented through creative accounting. It is for this reason that a decisive preferenceis emerging for principle-based disclosure. There is also a distinct shift in the approach ofthe Reserve Bank, for instance, with circulars and instructions being replaced rapidly byguidelines, guidance notes, illustrations of conformity nuances and extensiveconsultations with banks on recommendations of relevant working groups before they areimplemented. Indeed, similar considerations are pushing prudential authorities away fromquantitative rules towards qualitative supervisory oversight in recent years.V. Structural Changes in the Banking SystemFinancial systems worldwide are undergoing structural transformation. Technologicalinnovation, deregulation of financial services at the national level, external financialliberalisation, and organisational changes in the corporate world are some of the globalfactors driving the transformation. Banking and finance in emerging economies is alsocaught up in this change. In these economies, in addition to global developments,country-specific factors are motivating the structural shifts. Consequently, two separatedirections of reform are evident. There is an expansion of the financial system due tovacation of policy interventions in entry, exit and operations, the application of newadvances in information technology and in general, a greater emphasis on competitionand market-based outcomes. Almost contemporaneously, there is a strong drive towardsconsolidation in a quest for exploiting core competitiveness and for developing “niche”strategies.In India, the primary force for transformation was structural reforms launched in theaftermath of the balance of payments crisis of 1990-91. It was recognised that a vibrant,resilient and competitive financial sector is vital for sustaining the reform process in thereal sectors of the economy. Significantly, financial sector reforms in India were pre-emptive and proactive rather than a result of banking crises, as has been the experience ofseveral emerging economies. Secondly, the momentum of change in the financial systemhas been the motivation for upgrading the technological infrastructure in Indian bankingand finance rather than the other way round. In that sense, the Indian financial system hasbeen a late entrant in the expressway created by the information and communicationtechnology revolution. Thirdly, competitive pressure – a major force of changeworldwide – has been reforms-driven rather than a driver of the transformation. Finally, alarge measure of the impetus for change has come from reforms in the regulatory andsupervisory regime and the aspiration to apply international best practices to the country-specific situation.The role of the public sector banks has come under close scrutiny in the recent period. Itis necessary to recognise that these banks have played a critical role in the developmentof the Indian economy in the period 1969-90, particularly in the spread of banking andmonetisation of the economy, the mobilisation of savings and their allocation by planpriorities. For all economies in the early and intermediate stages of development, creditmarkets face a persistent excess demand, reflecting the existing resource constraints.Moreover, market processes can well exclude the genuine credit needs of the weakersections of society which do not have the competitive strength to bid for funds in themarket for bank credit. Public ownership in Indian banking was intended to address bothconcerns i.e., the rationing of credit in the face of excess demand not cleared by themarket, and the channelling of bank credit flow to the economically disadvantagedsections of society. Over the period 1970-90, a massive expansion of bank branchesoccurred, and credit allocations ensured some equity in the distribution of bank credit.At the same time, however, there was erosion in the financial health of public sectorbanks and deterioration in the quality of customer service. Within the ambit of financialsector reforms therefore, the focus since the early 1990s has been on the viability,efficiency and competitiveness of banks and financial institutions. Liberalisation andderegulation has to go hand in hand with a greater emphasis on consolidation,productivity, asset quality and profitability. There is also an urgent need for Governmentto divest substantial shareholding to the public, so that these banks can respondeffectively to changing market conditions. Under the present circumstances,improvement in the cost structure of the banks and work culture are important priorities.In order to enable the public sector banks to deal with the new capital requirements as perinternational guidelines, recapitalisation was initiated in 1993, aggregating Rs. 20,446crore by the end of the 1990s. The Verma Committee’s recommendation thatrecapitalisation of ‘weak’ public sector banks be accompanied by conditionality relatingto managerial and operational aspects of the banks’ functioning was endorsed in theUnion Budget, 2000-01. Accordingly, in 2001-02, a sum of Rs.1,300 crore was providedto one of the weak nationalised banks. Two of the weak banks have already turnedaround and are reporting profits and a capital adequacy ratio of 9 per cent. The last one isalso going through a turnaround. Recapitalisation is associated with a monitorable reformprogramme and operational restructuring to ensure that flow problems in a bank’sperformance are dealt with.Mergers have reflected efforts to reap economies of scale and scope through jointproduction of financial services and one-stop delivery wherever synergies in servicesupply can be exploited to lower costs of production. In general, these mergers havecome about as a result of government efforts to restructure inefficient national financialsystems. Market-driven consolidation is a relatively new phenomenon in these countries.A critical issue in almost all emerging economies is a reassessment of the ownership ofthe State in the financial system and a redefinition of the role of State-owned banks andfinancial institutions. The changing structure of the banking and financial systems inemerging economies has implications for systemic stability and the supervisory regime.A major structural change in our financial system is the infusion of competition. Theenabling conditions for a more competitive environment initially took the form of shiftsin the policy regime. Statutory pre-emptions were progressively lowered, interest rateswere deregulated and restrictions on entry and exit were eased. Financial markets weredeveloped to enable financial intermediaries to deal in assets and liabilities of varyingmaturities and risk profiles. Activity restrictions were eased and banks can now undertakevarious types of activities reserved earlier for development financial institutions.Likewise, the term-lending financial institutions have been allowed to undertake workingcapital financing. Elements of this growing convergence have determined the pace andsequencing of the approach to universal banking in the recent years.Within the banking system, there is heightened competition with the introduction of newgeneration private sector banks. In January 2001, revised guidelines were issued for entryof new banks in the private sector. Despite the preponderant share of domestic banks inbanking activity in India, foreign banks have been a source of competition, at leastpotentially, given their use of sophisticated technology, risk monitoring analysis andexposure management. In recent years, the policy thrust has been to level the playingfield for domestic and foreign banks. For example, foreign banks that were earlierallowed to operate only branches but not subsidiaries, are now free to choose to set upeither branches or subsidiaries under common banking regulations including lendingnorms. Appropriate legislative changes are also under consideration of the Government.Foreign direct investment up to 49 per cent has been allowed in private sector banks andup to 20 per cent in nationalised banks. Guidelines have been issued for the entry ofbanks into insurance business either as joint venture participants or to take up strategicinvestment for providing infrastructure and services support without any contingentliability.VI. Issues in Supervision and RegulationRecent international financial developments have underscored the critical role of theregulatory and supervisory function in ensuring the health and stability of the financialsystem. There is now a worldwide debate on how to strengthen financial regulation evenfurther, including proactively, to contend with the dangers posed by creative accountingpractices, even as the depressed state of economic activity exerts conflicting pulls on theextent of supervisory rigour. At the same time, the impact of technological advancement,financial liberalisation and the degree of integration between domestic and internationalfinancial markets has rendered the conduct of oversight of the financial system a highlycomplex task.Regulatory and supervisory authorities need to be regarded as providing a range ofservices to the community. This includes the establishment of specific rules of behaviourfor participants in the financial system, monitoring the observance of the rules, andgeneral supervision of the behaviour of financial entities. Unlike other services, however,these are not supplied through market processes but laid down by the regulator afternecessary consultations. The primary need for regulation arises from the fact thatconsumers of financial services are not in a position to evaluate the soundness and safetyof financial entities since even the most stringent laws regarding enforceability ofcontracts cannot protect for post-contract-signing behaviour. Therefore, the rationale forfinancial regulation lies in the economic costs imposed on society by the external effectsof financial market failure which can threaten systemic stability. There is also a potentialfor gridlocks in the financial system due to adverse selection and moral hazard problems.At the same time, substantial benefits can accrue from correction of marketimperfections, reduced transaction costs, and in general, providing people with a financialsystem they can trust.In India, progressive strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework has beena key element of financial sector reforms since their inception. There has been progress inachieving international best practices in banking supervision and this has been noted evenin external audits conducted by the IMF. Within the process of convergence with the bestpractices, fine-tuning is undertaken keeping in view the country-specific circumstances.An example of this is the approach being evolved towards consolidated supervision andthe compliance of banks with accounting standards.In recent years, there has been a shift in emphasis from micro-regulation to macro-management, supported by a tightening of prudential norms and improvements in thefunctioning of financial markets. A clearer definition of the regulatory role of the ReserveBank is also being considered within the broader debate on the conflict of interestbetween ownership and regulation. The supervisory strategy of the Board for FinancialSupervision, which is entrusted with the supervision of banks, all-India financialinstitutions, non-bank financial companies and systemically important institutions,consists of combining a restructured system of on-site inspection with off-sitesurveillance, enhancing the role of external auditors and strengthening corporategovernance, internal controls and audit procedures. Under the OSMOS system, monthlyreturns provide information on exposure to sensitive sectors, market risks and macro-prudential early warning indicators. Banks need to prepare for switching to risk-basedsupervision by 2003 by identifying information gaps in the compilation of risk profilesand training to personnel. The supervisory follow-up process will then involve amonitorable action plan including remedial actions and timely corrective steps.Banks are being encouraged to improve the reliability and robustness of their riskmanagement, management information and supervisory reporting systems. A scheme ofprompt corrective action based on early warning triggers is being developed as asupervisory tool. Rule-based actions would be delineated not only for shortfall in capital,but also for other indicators of incipient weakness. Trigger points would be set for threeparameters – capital, non-performing assets, return on assets – and for each trigger a setof mandatory and discretionary prompt corrective actions would be laid down. Inaddition to macro-prudential indicators of financial vulnerability being reviewed in India,financial soundness indicators have been proposed for monitoring the health andsoundness of financial institutions and markets. The Reserve Bank and the Governmenthave initiated a wide range of legal reforms to enable the regulatory and supervisoryregime to keep pace with advancements in information and communication technology.The envisaged reforms relate to electronic cheques, cheque truncation, securitisation andreconstruction of financial assets, the payment system and money laundering. Withregard to the cooperative banking sector, the Reserve Bank has proposed that there isneed for an apex supervisory body to deal with the existing regulatory overlap amongmultiple agencies. In respect of the financial institutions, the Reserve Bank has been infavour of divesting all or part of its holdings to mitigate the conflict of interest that couldpotentially arise in regulating the entities.Regulation is largely perceived to be free or costless and as such, tends to be over-demanded by the public and over-supplied by the regulator. However, regulation involvesa range of costs which are ultimately reflected in the price of financial intermediation. Infact, the focus in the current debate is whether regulation should be imposed externallythrough prescriptive and detailed rules or alternatively, by the regulator creating incentivecompatible contracts that reward appropriate behaviour. The main responsibility for riskmanagement and compliant behaviour has to be placed on the management of financialinstitutions. In the ultimate reckoning, it is necessary to recognise that there are distinctlimits to what regulation and supervision can achieve. In particular, it does not provide afool-proof of assured contract of safety and does not absolve either management orconsumers of their responsibilities.VII. Corporate GovernanceThe recent spate of interlocked occurrences of corporate distress and accountingirregularities, including financial restatements by mega corporates in the United Stateshave severely undermined investor confidence and pulled global financial markets intothe steepest declines since September 11, 2001. It is increasingly recognised that thehealth of corporate entities has societal implications and that high ethical standards arenecessary to ensure their accountability to society. In particular, it has become vital to setup firewalls against what has come to be termed as aggressive accounting practices thatultimately compromise the stake of shareholders in the corporate entity. Today, corporategovernance means much more than the conduct of business in accordance withshareholders’ desires, a statement attributed to Nobel laureate Milton Friedman. It hascome to encompass systems by which business corporations are directed and controlledand thus takes into account not just the interests of shareholders but others who have astake in the well-being of the corporate enterprise. ‘Doing everything better’ is howcorporate governance is defined today. It covers in its ambit risk assessment andproviding for risk cover, early warning systems against failure as well as promptcorrective action. Good corporate governance encompasses appropriate checks andbalances through external and internal audits and accounting, clear division ofresponsibility, both horizontal and vertical, disclosure and transparency. While there areseveral models of corporate governance, the choice essentially is between the ‘outsider’model of the US and the UK which entails separation of ownership and management, andthe insider model of Europe and Asia, where a small group of interconnectedshareholders exercise control over management. Public sector banks in India are aprototype of the outsider model while private sector banks, non-bank finance companiesare more in the insider model tradition. Most Indian companies follow insider models ofgovernance.The public interest in corporate governance dates back to the late 1970s when, in theaftermath of the Watergate scandal, legislation specifically mandating the establishment,maintenance and review of systems of internal control, was passed in the US.Subsequently in 1985, the Savings and Loan crisis led to the formation of the TreadwayCommission. Throughout the 1980s, there was a clear recognition that the existing legalinfrastructure was inadequate to deal with corporate failures due to poor businesspractices. The Cadbury Committee’s code of best practices in the UK in 1991, theCombined Code of the London Stock Exchange, The Blue Ribbon Committee of the US,the OECD’s Code of 1998, the joint efforts of the World Bank and the OECD to developbenchmarks in corporate governance that qualify as best practices under the standardsand codes identified by the Financial Stability Forum are all reflections of the debate thathas dominated the last twenty years.Several forces have been driving the debate i.e., deregulation and financial liberalisation,systemic implications of certain failures of corporate governance and the fear ofcontagion, to name a few. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act, signed into law in the US in July2002, represents a response to the series of accounting irregularities in the US. Itrecognises the importance of sound information for improving the allocative efficiency ofmarkets. The Act emphasises timely and reliable public disclosure of financial statementsand changes in ownership of shares due to trading activity, independence of auditcommittees and obligations, strengthening of criminal penalties and addressing ofconflict of interest by security analysts. These elements are expected to make for farreaching changes in the management of corporate entities.As I mentioned earlier, variants of the two dominant models of corporate governanceexist in India with important differences from the US, Europe or Asia. While the outsidermodel may appear intuitively appealing, country-specific factors have to be taken intoaccount. For instance, although there is separation of ownership and management inpublic sector banks and financial institutions, there are weak checks and balances. TheChief Executive Officer (CEO) as well as the Board is appointed by the owner i.e., theGovernment. As such, the Board itself has no role in continuation or otherwise of theCEO irrespective of performance. Further, the fact that staff issues are outside thepurview of management also limits the role of the Board substantially.There has been considerable thinking on corporate governance issues in India too. TheKumaramangalam Birla Committee appointed by the SEBI in 1999 framed codes ofdisclosure for corporates. The R. H. Patil Advisory Group on Corporate Governancemade important recommendations regarding the responsibilities of boards to stake/shareholders, selection procedures for appointment of directors, oversight of corporategovernance practices, amendment of the Companies Act for enforcing good governance,to name a few. The M. S. Verma Advisory Group on Banking Supervision advocateduniform quality of corporate governance, irrespective of ownership. It recommendedclear lines of responsibility and accountability for boards as well as for seniormanagement throughout the organisation. The Consultative Group of Directors of Banks/FIs under Dr A. S. Ganguly, Member of the Board for Financial Supervision has maderecommendations to strengthen the supervisory role of the boards of banks. The Grouphas also focused on the role and responsibilities of directors.In view of the sweeping changes taking place in the environment in which the financialsystem operates, corporate governance has never been more important than now. Asemphasised earlier, corporate governance relates not merely to the individual firms orbanks, but to the stability of the entire financial structure. The approach should be to havein place the best standards of governance as early as possible. In many areas, we havemade progress in setting out what needs to be done. It is important now to put in placeimplementation and enforcement mechanisms, early warning systems and promptcorrective action strategies.VIII. Technology, Payment and Settlement systemThe information technology revolution has brought about a fundamental transformationushering in, as Alvin Toffler describes it, the fourth wave. Perhaps no other sector hasbeen affected by advances in technology as much as banking and finance. It has becomethe most important factor for dealing with the intensifying competition and the rapidproliferation of financial innovations. It has enabled, in general, raising the efficiency offinancial intermediation in the face of ever-rising volumes of transactions, falling marginsand more empowered customer expectations. In particular, there are four or five keyareas in which the financial system has experienced the benefits of the technologyrevolution: product development, market infrastructure, risk control and market reach.The interaction of technology with globalisation has contributed to the expansion offinancial markets beyond national borders, heralding the end of geography. In theprocess, technology has changed the contours of three major functions of financialintermediaries: access to liquidity, transformation of assets and monitoring of risks.The Indian financial system is quickly adapting itself to these developments and isacquiring a customer-centric focus. The proliferation of Automated Teller Machines(ATMs), networking of these ATMs and Shared Payment Network based ATMs is afeature that has been welcomed by the banking public. Other innovations already withinthe domain of banks and financial systems in India include Internet Banking, ElectronicFunds Transfer and ‘Anywhere/ Anytime Banking’, all of which have a high level oftechnology embedded in the systems offering these services. Many of the older banks aremigrating towards the implementation of Core Banking or Clustered Solutions whichwould contribute significantly towards increasing customer satisfaction. In all this,business process re-engineering becomes an essential concomitant to ensure best resultsin technology upgradation.In recent years, the Reserve Bank has assigned priority to the upgradation oftechnological infrastructure in the Indian financial system. Efforts have been made tomodernise clearing and payment through MICR based cheque clearing, ElectronicClearing Services and Funds Transfer (ECS and EFT) and the Centralised FundsManagement System. For the traditional paper-based cheque systems, introduction ofcheque truncation and imaging of cheques is envisaged to reduce the time lags inrealisation of cheques. Substantial efforts have gone into developing what has beendescribed as the ‘plumbing’ in the financial architecture - a modern, efficient, integratedand secure payment and settlement system for the financial services industry in India.Significant milestones in this path are the Negotiated Dealing System for transactions ingovernment securities and the Clearing Corporation of India. In order to establish anefficient, cost-effective and dependable communication backbone, the INFINET has beenset up. About 150 banks, primary dealers and mutual funds have become members.Structured Financial Messaging Solutions are being implemented for secure messagetransfers across members of the INFINET (Indian Financial Network). Common inter-bank application software has been designed, taking into account the securityrequirements. The medium-term goal is the operationalisation of Real Time GrossSettlement which would enable real time funds transfers across different banks andthereby the optimal utilisation of funds. Critical to the future of the payment andsettlement system of the country is the ongoing research in the IDRBT on messagingsystems, security and design specifications for RTGS.Adequate security is a prerequisite for a modern, technology-intensive payment andsettlement system, especially one functioning in a highly networked environment.Information Systems Audit is another area which needs to be adequately addressed. Someprogress has been made in defining what we need but implementation would require asystem-wide collaboration to obtain the best results. It is with this objective that theReserve Bank has recently circulated the recommendations of its Working Group onInformation Systems Security for the Banking and Financial Sector among all banks andfinancial institutions. Legal changes to deal with electronic data interchange and legalwherewithal for participants in the payment system are on the anvil. These changes areintended to enable the benchmarking of our payment and settlement system againstinternational standards such as the Core Principles for Systemically Important PaymentSystems of the Bank for International Settlements.The future of banking and finance hinges around exploiting the opportunities thrown upby the technology explosion. This requires the combined efforts of all participants in thefinancial system. In December, 2001 the Reserve Bank set out its vision of the road aheadin the document Payments System in India to share this vision with all participants andthe nature and direction of reforms needed to achieve it. The collective goal should be tomake use of synergies between technology and finance to maximise the benefits tosociety.IX. Human Resource DevelopmentThe content of human resource development (HRD) has been changing in tune with thebusiness environment. Nonetheless, the core function of HRD is to facilitate performanceimprovement and/or personal growth within the institutional goal of delivering value tocustomers and maximisation of value-added. Capital and technology are replicable, butnot human resources. Accordingly, the fundamental principle of human resourcemanagement (HRM) is to treat people as an asset rather than as a mere factor ofproduction. The emphasis on human resource management is in the common interests ofmanagement and the workforce: by enabling employees to actualise their full potential,the collective goal is achieved. Personnel policies and practices including elements like‘institutional culture’ have to be integrated with the business strategy. This involvesdeveloping the employees’ skills, knowledge and attitudes on an ongoing basis, creatingand maintaining a ‘learning’ environment, focusing on management development andcareer planning.The response of Indian banks and financial institutions to the challenges imposed by thechanging economic and business environment will mainly depend on the extent to whichthey leverage their primary strength, namely, their human resources. Certain rigiditiesconfront the banking system in this regard. The large public ownership has sometimesoperated as a drag on human resource development, particularly in skill development,management change and career planning. The recommendations of the secondNarasimham Committee could provide useful guidance to banks particularly in recruitingskilled manpower from the open market, including lateral induction of experts andredeployment of existing staff in new businesses and activities after suitable training. Amajor challenge for many banks will be to develop the special competencies and skills forcredit appraisal and risk management in an environment of deregulation and openness.Obviously, information technology is a key input in human resource development. Theimportance of building and reinforcing a corporate vision and culture that fosterscreativity and recognises talent and merit cannot be overemphasised.In my earlier addresses to the BECON I have emphasised the need to integrate bankeconomists with the mainstream of operational activity in the financial system in India. Ido believe that economists can perform an extremely useful function in the progress ofIndian banking and finance. Economists have traditionally been well placed to advise onstrategies which depend on macroeconomic developments, and to identify developmentalconstraints. Economic appraisal is another traditional area of the involvement ofeconomists and cost-benefit analysis is regarded as synonymous with the economists’work in the realm of finance. In the rapidly changing environment, the work ofeconomists has broadened beyond the confines of macroeconomic and financial analysisand abstract research. Today, the role of the economist is increasingly being viewed asproviding specialist inputs to assist administrators in formulating departmental policiesand programmes on the one hand, and in placing before management an appraisal of theoverall view of the institution’s goals and functioning, on the other. Thus economists playa key role throughout the organisation in helping define policy, strategy and programmeimplementation. Economics itself is a ‘cross-cutting’ discipline, and economists areparticularly suited to apply their expertise in a range of areas in which a financialinstitution interacts with its environment.In most risk assessment and asset pricing models, for example, there is the assumptionthat the law of large numbers prevails. The assumption of ‘normality’ is convenient sinceit does away with specification and testing the complex relationships that rule financialmarkets. Yet, as Chairman Alan Greenspan of the US Federal Reserve System points out,the biggest problem in the evaluation of risk is the “fat-tail” problem and the prevalenceof “non-normality”. We need economists to correctly determine the underlying model forimportant portfolio decisions.As the organisational structure of the financial system changes, institutional economics islikely to provide directions to manage the forces of change. Economics itself is becomingmulti-disciplinary to cope with these pressures and practical research is drivingeconomists beyond the frontiers of their vocation. Here, a good starting point foreconomists is impact assessment of changes in organisational structure, managementpractices and employer-employee relationships on productivity, operational efficiencyand institutional dynamics. This would involve designing monitoring and evaluationframeworks, in measuring and judging impact and in feeding results and practice throughinto new interventions by the institution into the financial system.Economists need to assist in the development of financial engineering labs, whethervirtual or real, to handle the profusion of financial innovation and product and processchanges. This often requires the interaction of economists from various corespecialisations, statisticians and experts in business and finance. Indeed, thesecompulsions are bringing about a transformation in research, data base management andinformation analysis – the core interests of economists.India has produced economists of the finest calibre in every generation. Their work hasbeen recognised internationally and honoured. There is no reason why our banks andfinancial system should not use this innate strength to greater advantage. It may be usefulfor banks and financial institutions to sponsor educational courses in our universities andtechnical institutes which develop a cadre of economists which is specific to theirrequirements. Recruitment strategies, career planning and appropriate personneldevelopment avenues can bring forth the best in them and encourage them to makevaluable contributions to the development of the industry.X. ConclusionTo sum up, I believe that we have made progress in several areas – strengthening thebalance sheets of regulated financial entities through risk-weighted capital adequacyratios; setting out a convergence path for asset classification norms with internationalstandards; expanding the ambit of prudential norms to include monitoring exposures tocredit risk, liquidity and interest rate risk; developing internal systems for riskmanagement; enhancing transparency and market disclosure and thereby, accountability;improving management practices and corporate governance; and managing the pressuresof structural changes in our financial system. We have also made considerable headwayin refining the regulatory and supervisory function, and fine-tuning it to the countryspecific circumstances. There is now a greater appreciation all around of the priority thatis attached to financial stability, even while efforts are intensifying to improve theefficiency of financial intermediation, the performance of financial intermediaries and theevolution of financial markets.It is also a matter of satisfaction that the overall policy environment has fosteredmacroeconomic stability, complementing financial stability and providing a measure ofprotection from the turbulent international financial events over the decade gone by. Inother areas, however, our progress has been slow. These continue to remain areas ofvulnerability from the point of view of systemic stability. We have not been able to bringdown the levels of NPAs in our financial system to internationally acceptable levels. Themanagement of NPAs is proving to be daunting in terms of the sheer magnitude and thisis acting as a drag on operational efficiency and transaction costs. The recent legislativechanges for faster recovery of NPAs are most welcome, but actual results on the groundwill depend on early resolution of potential conflict between what is legally possible andwhat is practical, reasonable and feasible. We also need to cover considerable ground indeveloping robust internal control systems, management information systems and earlywarning triggers. These are going to become prerequisites in the evolution of prudentialnorms envisaged over the medium term.We have to redouble our efforts to adapt to the advances in technology which arechanging the contours of financial intermediation worldwide. Unless we catch up, thetechnology lag could widen with adverse implications for efficiency and costs. We alsoneed to imbue our financial institutions with flexibility to absorb and adapt toinstitutional change. Our banks must shed their inward-looking focus and develop anoutward orientation. And, most important of all, we have to invest more resources intohuman resource development with a focus on the quality, timeliness and delivery offinancial services. The human resource model of the future will require professionals tobe both driving and anticipating change, understanding the complexities of the newbusiness environment and forces shaping it.In financial systems worldwide, today’s buzzwords are competition, consolidation andstability. Proactive strengthening of prudential regulations, enhanced transparency andaccountability, initiatives in setting best practices of corporate governance, andcomprehensive, sound and effective regulation and supervision have together played akey role in creating a secure and conducive environment for the functioning of thefinancial system. There is currently a strong emphasis on upgrading the technologicalinfrastructure for our financial institutions and markets. This is expected to providesignificant gains in terms of the efficiency and cost of intermediation. The full benefits oftechnological transformation, especially in terms of dealing with the vulnerabilities thatpersist in our system, will hinge upon enabling changes in the legal architecture.I believe that the driving force in the path ahead will be the immense skill capabilitiesthat we possess in terms of human resources. I am glad to see the emphasis on humanresource development among the themes being addressed in this year’s conference. In theyears to come, this ‘human’ bias is likely to get stronger and the quality of humanresources would become the cutting edge of competitiveness. A forward-lookingapproach to our long-term vision must focus on building human resources in a continuouscycle of competency and development. I leave this thought with you for yourconsideration, and wish you success in your deliberations.Thank you.* I am thankful to Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra of the Reserve Bank of India for his helpin the preparation of this address.
