I am thankful to Professor Nirvikar Singh for giving me this opportunity to bewith a group of very eminent economists, with deep understanding of various aspects ofIndia’s economy. I have set, for myself, a humble task of presenting before you, aconsolidated account of financial reform measures undertaken so far, and indicate wherewe were before reform and where we are now. Comments and outlook in regard to someof the measures would also be in order, keeping in view internationally acceptablestandards or practices. The main focus would naturally be on the RBI’s role in bankingsector and financial markets. I will conclude by highlighting what emerge as the mostThe financial system in India built a vast net work of financial institutions andmarkets over time, and the sector is dominated by banking sector which accounts forabout two-thirds of the assets of the organised financial sector. The first phase of currentreform of financial sector was initiated in 1992, based on the recommendations ofCommittee on Financial System (CFS or Narasimham Committee). Briefly stated, themain features of the financial sector reforms undertaken so far are: First, financial sectorreforms (FSR) were undertaken as part of overall economic reform. Second, while thereform process itself commenced in India well after many developing countriesundertook reform, FSR were undertaken early in the reform cycle. Third, these wereorderly as designed by a high-level committee taking into account the prevailingcircumstances. Fourth, while on the regulatory aspects and relevant financial ratios, therewas discernible progress, on structural aspects, especially public ownership and incentivestructures including autonomy of public sector banks, reform process fell short ofexpectations of CFS. Fifth, the reforms have brought about some efficiency, as forexample evidenced by recent reduction in interest spreads or increasing trend inhousehold savings, especially financial savings. Sixth, the financial system and inparticular the banking system displays continued stability relative to other countries.While during the initial stages of the FSR, India was often criticised as being far toogradual, the financial crisis in the past two years which have afflicted a number ofdeveloping countries, not to talk about some developed countries, have shown the meritsFinally, the progress that has been made in a substantial yet non-disruptivemanner, has given confidence to launch what has been described as second generation or*Ajit for background notes. Mohanty, and Dr. D. M.S. Mohanty, I am also thankful to Messrs D. Malegam for his kind advice on accounting standards. I am thankful to Mr. A.Prasad for their valuable assistance. Gopinath and Dr. Shyamala I am grateful to Mrs. Santa Cruz on November 20, 1998.“Growth, Governance and Empowerment: The Future of India’s Economy” at University of California,Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference on Keynote address by Dr. Y. V. second phase of reforms - especially in the banking sector.of India’s gradual reforms.Main Featurescritical issues that need to be currently addressed.Financial Sector Reform: Review and Prospects*In this background, a second Committee under Mr. Narasimham, who chaired theCFS, was constituted to advice Government on banking sector reforms (CBSR ) . TheReport of the Committee (April 1998) provides a framework for the current phase ofreforms. The RBI has already acted on many of the recommendations as perannouncements made in Governor Jalan’s October 1998 Monetary and Credit PolicyRBI’s approach to reform in financial sector has been ably articulated by Dr. C.Rangarajan in his speeches as Governor, RBI. The approach that governs both the firstpancha-sutra First, cautious and proper sequencing of various measures – giving adequate timeto the various agents to undertake the necessary norms; e.g., the gradual introduction ofSecond, mutually reinforcing measures, that as a package would be enablingreform but non-disruptive of the confidence in the system, e.g., combining reduction inrefinance with reduction in the cash reserve ratio (CRR) which obviously improved bankThird, complementarity between reforms in banking sector and changes in fiscal,external and monetary policies, especially in terms of co-ordination with Government;e.g., recapitalisation of Government owned banks coupled with prudential regulation;abolition of ad hoc treasury bills and its replacement with a system of ways and meansFourth, developing financial infrastructure in terms of supervisory body, auditstandards, technology and legal framework; e.g., establishment of Board for FinancialSupervision, setting up of the Institute for Development and Research in BankingTechnology, legal amendment to the RBI Act on Non-Banking Financial CompaniesFifth, taking initiatives to nurture, develop and integrate money, debt and forexmarkets, in a way that all major banks have an opportunity to develop skills, participateand benefit; e.g., gradual reduction in the minimum period for maturity of term depositsand permitting banks to determine the penalty structure in respect of prematurewithdrawal, syndication in respect of loans, flexibility to invest in money and debt marketReform measures have been grouped, for convenience, and presented in AnnexureI. The pre-reform position, reform measures undertaken on an year wise basis, currentstatus and comments on outlook are indicated. I will mention here only some significantMajor problem faced by the banking system was on account of constraints,mainly in terms of massive preemption of banks’ resources to finance Government’sbudgetary needs and administered interest rates. Removal of these constraints meant aplanned reduction in statutory preemption and a gradual deregulation of interest rateprescriptions. Since FSR, total effective preemption has been brought down from 54 percent to less than 35 per cent. The effective CRR which was as high as 16.5 per cent has2Preemptionsaspects to link up with critical issues that we intend identifying.Reform Measures and Outlookinstruments, greater freedom to banks to borrow from and invest abroad.(NBFCs).advances, coupled with reforms in debt markets.profitability.prudential norms.or five principles. and second phase is similar and, could be summarised as RBI’S ApproachReview statement.been brought down to 9.75 per cent. CRR in excess of 3 per cent is currently remuneratedat 4 per cent per annum. Given that the CRR is a tax on the banking system it is better togradually reduce the CRR rather than maintain a much higher CRR with a relativelyhigher remuneration on these balances. The medium-term objective of reducing CRR hasto take account of money supply considerations and also the objectives of exchange ratestabilisation. Furthermore, reduction of the CRR would depend on manoeuarability onmoney supply impact presently constrained by degree of monetisation of fiscal deficitStatutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) has been gradually brought down from anaverage effective rate of 37.4 in 1992 to the statutory minimum of 25 per cent though atpresent, many banks hold SLR well in excess of statutory prescription. Further reductionin SLR, though desirable, would have to await reductions in fiscal deficit apart fromneeded improvements in prudential standards including internal risk managementStructure of administered interest rates has been almost totally dismantled.Prescriptions of rates on all term deposits, including conditions of premature withdrawal,and offering uniform rate irrespective of size of deposits have been dispensed with.Currently, there is a prescribed rate of 4.5 per cent for savings bank accounts which areused by individuals virtually as current accounts and as the cost of servicing theseaccounts is high the remuneration on these accounts has necessarily got to be low. Thereis yet to emerge a consensus on further deregulation of interest rate on savings deposits.There is understandably a differentiated interest rate ceiling prescribed for foreigncurrency denominated deposits from non-resident Indians, and such ceiling will have tocontinue as part of managing external debt flows, especially short-term flows till fullerliberalisation of capital account. Lending rates for different categories, which were earlierprescribed, have been gradually abolished but transparency is insisted upon. Each Bank isrequired to announce Prime Lending Rates (PLR) and the maximum spread that itcharges. However, there are three exceptions. Currently interest rate on smaller advances(i.e., up to Rs.200,000) should not exceed PLR. The element of concessionality of verysmall loans below Rs.200,000 has to be seen in the context of very small loans. As thefigure up to Rs.200,000 has not been adjusted since 1990, the real effective protection forsmall loans has been gradually reduced by the inflation drift. Lending rate for exports arestill prescribed. The prescription of interest rates for exports linked to the period ofavailment is to some extent used as an instrument to influence leads and lags inrepatriation of export proceeds. Finally, ceilings are prescribed in respect of certainPrudential norms are being introduced gradually to meet the internationalstandards. Consequent upon CBSR recommendations, action has already been initiated toincrease the capital adequacy ratio; assign risk weights to Government approvedsecurities, to take care of the market risks; and also assign risk weights to open positionin forex and gold. In most of these, a time table has been indicated for the first phaseonly, so that banks are on notice for the first phase while the RBI has retained the3Prudential Normsadvances in foreign currency, which could be reviewed.Interest Ratessystems. Ofcourse, enabling legislative changes would also be needed.and uncertainties in forex markets.freedom to decide on the timing of the second phase. Given the normal growth of 17 to18 per cent in credit, and the required level of capital adequacy after implementing CBSRrecommendations, a substantial infusion of capital into the banking system will bewarranted. This is likely to have significant implications for public sector. Governmenthas to weigh the desirability of further budgetary support vis-à-vis substantial reductionin share of Government ownership of banks. Incidentally, as long as capital markets aresluggish, and their view on banks, bearish, a high proportion of divestment may beSimilarly, internationally accepted norms of income recognition have beenintroduced except that income on asset is not recognised if it is not received within twoquarters after it is past due, i.e., due date plus thirty days. The international norm is 90days. Tighter standards, though desirable, have to be introduced gradually so that bothbanks and borrowers have notice to adjust their operations, and there is no seriousdisruption in the normal banking activity or erosion in public confidence in the bankingsystem due to balance sheet impact. Also, a sharp tightening of the norms would pose anunbearable burden on banks and would serve no substantive purpose unlesscorresponding changes are made in credit appraisal systems and debt recoveryAsset classification, which was introduced as per internationally acceptablepractices early in the reform process is sought to be further strengthened gradually, as perCBSR. A significant decision taken relates to treatment of assets guaranteed by the StateGovernment as non-performing under certain circumstances. This is a somewhatexceptional provision to take care of the temporary delays observed in respect of a fewCompetition is sought to be fostered by permitting new private sector banks, andmore liberal entry of branches of foreign banks. The share of public sector banks in thebanking business is going down, particularly in metropolitan areas. Competition is soughtto be fostered in rural and semi-urban areas also by encouraging Local Area Banks. Somediversification of ownership in select public sector banks has helped the process ofautonomy and thus some response to competitive pressures. The RBI’s efforts to enhancecompetition do, however, take into account the response of public sector banks and theirprincipal, the Government. There are some banking institutions such as cooperatives,regional rural banks and local area banks, which are yet to be brought fully into thediscipline of reform process.The transparency and disclosure standards have been enhanced to meetinternational standards, though there are a few areas where we are lagging. These relateto maturity pattern of assets and liabilities, movements in provision account and NPAsand progress needs to be made in all these areas. To provide an authentic comparativeinformation on the performance of banks, the RBI’s annual publication `Trend andProgress of Banking in India’ presents, since the last two years, detailed information on4individual banks enabling public assessment of the working of banks.Competition and TransparencyState Governments in honouring their guarantee obligations when invoked.mechanisms.needed to raise the resources needed, since share premia may be low.An independent Board for Financial Supervision under aegis of the RBI has beenestablished, and consistent with international practice, focus is also on offsite inspectionsand on control systems internal to the banks. Status of implementation of Core Principlesof Banking Supervision (Annex II) shows that of 46 principles, 33 have beenimplemented, 11 are partially implemented, while only two are yet to be implemented.These two relate to the critical aspect of adequacy of reserves against country risk andtransfer risk; and consolidated reporting. While the former is not a major issue at thisjuncture in view of limited cross border exposure, the latter is of significance warrantingearly action. Even in respect of the Core Principles, which have been implemented, theRBI is making constant efforts to improve the quality of supervision and the skills ofSelective credit controls have been dispensed with. Micro-regulation of credit-delivery has been given up, and there is a greater freedom to both banks and borrowers inmatters relating to credit. However, there are apprehensions on two counts, viz., thediscipline of priority sector lending and flow of credit to the needy and deserving, on atimely basis. The advances eligible for priority sector lending have been enlarged, interestrates deregulated and alternate avenues of investment permitted, thus making the prioritylending far more flexible than before. No doubt, banks are averse to sub-ceilings inpriority sector, and have some problems with procedural requirements. The major area ofserious concern relates to Government sponsored programmes involving subsidies, wherethere are serious problems of both co-ordination and recovery. CBSR has made someThere was a general consensus that the real issue in credit-delivery is moreavailability of credit than cost. Consequent upon the deregulation of interest rates, therewas an expectation that credit flow to the needy will be enhanced, but there is somedisappointment about the credit-delivery – especially to small industry. Proceduralsimplifications have been advised by the RBI for rural credit, credit to small industry andThe most critical issue in financial sector reform relates to consequences of theextent of public ownership and special laws governing publicly owned banks. CBSR hasdevoted a significant part of its report to reform of public sector banks, on whichGovernment, as the principal, needs to act. At present, public ownership has adverseeffects on level playing field among banks, capacity and willingness to compete in themarket place, incentives to perform, and binding work practices/methods that inhibitefficiency. The issue of efficiency in public sector banks has several dimensions, andlegal is one of them. Again, issues of optimal efficiency, autonomy and ownership areintertwined and need to be resolved. Reduction of public ownership below the majoritylevel prescribed would need an amendment to the three different laws that govern public5sector banks. Sale of shares already held by Government also needs amendments to law.Incentives and Legal Reformsmore recently the RBI is working on procedural streamlining for export credit.recommendations and these are still under consideration.Credit Controlssupervisors.SupervisionProgress in establishing and operationalising debt-recovery systems has beenpainfully slow, partly due to judicial review. CBSR suggested several legislativemeasures that would facilitate debt-recovery, securitisation, electronic systems etc. Aserious consequence of tightening prudential norms and pressurising banks to reduceNPA without strengthening the debt-recovery system is the choking of credit. While largecorporates may be partly spared by recourse to alternate sources such as debentures orcommercial paper, the rest, especially medium and smaller corporates could face creditThere is apprehension in some quarters that the Indian Accounting standardsfollowed by the Indian banks are not in line with International Accounting Standards.Annexure III gives a comparative position of some of the significant standards relevant tobanking sector and comparative Indian standards/regulations. It will be seen that onaccounting and valuation, Indian standards and defacto practices are comparable withinternational standards. The major area of divergence in accounting is in respect of groupaccounting and consolidation. In India, currently consolidation is not required andinvestments in associated companies are not accounted for under equity method. Inregard to disclosure, Indian banks do not, at present, disclose maturity pattern ofassets/liabilities, concentrations of assets liabilities and off balance sheet items, netforeign currency exposure, movement in provisions account, and gross non-performingassets and related party transactions in the financial statements. However, as regardsdisclosure of related party transactions, banks are prohibited from granting advances tofirms in which a Director is interested. RBI has formally stated that instructions onfurther disclosures will be announced in due course. Meanwhile, many banks are alsoSince April 1997, the RBI has been taking special efforts to develop the varioussegments of the financial markets, in particular, money market, Government securitiesmarket and foreign exchange market (Annexure IV to VI). Significant steps have beentaken to introduce new instruments, strengthen the institutional infrastructure, widen theparticipant base, introduce efficient settlement mechanism, rationalise tax measures, andIn order to facilitate the conduct of monetary policy, it is essential to improve theefficiency of transmission mechanism through the money market. Among the measurestaken by the RBI in the recent past are: cautious entry to additional participants in theinter-bank call money market; actions to develop the term money market, the majoramong them being the exemption of inter-bank liabilities from CRR and SLRstipulations; and refinements in instruments such as Commercial Paper, Certificate ofDeposit, inter-bank participation certificate and rediscounting of commercial bills. TheRBI has also been conducting repos of 3/4/14 days both on auction and fixed interest ratebasis, depending on prevailing situation in the market. The medium-term objective is to6Money Marketimprove transparency in operations.Financial Marketstaking steps to build appropriate information systems, which some disclosures entail.Accounting Standardschoke and hence the pace of introduction of measures needs to be carefully modulated.Debt Recoverymake the call/term money market purely inter-bank market for banks while non-bankparticipants who are not subject to reserve requirements can have free access to othermoney market instruments and operate through repos in a variety of instruments. Thecompletion of documentation and operational details will pave the way for theintroduction of interest rate swaps and other derivative instruments. With proper asset-liability management systems in place, the term money market can also be expected todevelop. An electronic dealing system is envisaged to be operationalised by March 1999.The RBI recognises that a Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) needs to be introduced,but this will depend on the replacement of General Refinance Scheme though notWith the switchover to borrowings by Government at market related interest rates,and more recently, abolition of system of automatic monetisation, it was possible toprogress towards a genuine market for Government securities. Reforms instituted by theRBI in this market include selling of Government securities through auctions;introduction of new instruments such as zero coupon bonds, floating rate bonds andcapital indexed bonds; introduction of Treasury Bills of varying maturities; establishmentof specialised institution, viz., Securities Trading Corporation; institution of system ofPrimary Dealers and Satellite Dealers; institution of the system of Delivery versuspayment; prescription of standard valuation norms; and transparency in operationsFuture developments in the Government Securities market hinges on three mainissues, viz., legal reforms, technological upgradation and achievement of standardisedpractices. The legislative measures relate to Public Debt Act, to be consistent withmodern technology and market practices; Amendment to Securities Contract RegulationsAct to allow derivatives and give formal jurisdiction to RBI to regulate the Governmentdebt market; and abolition of Stamp duty to avoid transaction costs in debt markets.These are essential for enabling the development of the market. Development oftechnology is an integral part of reforming the debt market and the RBI has embarkedupon the technological upgradation of debt market. Introduction of the Electronic DealingSystem, a Real Time Gross settlement System, integrating the payments and settlementsystems for Government securities are all part of the short-term agenda. Finally,standardisation of practices with regard to manner of quotes, conclusion of deals andMeasures initiated to integrate the Indian forex market with global financialsystem include permitting banks to fix their own position limits as per international termsand aggregate Gap Limits; to borrow from and invest abroad up to 15 per cent of theirTier I capital; and to arrange to hedge risks for corporate clients through derivativeinstruments. Other measures such as permitting forward cover for some participants, andthe development of the rupee-forex swap markets also have provided additionalinstruments to hedge risks and help reduce exchange rate volatility. There has been atemporary slow down in further progress due to uncertainties in the market. These7Foreign Exchange Marketcode of best practices are being evolved for repo transactions.through market process and dissemination of information.Government Securities Marketnecessarily on a review of export refinance.matters will have to be reviewed from time to time and the process of reform restoredThe road map for longer-term developments in the forex markets has been drawnby the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility but a view will have to be taken oneach one of them depending on domestic and international developments, especially thepace of liberalisation of the capital account. In any case, the process of liberalisation ofcapital account itself will, to a large extent depend, inter alia, on progress of financialIn identifying critical issues, it is necessary to recognise the strengths of theIndian banking sector. These include, long history of regulation, early start of financialreforms, stability imparted by reserve requirements, limited exposure to risky assets suchas real estate or stocks or foreign currency, strict control over off-balance sheettransactions, and relatively well diversified credit exposures, rather than undueconcentrations. However, greater efficiency can be brought about, only and only if co-First, the medium-term objective of reducing preemptions will be pursued, subjectto reduction in fiscal deficit by Government, monetary developments vis-à-vis growth inreal output, and uncertainties in forex markets. Reduction in CRR will help improveprofitability of banks. No doubt, reduction in refinance window will give greaterSecond, on interest rate regime, reform objectives continue to be furtherderegulation and enabling environment for reduction in interest spreads. These wouldagain depend on the progress in reduction of fiscal deficit; reduction in non-performingassets which in turn needs changes in debt recovery system as also improvement in creditappraisal systems by banks themselves; and rationalisation of interest rates in smallsavings, bonds, etc., which are alternatives for savers. Furthermore, inflationaryexpectations do play a critical role in determining interest rates, and these in turn, areThird, RBI will pursue with implementation of the first phase of reformannounced in October, 1998 and mount the second phase of reform on prudentialrequirements soon. These requirements would, however, warrant significant additions tothe capital of the banking system as a whole. Further progress will depend on resolutionof issues in Government relating to budgetary support, permitting access to capitalmarkets, the strategy for weak banks, mergers, possible changes in the percentage ofFourth, RBI will continue to foster competition between banks and in due coursebetween banks and other financial intermediaries. The issue of competition with otherfinancial intermediaries has to recognise the level playing field argument warrantingspecial treatment to banks as long as they have large preemptions, especially CRR - againlinked to fiscal deficit. As regards competition among banks, the issues relating todiversified ownership, incentive structure and reorganisation of public sector banks haveto be addressed by Government to enable RBI to pursue measures to enhance competition8public ownership, etc.dependent on credibility of price stability.flexibility in this regard.Reserve Bank of Indiaordinated efforts are made by RBI, Government of India and banks themselves.Critical Issuessector reforms.with appropriate change.without serious systemic implications. RBI will intensify consultations with Centre andFifth, RBI would also pursue vigorously, improvements in transparency,disclosure standards as also accounting standards to attain the best international practices.Similarly, compliance with Core Principles is being expedited. To focus on criticality ofpayment and settlement systems, the October 1998 statement on Monetary Policy has laidSixth, credit-delivery systems will be improved to ensure smooth credit flow butthis is facilitated only when legal systems and judicial processes are reviewed to replacecumbersome, and time consuming procedures. In addition to laws relating to debtrecovery, changes in bankruptcy law, tenancy laws, urban land ceilings etc. would beSeventh, improvements in financial markets are being so attempted by the RBI asto address both technological and procedural/documentation issues. Development ofmoney and debt markets would also require, among other things, reduction inpreemptions, amendments to Securities Contract Act, replacement of Public Debt Act andIt is very clear that further progress in financial sector would, to a significantFirst, sustainable level of fiscal deficit is of paramount importance. Furthermore,cost of raising resources, viz., interest payment for small savings and tax treatment onincome from Government securities need to be reviewed. A view has to be taken onbudgetary support for recapitalisation of banks and contingent liabilities in case AssetReconstruction Company route is favoured. An appropriate approach is also needed onhow the Government sponsored subsidised special programmes of employmentSecond, legislative changes that are essential for successful reform are many andCBSR had attempted to address these issues. In particular, legislative changes affectingdebt recovery and growth of financial markets, as already listed, are very critical.Legislative changes may also be needed for greater flexibility in change of publicThird, structural issues affecting public sector banks have been dwelt at length byCBSR, and suffice to say that the reordering of relationship between Government asprincipal/owner and banks as agents, through legislative changes or otherwise, wouldinfluence the further direction of reform, introduction of competitive pressures andincentive-structures for efficiency-enhancement. Key to financial sector reform isbanking reform; key to banking reform is public sector banking reform; and key to publicIt is clear that actions of RBI and initiatives of Government provide enablingenvironment, incentive framework and to some extent punitive measures. The outcomewill depend on the response of banks, i.e., boards of banks, management, officers and9Bankssector banking sector reform is Government’s initiative.ownership.generation would operate in the new milieu.extent, depend on the resolution of fiscal, legal, and structural issues.Government of Indiaresolution of Stamp Duty issue.needed to ensure that the collateral offered is in reality a realisable collateral.out a concrete programme of implementing the banking sector reforms.States, on issues relating to co-operatives and Regional Rural Banks.staff. There are, in particular, four broad areas of internal systems which may needSecond, the placement, work practices etc., which inhibit incentives for efficiencyFourth, introduction and effective use of technology in banks, especially publicI trust I have brought to your notice the efforts made by the RBI, the challengesbefore us, and the need for co-ordinated actions between the RBI, Government of Indiaand banks themselves. You would appreciate that, by and large, we try to be aware of10Thank you.what is desirable and we are implementing whatever is feasible.Conclusionsector banks.Third, flexibility in obtaining and enhancing highly skilled or talented people.and improved customer service.First, the internal control systems in the banks, especially Public Sector Banks.thorough overhauling and which need to be facilitated by Government and the RBI.1. Removal of • CRR 15 percent on • 1992-93 – Incremental CRR of •  CRR at 11 per cent on • Minimum CRR as per law is 3 perNDTL (excluding zero CRR cent.• • The reduction in CRR has to take(a) Reduction of• Incremental CRR of CRR reduced in phases from 15 • 10 per cent incremental CRR into account the reduction in fiscal10 percent on NDTL per cent to 9.5 per cent. on FCNR(B) deposits over deficit, reduction in overall liquidityover the level of However, CRR was increased the level as on April 11, position and developments in( i) Cash ReserveNDTL as on May 3, temporarily in 1994 for financial markets in particular themonetary policy reasons. Inter- • possible spill over effects on thebank liabilities exempted fromper cent incremental CRRCRR in 1997. During the periodbetween May 3, 1991 andaverage CRR of 15 per cent wasimposed gradually on non-• resident deposits andfor certain categories ofsubsequently removed. In Aprilforeign currency liabilities1997 10 per cent incrementaland net inter bank liabilities,effective CRR is 9.75 per• Interest on cash balances• December 1997- January 1998 –maintained with RBI is paidCRR increased in phases by 1to SCBs at 4 per cent perper cent temporarily forannum on eligible cashstabilising forex markets and• 1991forex markets. for stabilising 1998 – CRR hiked to 11 per centper cent of CRR.then reduced to 10 per cent.balances over the minimum 3(Banks) Liabilities.centForeign Currency Non ResidentsCRR was imposed on increase inIn view of exemption of CRRApril 17, 1992.foreign exchange markets.Remaining balances under 10Ratio (CRR)1997.emptions pre-1993-November 1997 – Averageliabilities). Liabilities (NDTL) constraints10 percent on NDTL withdrawn. Net Demand and TimeexternalReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements ofBanking Sector ReformAnnexure I(ii) Statutory • SLR 38.5 per cent on • 1992-94 – SLR reduced in • SLR is 25 percent on • Further reduction can beLiquidity Ratiodomestic liabilities and which is the minimum contemplated with reduction in fiscal30 per cent on non- reduction on SLR onresident liabilities - incremental deposits and byeffective SLR 37.4 per bringing forward the base cent. every time. SLR on increase inNDTL over the level as onto 25 per cent. The base levelSLR was reduced to 33.75• 1997 – In April 1997 inter- bankliabilities was exempted fromSLR and in October 1997 SLRreduced to 25 per cent on entireNDTL which is the minimumstipulated under Sec. 24 ofBanking Regulation Act. Banksare maintaining on average12above 30 per cent.percent.September 30, 1994 was reduceddateRegulation Act.deficit. prescribed under the Banking (SLR)phased manner through a steeperNDTLReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of(b) Interest rate • Administered interest • 1992 – Deposits rates were subject to only • The only administered • The deregulation ofrates structure on all one ceiling rate as against prescribed rates interest rate on rupee rate interest rates on savings( deposits including deposits is on savings bank deposits will be examinedterm deposits of• 1993 – New Foreign Currency (Resident) Deposits (Banks) Scheme • • The ceiling rate on foreign• Regulations on pre- introduced. Exchange risk has to be borne currency deposits willmature withdrawal of by the banks. Interest rates prescribed by continue for sometime as a• deposits and loans RBI. The earlier scheme was phased out interest on foreign currency measure of prudent debt• Interest rate on term • 1995-96 – Banks given freedom to fix theirdeposits uniform for own interest rates on domestic & NREterm deposits of same deposits with maturity of over two yearsmaturity irrespective• 1997 – Interest rates on bank deposits of• Foreign Currency( • 1997 – Banks given full freedom toDeposits Scheme –determine interest rates on term deposits ofInterest ratesprescribed by RBI and• 1997 – Interest rates on foreign currencyexchange risk alsodeposits to be determined by banks subjectto ceiling rate prescribed by RBI followedby freedom to offer interest rates linked to• 1998 – Minimum lock in period of term• Banks advised to determine their ownpenal rates of interest on prematurewithdrawal of domestic term deposits• Banks given freedom to offerdifferential rate of interest based on• Banks allowed to charge interest rateon loans against fixed deposits notexceeding its Prime Lending Rate13(PLR).mn and over. size of deposits of Rs.1.5 and NRE deposits.deposits reduced from 30 days to 15 days.LIBOR.borne by RBI.30 days and above.Non-Resident)less than one year linked to Bank Rate.of size.which was later reduced to one year.management. deposits continues. and closed by August 1994. against fixed depositsDifferentiated ceiling rate ofno interest is payable.On current account balances maturities. various Non-at the appropriate time. depositsearlier. i) Deposit RatesderegulationReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of• Lending rates structure • 1992-1994 – • Interest rates on advances above • Ceilings certain on advances inconsisted of six categories Rationalisation of ,00,000 to be linked to PLR of foreign currency could bebased on size of advances. lending rate structureUnder one category the from the earlier six• Advances “ upto” Rs.2 ,00,000 not toRBI had prescribed a categories to three• Export credit rates regulated by RBI.• 1994 – Banks givenfreedom to fix their own• Certain advances denominated inPrime Lending Rate(PLR) for advances over• Rs.2,00,000/- (about US• • • Spreads over PLR to be14announced.be announced by banksBoth PLR and LTPLR toreduced to two.Lending categoriesfixed at PLR of banks.,000/- loans below Rs.251998 – Ceiling rate on$ 4500/-)Loan against FD not exceeding PLR.currrency subject to a ceiling. foreign concessional rate. Currently at categories. minimum lending rate.exceed PLR.reviewed each bank.Rs.2(ii) Lending ratesReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of• No capital adequacy • 1992 – Capital to risk asset • All banks comply with the capital • The ratio of 8 per cent prescribed adequacy ratio of 8 per cent except suggested increase in capitalfor 4 banks in private sector and one adequacy ratio to 10 per cent. 9to be achieved in a phased per cent to be achieved by• Capital adequacy ratio increased to 9 March 2000 and 10 per cent byForeign banks by 31 March percent to be achieved by March• Decision about furtherIndian banks with internationalenhancement will be announced• Capital adequacy on market risk forGovt./approved securities has beenannounced which will beimplemented in two phases. 2.5%31, 2000. Balance of 2.5% will be• Capital adequacy on forex and gold• Investments in Governmentguaranteed securities of Governmentundertakings which do not form partof market borrowing will be subject• Risk weight on outstanding stock ofthe above securities as on 31 March2000 will be implemented in twophases at the rate of 10 per cent each• Risk weights of 20 percent will beassigned for advances guaranteed byState Government where the StateGovernments have remained indefault as on March 31 2000 in caseswhere the guarantee has beeninvoked.  The risk weight will beincreased to 100 per cent if theycontinue to be in default after March31, 2001 in respect of such invoked199315guarantees.in 2001-2002 and 2002-2003.2000-2001.to additional risk weight of 20% frompositions introducedannounced later.8% by March 19964% by March 1993risk weight by the year ending MarchOther banksoperations by 31 March 1994later.2000.2002.manner as follows :bank in public sector.as per Basle Committee normsrequirements. AdequacyNarasimham Committee has(a) CapitalNorms2. Prudential• Income recognition based • Banks cannot recognise • Banks cannot recognise • The Narasimham Committee II hason health code system interest income on all non- income on assets where recommended that RBI shouldunder which advances implement the international norm ofwere categorised into eight two quarters after it is past• Non performing assetscategories. Of which four due.categories were deemed asinterest is past due for a • Banks not allowed period of four quarters recognise collateral or• ( ending March 1993, three government guarantees for• quarters ending March 31,1994 and two quarters• ending March 31, 1995 and• (iv) debts classified as bad could not • Interest on advancesguaranteed by which is past due for twoquarters should not be• No clear definition ofrecognised as income.However the advances will• 16credits.classification of problembe treated as standard assets.Subjectivity inproblem creditsincome on these categories.Governmentrecognise Banksas 30 days beyond due date.and doubtful.onwards. Past due is defined(iii) decreed debtsrecognising interest income. (ii) suit filed accountsi) debts recallednon-performing assets viz.todefined as on asset on which90 days in a phased manner by 2002.income is not received within performing assets.recognition(b) IncomeReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Asset Assets were classified into • 1992 – All advances have to be • The classification • The Narasimham Committee II haseight health codeclassified by banks into four broad standards as defined in recommended that an asset becolumn 3 continue. RBI classified as doubtful if it is in thea) has announced in October sub-standard category for 18 monthsb) 1998 that an asset will be in the first instance and eventually treated as doubtful if itd) has remained in sub- • The Narasimham Committee II hasstandard category for 18• As asset is classified as sub-standard recommended that for the purpose ofmonths instead of 24when the bank stops recognising evaluating the quality of assetincome on accrual basis i.e. when it months by March 31, portfolio Government guaranteedgets classified as non-performing advances which have turned sticky8. Debts classified by the• Advances guaranteed by should be treated as NPAs. IfState Government will be however for reason of the sovereign• An asset is classified as doubtfulThe classification was leftwhen it remains in substandard classified as NPA if guarantee argument such advancesto the discretion of eachguarantee is invoked and are excluded from computation, suchbank and was notthe concerned NPAs should be separately shown as• A loss asset is an asset which isGovernment remains in an aspect of fuller disclosure andconsidered as irrecoverable and notdefault for more than twoquarters with effect from• Further tightening of norms has not• In view of the large number ofborrowal accounts classification ofadvances below Rs.25 ,000/- wasallowed to be done in a phasedmanner but income recognitionnorms were applicable. Thisrelaxation was allowed upto March• are not classified as non-performingasset even if income is not being..17recognised on accrual basis.Advances guaranteed by Government31, 1998.been announced. April 1, 2000.written offgreater transparency of operations.objective.category for 24 months.banks as bad/doubtfulasset (NPA).2001.7.Decreed debts6. Suit filed accounts5. Advances recalled4. Sick – Non-viable/stickyLossnursingfor 12 months Doubtful c) 3. Sick – viable underSub-standard2. IrregularStandard 1. Satisfactorygroups categories as under :Classification (c)ReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Provisioning • The provisions to be • 1992 - 10 per cent general • The provisioning norms as • Narasimham Committee II hasmade by banks was provision on outstanding sub- indicated in column 3 recommended that in case of allleft to the discretion future loans, asset classification andof the bank. RBI provisioning norms should apply• 100 per cent provision on • RBI has announced thatInspecting officers unsecured portion of banks shall make a general even to Government guaranteedwould however advances in the same manner as forprovision of a minimum ofdetermine whether 0.25 per cent for the year any other advance. For existing• 20 per cent to 50 per centprovisions were Government advances, RBI,provision on securedportion of doubtful assets • Additional provisions arisingreal value of capital a mechanism for a phasedfrom the revised definition ofrectification of the irregularities indoubtful asset being phased• • On non-performing advances• The Narasimham Committee II hasbelow Rs.25 ,000/- banks had toMarch 2001 and 31 March recommended that a generalmake a provision on aggregateprovision on standard assets of say 1outstanding advances withoutpercent may be introduced in anetting for collateral @ 2.5 per • Provisions on advancesguaranteed by Statecent in 1992-93 which wasincreased to 15% in 1997-98.invoked and remain indefault for more than twohad not classified the accounts.Banks had to complete quarters will be made over aclassification of all such period of four years from theyear ending 31 March 2000to 31 March 2003 withthe normal provisioning normsminimum of 25 per cent each• 1993 - Banks were allowed tomake provisions on substandardand doubtful assets in March1993 spread over two years. Insubsequent years no such18relaxation has been given.year.came into force.advances by 1997-98 after whichbanks which This applied only to Government which have beenphased manner.2002.made over two years as on 31in as on March 31, 2001 to bethese accounts.100 per cent on loss assetsand reserves.three year period. over a Government and banks may work out adequate to assess theending March 31, 2000.doubtful debts.continue. standard advancesstandards (d)ReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of(e) Classification • Investments in • 1992 - Banks were required to bifurcate • Banks have to • The Indian standards are quiteand Valuation ofGovernment and other investments in Government and approved mark to market 70 stringent and no further changesapproved securities securities into permanent category and current per cent of thecould be carried at investments inbook value without cent of the portfolio as current investments to Government andrecognising any facilitate valuing all the investments on fullydiminution in the securities by 31• • In the case of other approved securities from ‘current’ to • RBI hasinvestments banks had ‘permanent’ and ‘vice versa’ . These guidelines announced that into make adequate ensure that latent losses are provided for at the the next threeprovisions for years the entireportfolio will be• 1993 - The entire investment portfolio of banksother than investments classified as ‘permanent’has to be classified into six categories for thefor each category of investments. While netdepreciation has to be provided by debit to theProfit and Loss account, net gains have to beignored. Permanent investments can be carriedat book value. Premium will have to beamortised over the life of the investment but• 1993-1998 The said minimum ratio of 30 percent has been increased in a phased manner to60 per cent as on 31 March 1998. It has furtherbeen decided to increase the ratio to 70 percententire investments in approved securities from1931 March 1997.sector banks are required to mark to market theirfor the year ending March 31, 1999. New privatediscount cannot be recognised as income.purpose of valuation. The valuation will be donemarked to market.diminution in value.time of such transfer.1992 – Guidelines were laid down for transfer ofMarch 1999. value of the portfolio.‘marked to market’ basis.approvedcategory. Banks had to classify minimum 30 per Portfolio.are required. InvestmentReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of• Entry of foreign • 1991-1998 - A number of foreign banks were • India has made The Narasimham Committee hasallowed entry into the Indian banking sector. commitments in theThe number of foreign banks operating in India World Trade • Foreign banks may be allowed• No new privateincreased from 21 in 1990 to 43 in 1998. Organisation (WTO) to set up subsidiaries/jointsector commercialbank licensed Existing foreign banks were allowed 36 under the General ventures in India which will beAgreement on Trade subject to the same regulations• 1993 –In order to introduce greater competition in Services in 1995 to on directed credit as Indiangrant eight licencesin the banking sector, the Reserve Bank issuedper year to new and• The licensing policy for settingof new banks in the private sector. The up new private banks may beThe number wasminimum paid up capital for these banks is reviewed and no categoryincreased to 12 in1000mn The banks will have to be publicly should be excluded on a priorilisted. They are also required to start operations 1997. In actual grounds. These should be wellpractice India hasin a fully computerised environment with stateallowed foreign banksof the art technology. Foreign banks/foreign• Revamping of Regional Ruralfinancial institutions are allowed to have 20 per to open 15 branches inbanks and establishment ofa year. In addition,cent stake within the overall non-resident limit Local Area Banks couldoff-site  whichof 40 per cent as technical collaborator/partnerfacilitate competition in therequire a branch• • Co-operatives are involved inbanking operations and these• Public sector stilldominates and• 1996 – The Union Budget 1996-97 proposed• The licensing policy for neweffective competitionsetting up of new private local area banks withprivate banks is under reviewto them is injurisdiction over two or three contiguousdistricts. RBI issued guidelines in 1996 forsetting up of new private local area banks. Theminimum paid up capital for these banks will be20Rs. 50mn.metropolitan areas.a internal Working Group. by are subject to dual control.allowed to convert to a private commercial bank.the private sector and one co-operative bank waslimit of 12.1994 – 1996 Nine new banks have been set up inlicence are outside thissemi-urban areas also. rural and in private banks.ATMsdefined.Rs.existing foreign banks.guidelines in January 1993 for the establishmentbanks.since 1972additional branches.banks restrictivesuggested that :3. CompetitionReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of Transparency The income in the • The whole format of Profit and Loss Account and • The transparency and • The Narasimham Committee IIprofit and lossBalance Sheet was revised in 1992 with a view to disclosure standards has recommended that there isaccount was shown ensure greater transparency and disclosure. The have been enhanced need for disclosure in a phasednet of all manner of the maturity patternprovisions and• Instructions on further of assets and liabilities,The Balance Sheet also is presented in more movement in provisionsdisclosures will bedetailed format with several schedules. Disclosuredisclosed. Loss on• The annual statutory report onsale or revaluation• In 1996 banks were advised to include their Trend and Progress of Bankingof investments andassessment of capital adequacy ratio in the balance by RBI gives a consolidatedother assets couldaccount of status of non-be deducted fromperforming assets of individual• In 1997 banks were advised to disclose percentageof shareholding of Government, percentage of netOnly aggregateamounts under aDetails of provision made category-wise i.e. towardsfew categorieswere disclosed inthe Profit and Loss value of investments less cumulativeAccount. Therewere no schedules• or detailed break-The Balance SheetInterest income as a percentage of average workingdisclosure was alsoOperating profit as a percentage of average workingpolicies were not 4.21Profit per employeeBusiness (deposits and advances) per employeedisclosed.Return on assetsfundsAccountingvery limited.fundsCapital adequacy ratio – Tier II capitalup.Capital adequacy ratio – Tier I capitalIn January 1998 banks were advised to disclose.depreciation. GrossAmount of subordinated debt raised as Tier II capitalNPAs, depreciation etc.NPAs to net advances.banks also.income.sheet.of accounting policies has been made mandatory.NPAs. account and issued in due course.provisions were notthereforeincome items and expenditure items with schedules.substantially. revised format provides for detailed disclosure of alland DisclosureReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of5. Supervisory Dependence on on- • 1994 – In order to exercise integrated supervision The RBI supervisory The Narasimham Committee hassite inspection of strategy consists of both recommended that an integratedover credit institutions in the financial system and toonsite inspections and off- system of regulation andensure implementation of regulations in the areas ofFocus on credit management asset classification income site surveillance. A detailed supervision be put in place to priority off-site surveillance system regulate and supervise therecognition and treasury operations a Board forsector credit and based on prudential activities of banks, financialFinancial Supervision was set up within the RBI incredit portfolio. supervisory framework on a institutions and non-bank financeInvestment and risk quarterly basis covering companies ( NBFCs) the agencyThe supervisory strategy as finalised by BFS in 1994management not important areas has been to be called Board for Financialgiven much i) made operational. In regard Regulation and Supervisionto on-site inspections the (BFRS). The BFRS should beii) Long inspection iii) process is now on the given statutory powers and be strengthening corporate governance internal evaluation of the total reconstituted in such a way as toEmphasis was on operations and performance be composed of professionals. Atsolvency and not on of the bank under the present, the professional inputs• other aspects like are largely available in anup with the primary objective of monitoring thecapital adequacy, evaluating asset quality and advisory board which acts as afinancial condition of banks in between on-sitecompliance with prudentialexaminations identifying banks which shownorms focus is now on the The Committee, taking note offinancial deterioration and trigger an onsiteeffective functioning of the formation of BFS hasBoard management, recommended that the process of• The new approach to annual financial inspectionefficacy of internal audit separating it from the Reservebased on CAMELS (Capital Adequacy AssetBank qua central Bank shouldQuality, Management Earnings, Liquidity andmanagement. The entire begin and the Board should becycle of inspection and invested with requisite autonomy• Two supervisory rating models based on CAMELSfollow up action is now and armed with necessary powersand CACS (Capital adequacy, Asset Quality,completed within a so as to allow it to developCompliance and Systems) factors for rating ofmaximum period of twelve experience and professionalIndian commercial banks and foreign banksexpertise and to functionoperating in India respectively have been workedout and would help RBI identify banks whereto retain an organic linkage with• The role of the external auditors has been enhancedand enlarged. Besides audit of annual accountsSupervisory skills of RBI mayneed enhancement, especially toThe system of concurrent audit has been introduced.Each bank has to designate ‘Compliance Officer’ to actall22as nodal officer.new financial instruments.capture technological changes andbalance sheets.aspects as also financial ratios to be disclosed in theauditors are now required to verify and certify otherhead of the BFRS.RBI, the Governor, RBI should becondition warrants special supervisory attention.effectively. However, with a viewmonths.Systems) framework commenced from July 1997.and control systems and riskexamination.management etc.distinct entity supporting the BFS. liquidityCAMEL system. Apart from1995 – An offsite surveillance function has been setcontrols and audit functions.iv) cyclesenhancing the role of external auditors andsetting up of offsite surveillanceimportance.restructuring system of inspectionhas four components.1994.mobilisationdepositbanks.SystemFocus was entirely on credit Having introduced credit Asset Liability Managementrisk and to a large extent on Introduction of income recognition and asset risk, management attention is guidelines are to be finalised. Athe management of foreign now focussed on market risk view has to be taken on theexchange risk and operating Introduction of capital for credit risk as per Basle management particularly in introduction of capital forrisk. the context of deregulationa) Drawing up loan policy and recovery policy by and liberalisation of interestEmphasis on toning up of rates. Comprehensive assetthe appraisal standard, Extending the exposure norms to cover all formsstrengthening post sanctionsupervision and intensive 1 April 1999 to take care offollow-up of large value A Committee looked into the entire gamut of interest rate, liquidity andIntroduction of health code Consequent to the recommendation of thisnorms for classification of Committee, the method of computation of openadvances, single and group position was refined and setting up of openexposure limits set up by position limits was made banks specific andRBI; and banks required set up industry exposure Introduction of market risk capital for openInternal control guidelines Introduction of simple value at risk calculation inissued in a comprehensivemanner in 1981. Mainemphasis on setting up open Intensive monitoring of inter branch, inter bankposition limits andFocus on fraud reporting Implementation of recommendations of and preventive measures;emphasis on house keepingi.e. balancing of books andreconciliation of Introduction of standards for conduct ofinvestment operations including audit and23accounting norms.and inter branch accounts.interbanke) Treasury Operationsand audit system in banksCommittee for strengthening of internal inspectionJilanic) Operating RiskSetting up of compliance officersSetting up of Audit Committee of BoardIntroduction of concurrent audit by banks aggregate gap limits.nostro accounts, reconciliation by RBI and d) Operating Risk:respect of forward gapsMore flexible setting up of aggregate gap limits; b) Foreign Exchange Riskposition limits in foreign exchange and gold. norms.liberalised tocurrency risks. foreign exchange markets in India accounts.Forex Risk b) are being introduced from of exposure in addition to credit exposureliability management systemsbanksCredit Risk:market risk. Committee’s recommendationclassification norms;Managementa) Credit Risk : 6. RiskReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of7. Credit • Credit delivery mainly in 1993 – Banks were given freedom to There is no mandatory With pressure on banks to reduceControls/ Credit consortium requirement NPA’s and in the absence of effectivethe form of cash credit forof inventory and receivables of various and borrowers can either debt recovery systems the credit flowindustries while assessing credit have single or multiple especially to medium and small sector• A system of creditbanking arrangements orauthorisation scheme1993 – The threshold limit of obligatoryexisted under which loansconsortium lending raised from Rs.50credit will form part of thea cut off point had to be1995-1996 – Loan system for Delivery ofBank Credit for working capital purpose formulated by each bank• Detailed regulations on howwas introduced to bring about greaterbanks should calculatediscipline in credit utilisation and to gain There is considerablepermissible bank finance asflexibility with regard toalso norms for receivablesborrowers with assessed maximum credit delivery systems forand inventory holdings ofpermissible bank finance of Rs.200various industries weremillion and above. The cash credit Procedural simplificationsin regard to agriculture and• It was mandatory for banksand then gradually reduced to 60%, 40 small industry has beento form a consortium aboveper cent and 25 per cent in 1996. The brought about recently andsystem was also extended to borrowers such simplification for• Regulations on levy ofwith assessed MPBF of Rs.100 million to export sector is expectedcommitment charge andcertain portion of book debt1996 – The levy of commitment chargewas left to the discretion of banks.• Regulations on functioningMandatory levy of additional interest oncertain portion of book debt finance was• Limits on grant of term1996 – Participating banks in aconsortium were permitted to frameground rules of the consortium24arrangements.loans for projects by banks.also withdrawn.of consortium arrangement.finance.fixed at 40 per cent.levy of additional interest onsoon. Rs.200 million and cash credit componentRs.50 million.component was initially restricted to 70%prescribed by RBI.borrowers.better control over borrowers in respect ofwith Board'’ approval.referred to RBI.loan policy which has to bemillion to Rs.500 million.availed by a borrower abovemethod. The regulations onsyndicate/consortiumis reported to be choked. requirements of borrowers.working capital finance. Delivery Systemdecide on their own the levels of holdingsReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of• Selective credit 1997 – In order to provide greater freedom in assessing workingcapital requirements all instructions relating to Maximum Permissiblecontrols on sensitiveBank Finance (MPBF) were withdrawn and banks were advised toevolve their own methods for assessment.  Banks were required to lay1997 – Mandatory requirement on formation of consortium forborrowal accounts with limit of Rs.500 million and above from more1997 – Limits on grant of term loans for projects by banks waswithdrawn. Banks are free to sanction term loans for projects within1997 – Loan component for all borrowers with credit limit of Rs.1001997 – Credit Monitoring Arrangement which replaced Credit1996 - Selective credit controls on all sensitive commodities was25abolished except for sugar.Authorisation Scheme was withdrawn.million and above made uniform at 80 per cent.the ceiling of exposure norms.than one bank withdrawn.down loan policy for each industry for this purpose.commodities.ReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of8. Priority Sector • Definition comprised 1992 – Export credit target of 10 It is clear from the reforms • While priority sector lending asLending or introduced in the area that theagriculture, small scale currently operated is not considered aindustries (including 1993 – Foreign banks target scope of priority sector credit has serious constraint on operations, theresetting up of industrial revised to 32 per cent and which been increased and providesincludes export credit with sub opportunities to banks to makeestates), small road and programmes which are to be fundedwater transport operators, targets of 10 per cent for export loans on commercially viable by banks. The terms. There is no element ofsmall business, retail Committee has recommended that1993 – Target of 18 per cent fortrade, professional and given the special needs of this sector,self-employed persons, agriculture for Indian banks to Further, the markets have an the current practice may continue.include indirect advances to the option to invest short fall inHowever, for ensuring greaterextent of 4.5 per cent of Net priority sector lending inorganisations for involvement and accountability and/ , educational also appraisal of schemes on1996 – Export sub target raised freedom not to lend toloans granted to commercial considerations withoutcommercially unviable activities.individuals by banks any extraneous influences, the branchunder their schemes, 1993 – 1998 – Definition of Since banks have freedom to managers of banks should be fullypriority sector enlarged to invest in bonds, debentures,credit scheme for weaker responsible for the identification ofshares etc., the resource base forsections and refinance by beneficiaries under the Government. i) loans to traditional calculating priority sector lending sponsored credit linked schemes. Thisplantation crops viz. Tea, is restricted to advances,• Target for Indian banks:Coffee, rubber, cardamom,40 per cent of net bank • The  Committee has alsoetc. irrespective of size ofcredit of which direct noted the changes in the scope ofagriculture 18 per cent, beneficiaries under the priority sectorii) loans for housing advances to weaker since the earlier CFS Report wassections 10 per cent of submitted and proposes that given theiii) loans to transport operatorsimportance and needs of employment• Target for foreign banks oriented sectors like food processing advances to dealers ofand related service activities indrip/sprinkler irrigationagriculture, fisheries, poultry andsystem and agricultural these sectors should also becovered under the scope of priority investments made by banksin special bonds of SIDBI,• Banks are also averse to sub ceilingsNABARD, NHB, NSIC,in priority sector and procedure ofHUDCO, SFCs, SIDCs andREC and contributions toRural Infrastructure banks’ investments in bondsissued by Rural26vi)Development Fund (RIDF).computation.sector lending.v)15 per cent by March 1992machinery12 per cent by March 1990dairying10 per cent by March 1989includes export sector:iv)upto 10 vehicles,bank creditRs.500000.uptoholdingsNarasimhamexcluding expanding investments.is yet to be acted upon.RRBs sponsor banks to includefrom 10 to 12 per centNABARD/SIDBI, thus exercising Bank Credit. STs SCsState-sponsoredinterest subsidy.and 10 per cent for SSI.Narasimhamare a variety of government sponsoredDirected Creditper cent introduced.ReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements ofElectrification Corporation(REC) for financing itsSystems ImprovementScheme under SpecialProject Agriculture (SI-vii) advances to NBFCs foronlending to truck operatorssatisfying priority sectorviii) advances upto Rs.10mn to27Software Industry . normsSPA).• Nationalised banks are • 1993 – SBI Act amended to enhance the scope of Currently out of 105 Related issue is "autonomy"commercial banks (excluding and inhibiting factors such asfully owned by the provision for private shareholding. RBI shareGovernment, State Regional Rural banks), 27 are jurisdiction of vigilance,Bank of India by RBI publicly owned. As per investigative agencies as long• 1994 – Banking Companies (Acquisition andexisting law governing Public as there is majority of publicand the associates ofSBI by SBI. In the Sector Banks, majority of ownership. Further, the public15, 1994 permitting nationalised banks to raisepublic ownership should sector banks are governed bycase of nationalisedalways be maintained. In the three different statues.banks there was no• 1995 – Banking Companies (Acquisition &provision for private case of SBI the RBI Narasimham CommitteeTransfer of Undertaking Act) amended to enableshareholding cannot be less recommended dilution ofparticipation. As therebanks to reduce the paid-up capital subject to thethan 55% and for subsidiaries public ownership to 33 perwas no capitalcondition that the paid up capital cannot beadequacy requirement of SBI, SBI shareholding cent. According to them thereduced at any time below 25 per cent as on thecannot go below 55%. In reduction of the minimumthere was no need todate of amendment. This amendment enablednationalised banks, the holding of Government belowconsider accessing themarket. In certain minimum Government• 1993 – SBI first public sector bank to raiseshareholding has to be 51 per major and clear signal aboutcases Governmentcapital from the market (Rs.22120 million asthe restoration to banks andcapital). In 1996 SBI raised capital in the form ofhave so far raised capital from financial institutions of• 1994–1998 - Oriental Bank of Commerce, Bank, Bank of India, Corporation Bank, Bank ofPublic sector banks wouldBaroda, State of Travancore, State Bank ofrequire additional capital toBikaner & Jaipur accessed capital markets tomeet their normal assetraise capital. Total capital including premiumexpansion as also theraised by all public sector banks amounted toenhanced capital requirementsRs.60150 million. (Premium Rs.52540 million).and more stringentThe Government/RBI/SBI shareholding afterprovisioning standards. Thepublic issue now ranges from 59.73 to 77% inminimum public share of55/51 per cent may become a• constraining factor for some• 1995-1998 - Till date four banks viz. Punjabbanks unless the Act isNational Bank, Bank of India, Bank of and Corporation Bank have returned toGovernment of India paid up capital aggregatingRs.6421 million. The reduction of capital resultsin an improvement in earnings per share andhelps the banks in better pricing of the share at.28the time of public issueamended.BarodaRefund of Capitalthese banks.Denaautonomy in their functioning. the public.GDRs.capital.provided the necessarycent. Eight public sector banks51 per cent would in itself be abanks to set off losses against capital.upto 49% from the public. capital Transfer of Undertakings) amended effective Julynot to fall below 55%.9. OwnershipReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements of10. Legal and per law banks can realise the • In order to effect speedy • Government has set up so far • The functioning of the Tribunalssecurities pledged to them by filing arecovery of loans has not been effective as theresuit against the borrower and retain Government passed the 22 states and 4 Union are several problems faced bythe pledged goods as collateral till the Recovery of Debts due Territories. The constitutional them. A Working Groupdebts are satisfied or sell the goods byto banks and Financial validity of the Act has been appointed by RBI has madegiving reasonable notice to the Institutions Act 1993 for challenged and is under several recommendations toborrower without the intervention ofthe creation of Special adjudication of the Supreme improve the functioning ofthe Court. The realisation of debts byTribunals for banks and Court. However, the Supreme DRTs including amendments tofinancial institutions. Court stayed the operation ofselling the pledged goods by givingMonetary claims above the Delhi High Court which • Amendments are beingnotice, very often banks do not haveRs. 1 mn and above quashed the notificationintroduced to the SICA 1985 inthe goods in their possession as these adjudicated by the Debt constituting the Tribunals andthe Parliament to provide thatare mostly inventories and are onlyRecovery Tribunals. The the stay of legalhypothecated to the bank.  In case ofimmovable properties, the law ofmoneys or  etcmortgage is banks and financial against the sick industrialright of sale without the interventioninstitutions within 6companies should operate onlyof the Court is not available to months of suchon the specific orders of theapplications. The Board for Industrial and• Once a sick industrial company tribunals follow adefined as a company registered summary procedure thatfor not less than five years whose is expected to expedite the possibilities of misuse of thenet worth has been fully eroded disposal of suits filed bystands referred to Board for• The Narasimham Committee IIIndustrial and Financialhas suggested need for severalReconstruction, no proceedingslegislative amendments tofor the winding up of suchexisting laws which affectcompany or for execution of theoperations of banks includingrecovery through sale withoutappointment of a receiver injudicial intervention, changes inrespect thereof and no suit filedTransfer of Property Act tofor recovery of money or for thefacilitate enforcement of securities shall lieor be proceeded with further,in law on matters arising fromexcept with the consent of thecomputerisation and electronicfunds transfer, structure of the• Banks and financial institutionstherefore faced considerable• According to the Committee thedifficulties in recovery of duesevolution of legal reforms has29banking system etcBoard.reduction in stamp duties, claritysecuritisation,properties of such company or forbanks.provisions of the Act.rather than automatically to limitFinancial Reconstruction (BIFR)banks/financial institutions.unsatisfactory as often theenforcementsdispose of such claims ofproceedings/suits for recovery ofTribunals are expected toDRTs to function. allowed the arecertain provisions. filing a suit takes very long As regardsReforms:9 Recovery Tribunals coveringInstitutional AsReformsComments/Outlook Current status Reform measures Pre-reform status Elements offrom the borrowers and not kept pace with the changingenforcement of security charged commercial practice and withto them due to the delays in thelegal process. A significant result the economy has not beenportion of the funds is thus able to reap the full benefits ofblocked in unproductive assets,the values of which keep• In view of the wide-rangingdeteriorating with the passage ofchanges needed in the legalframework, the Committee has• The Sick Industrial Companies recommended setting up Act further enables borrowers to Expert Committee to formulateavoid meeting their obligations as specific legislative proposals toonce the networth is eroded give effect to the suggestionsautomatically the Act applies andthey come within the ambit of • The Finance Minister hasBIFR. Thus all proceedingsannounced setting up of anagainst the company are stayedand banks are unable to effect30recoveries.Expert Committee.made by them.atime.the reform process.the financial sector reforms. As a.  .   Principle 1, Part 6 Arrangements for sharing information between supervisors and protection for confidentiality of31setup by GOI. the Expert Group other supervisors. This will be looked into byauthorising the Bank to share information withprovision be incorporated in the ActIt has also been suggested that a specificmajor supervisors will be represented.GOI to set up a Technical Group on whichBFS has decided to refer their suggestions to such information, should be in place.inhouse group and the has been examined by an cooperation amongst supervisors Interagency reexamine Banking related legislation. GOI to now be referred to the Expert Group set up bynegligence is yet to be tested in law. This willgood faith, the liability of supervisors in case ofstatutory protection is available for acts done in protection for supervisors.examined this and concluded that while legal including banking supervision is also necessary setup by the RBI has A working group A suitable legal framework for Principle 1, Part 5soundness concernsaddress compliance with laws as well as safety andbanking supervision is also necessary including powers toA suitable legal framework for Principle 1, Part 4ongoing supervisionto authorisation of banking establishments and theirsupervision is also necessary including provisions relatingPrinciple 1, Part 3 A suitable legal framework for bankingoperational independence and adequate resources.Principle 1, Part 2 Each such agency should possessbanks.objectives for each agency involved in the supervision ofsupervision will have clear cut responsibilities andPrinciple 1, Part 1 An effective system of bankingNot Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core PrincipleSTATUS OF IMPLEMENTATION OF CORE PRINCIPLES OF BANKING SUPERVISIONAnnexure II32risks or hinder effective supervision.not  expose the bank to undue affiliations or structures do authority to establish criteria for ensuring that corporatePrinciple 5, Part 2 Banking Supervision must have theacquisitions or investments by a bankauthority to establish criteria for reviewing majorPrinciple 5, Part 1 Banking Supervision must have theLegislation. other parties.which will be examining the Banking related ownership or controlling interests in existing banks tobeen decided to refer this to the Expert Group to review and reject any proposals to transfer significantThis matter has been examined and it has Principle 4 Banking Supervision must have the authorityhome country supervisor should be obtained.organisation is a foreign bank, the prior consent of itsPrinciple 3, Part 3 Where the proposed owner or parentalso being looked into by this Group,Licenses in future. The issues raised here arenew banks and suggest criteria for issuing conditions, including its capital base.private sector, examine the need for setting up plan and internal controls and its projected financialenvisaged for the new banks set up in the structure, directors and senior management; its operatingfulfillment of the objectives critically evaluate should consist of an assessment of the bank’s ownership A Group was set up earlier this year to at   minimum Principle 3, Part 2 The Licensing process establishments that do not meet the standards set.right to set criteria and reject applications ofPrinciple 3, Part 1 The Licensing authority must have thebe controlled as far as possible.Principle 2, Part 2 the use of word ‘bank’ in names shouldbanks must be clearly definedinstitutions that are Licensed and subject to supervision asPrinciple 2, Part 1 The permissible activities ofNot Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core PrinciplePrinciple 6, Part 2 For internationally active banks requirements should not be less than those  established in33companies and individuals on arms-length basis,in place requirements that banks lend to relatedfrom connected lending, banking supervisors must havePrinciple 10, Part 1): In order to prevent abuses arisingof related borrowers.to restrict bank exposures to single borrowers or groupsPrinciple 9, Part 2 supervisors must set prudential limitsportfolioenable management to identify concentrations within thethat banks have Management Information Systems thatPrinciple 9, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must be satisfiedReserves . Loss Provisions and Loan Loss practices and procedures for evaluating adequacy of Loanthat banks establish and adhere to adequate policiesPrinciple 8, Part 2 Banking supervisors must be satisfiedAssetspractices and procedures for evaluating the quality ofthat banks establish and adhere to adequate policiesPrinciple 8, Part 1 Banking supervisors must be satisfiedand investment portfolios.procedures related to ongoing management of the loansystem is the evaluation of a bank’s policies andPrinciple 7, Part 2 As essential part of any supervisoryinvestmentsprocedures related to the granting of loans and making ofsystem is the evaluation of a bank’s policies andPrinciple 7, Part 1 As essential part of any supervisorythe Basle Capital Accord.theseabsorb losses.components of Capital bearing in mind its ability torisks that the banks undertake and must define theminimum capital requirements for banks that reflect thePrinciple 6, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must setNot Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principlethat banks have adequate policies and procedures for34hold capital against these risks.communicated to banks for implementation. control all other material risks and where appropriate tomeasures to be taken by banks. These will be identify  measures monitor and Management oversight) to regarding Risk Management structures and process (including appropriate Board and Seniormatter and made several recommendations banks have in place a comprehensive risk management An in-house group has gone into the Principle 13 Banking Supervisors must be satisfied thatmarket risk exposures if warranted.impose specific limits and/or a specific capital charge onPrinciple 12, Part 2 Supervisors should have powers tomethodology as a minimum requirement. control market risks;Market Risk capital based on BIS standard satisfied that banks have in place systems that accuratelyBanks will now be required to provide Principle 12, Part 1: Banking Supervisors must bedetailed study.particular aspect requires moreregarding country risk, thisseveral recommendations maintaining adequate reserves against such risks.Management Group has madeAlthough the Risk Principle 11, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must be satisfiedresubmitted.studies and the recommendations activitiespractice followed by different banks be transfer risk in their international lending and investmentrecommendations. BFS has desired that the identifying monitoring and controlling country risk andGroup which has made several Management that banks have adequate policies and procedures forThis issue was examined by the RiskPrinciple 11, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must be satisfiedtaken to control or mitigate the risks.that  other appropriate steps are in place requirements from connected lending, banking supervisors must havePrinciple 10, Part 3, In order to prevent abuses arisingextensions of credit are effectively monitoredcompanies and individuals on arms-length basis  that suchin place requirements that banks lend to relatedfrom connected lending, banking supervisors must havePrinciple 10, Part 2): In order to prevent abuses arisingNot Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle35inhouse group.is being looked into by anaccounting which consolidated consolidated basis.after introduction of a Reports and Statistical Returns from banks on banks will be implemented means of collecting reviewing and analysing Prudential Consolidated Reporting by Principle 18, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must havebasis.Reports and Statistical Returns from banks on a solomeans of collecting reviewing and analysing PrudentialPrinciple 18, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must haveunderstanding of the institution’s operations.contact with bank Management and thoroughPrinciple 17 Banking Supervisors must have regularsupervision.should consist of some form of both on-site and off-sitePrinciple 16 An effective Banking Supervisory Systemintentionally and unintentionally by criminal elements.being  used financial sector and prevent the bank promote high ethical and professional standards in theplace including strict ‘Know Your Customer’ Rules thatbanks have adequate policies, practices and procedures inPrinciple 15, Banking Supervisors must determine thatas well as applicable laws and regulations.compliance functions to test adherence to these controlsand appropriate independent internal or external audit andreconciliation of these processes; safeguarding its assets;for  its assets and liabilities and proper accounts that involve committing the bank, paying away its funds,authority and responsibility, separation of the functionsshould include clear arrangements for delegatingadequate for the nature and scale of their business. Thesethat banks have in place internal Controls that arePrinciple 14, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must determineadequate for the nature and scale of their business.that banks have in place internal Controls that arePrinciple 14, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must determineNot Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core PrinciplePrinciple 19 Banking Supervisors must have a means of independent validation of supervisory information eitherPrinciple 21, Part 1 Bank Supervisors must be satisfied that each bank maintains adequate records drawn up inaccordance with consistent accounting policies andpractices that enable the Supervisor to obtain a true andfair view of the financial condition of the bank and thePrinciple 21, Part 2 Bank Supervisors must be satisfied that the bank publishes on a regular basis FinancialPrinciple 22 Banking Supervisors must have at their disposal adequate Supervisory measures to bring abouttimely corrective action when banks fail to meetprudential requirements such as minimum capitaladequacy ratios when there are regulatory violations orwhere depositors are threatened in any other way.   Inextreme circumstances this should include the ability to36ventures  and subsidiaries. their foreign branches, joint worldwide, primarily at by these banking organisations prudential norms to all aspects of the business conductedwill be now implemented. banks, adequately monitoring and applying appropriateinhouse group in this regard and these by an consolidated supervision over their internationally active The BFS has approved the proposals made Principle 23 Banking Supervisors must practice globallicence or recommend its revocation revoke the banking Statements that fairly reflect its condition.profitability of its businessexamining related issues.inhouse group is implementation. An group on a consolidated basis.on the agenda of the Bank for the capability of the supervisors to supervise the bankingIntroduction of consolidated supervision is Principle 20 An essential element of bank Supervision isthrough On-site Examination or use of External Auditors.Not Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principle.1.a) A Current investment is an investment that is In UK the investments areby its nature readily realisable and is intended to classified as current/non-current but in US there are(ii) available for sale and (iii)211334637trading.maturity for debt securities only other than a current investment.be held for not more than one year.and permanenta) As per international standard. a) Definition of currentI) Investmentsmeasurement:Asset recognition andComments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard IssueA comparative analysisAccounting Standards as relevant to banksAnnexure IIIinto by the Expert Group set up by GOI.with other supervisors. This will be looked consolidated Supervisionauthorising the Bank to share information Supervisors of those banks for the purpose of carrying outprovision be incorporated in the Actpowers to share information needed by the home country It has been suggested that a specific Principle 25, Part 2 Banking Supervisors must haveinstitutions .domestic same high standards as are required of local operations of foreign banks to be conducted to thePrinciple 25, Part 1 Banking Supervisors must require the(primarily host-country Supervisory Authorities).will be now implemented. exchange with the various other Supervisors involvedby an in house group in this regard and these Supervision is establishing contact and informationThe BFS has approved the proposals made Principle 24 A key component of ConsolidatedNot Implemented Partially Implemented Implemented Core Principleb) Investments classified as current assets should b) For the purpose of valuation all investments other Current investments are valuedbe carried in the balance sheet at market value or than permanent investments in Government and at the lower of cost and netthe lower of cost or market value. The approved securities held as permitted by RBI has to be realisable value or at currentcomparison of cost and market value can be treated as current investments and marked to market. cost.   In US held to maturityperformed  either on an aggregate portfolio basis, Banks have been advised by RBI to bifurcate all securities should be held atin total or by category of investments, or on an investments in approved and Government securities amortised cost. Trading andinto current and permanent. The minimum ratio of available for sale securitiesand losses can be included in income or can increased gradually from 30 percent to 70 percent for value.the year ending March 31 1999. RBI has already Gains and losses should beshould be carried in the balance sheet at securities but to shareholders’The valuation of current investments is done category equity for available for sale(a) wise. Any net gains under each category is ignored but(b) losses have to be debited to Profit and Loss account The Indian accounting in the case of marketable equity under Provisions and Contingencies.  If on valuation, standards laid down by RBI insecurities the lower of cost and market there is an excess in the provision for depreciation consultation with the Instituteaccount created by earlier debit to profit and loss of Chartered Accountants of38India is more conservative as account, it can be written back to profit and lossvalue determined on portfolio basis.(c)revalued amountssecurities. costeither:investments have to be treated as current.be credited to revaluation surplus.individual investment basis.b)ValuationIf revalued amounts are used, a policy for the banks cannot classifyfrequency of revaluation should be adopted and However, such excess has to be transferred to Capitalthe 100 percent mark to marketis achieved.  Further banksbe recognised through the income statement or case of unquoted investments the value is to be cannot recognise unrealised netadjusted on owners’ equity as a revaluation determined on the basis of ‘Yield to Maturity’.surplus provided that the valuation is above cost. However the values have to be further discountedAny revaluation below cost is recognised as anexpense in the income statement. The enterprise Permanent investments can be held at book value.should recognise any decline in value below cost However, any premium paid has to be amortised overother than on a temporary basis on an item- by- the life of the investment. Any discount has to beignored. For the purpose of valuation, as stated above,banks are not allowed to treat  more than 30 percent oftheir portfolio has permanent investment andprogressively over the next three years the intention isc) In cases where current investments are carried c) Banks have to recognise the depreciation in thec) Fixed to currentat lower of cost and market, transfer has to bemade at the lower of cost and carrying amount.Any revaluation reserve  remaining after thetransfer has to be reversed.  Where currentinvestments are carried at market, transfercarrying amount. Transfer any remainingrevaluation reserve to income if the policy oncurrent assets is to take gains and losses tod) Current to fixed d) Transfer at lower of cost and market or at d) the transfer will be at value net of depreciation.However, with banks moving to 100 percent mark to39market such transfers will be few.transfersmarket if that was the basis used.income.category at the time of such transfer.value of the investment when it is transferred to current transfersthat the full portfolio should be marked to market.item basis.where interest or redemption are in arrears.gains   as income. Incapital and cannot be used for distribution of dividend. The resulting changes in carrying value can eitherReserve which is allowed to be treated as part of Tier II investments should be valued in entire categories.investments as permanent  onceaccount under the head ‘provisions and contingencies’ .Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issuetransfers substantially all the risks andrewards.UK and US have laid down the books of the lessee. Indian Accounting Standardon lease accounting ensures that the lease rentalsuseful life unless there is no certainty about repayment of the lease obligation. A matchingeventual purchase when the shorter of useful annual charge is made to profit and loss accountrepresenting recovery of the net investment/fairof either net investment or net cashdepreciation provided thereon. The leasestandard on this and each country adopts itsown practice. However an internationalaccounting standard on this issue is expectedhas laid down norms for recognition ofincome and for provisions for loan losses orthey rely on the assessment of the external40auditor such as in UK Germany etc.As far as banks are concerned, each regulatorshortly.and provisioning.by RBI for income recognition, asset classificationIn India banks follow the detailed norms laid down iii) Impairment of assetsobligation is shown in creditors.should be taken over the lease term.of finance leases apparent profit if recognisedIn the case of sale and lease back transactionscharacter of the lease.investment used consistently according to thethe lease.value of the leased asset over the primary period oflife and lease term should be used.presumptions and conditions in this regard.capitalised in the books of the lessor and not in theii) Lease accountingComments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue2. Liability recognitioni) Contingencies andevents occurring after the International Accounting Standard In regard to of Securities Companies hasit is probable that future events will confirm off balance sheet items the external auditors and called for a review of thethat an asset has been impaired or a liability measurement requirements ofincurred at the balance sheet date; (b) a this standard as guidance isreasonable estimate of the amount of the required to define more clearlyresulting loss can be made. The existence of the nature of contingencies. Ifa contingent loss should be disclosed in a this can be achieved the revisednote to the accounts if it is probable that thedistinguishing on-balancedate but before the date on which financial items. There is also a particularstatements are authorised for issue may concern about the use ofprovisions in financialand liabilities or may require disclosure. The statements which will also beessential test is whether the event provides addressed when this standardat the balance sheet date or provides ifnormatiion relating to the applicability of thegoing concern assumption. For e.g. aborrower becoming bankrupt after thedeferred tax liability should be recognised deferred tax credit. The provision for taxation isfor all taxable temporary differences (apart based on the estimated tax liability currentlyfrom some specific exceptions). A deferred payable. This is one area where Indian GAAPtax asset may be recognised (for the carry- differs from US/UK GAAP. As far as banks areforward of unused tax losses and unused taxcredits) to the extent that it is probable that provisions made by them towards non-performingfuture taxable profit will be available against assets are not tax deductible and provisions arewhich the unused tax losses and unused taxcredits can be utilised. Measurement ofthe tax rates which are expected to applywhen the liability is settled or the asset is41realiseddeferred tax liabilities and assets should be atmade gross of tax.concerned they have more of deferred tax credit asii) Income taxesbalance sheet date.will be reviewed additional evidence about conditions existingindicate a need to make adjustments to assetsgain will be realisedstandard will provide a basis forhave been provided for.RBI inspectors do verify whether contingent lossesthe balance sheet daterecognised as an expense and a liability if (a)and measurementComments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard IssueJanuary 1 1996 in view of the increasing use ofgoverned by conservative limits on positions etcfor each class of financial asset, liability and products. The standard will be applied when weequity instrument disclosure is required of conditions and accounting policies, interest ratefuture economic benefits will flow to the are allowed to recognise interest and otherenterprise and these benefits can be measures income on accrual basis. However, if interest ispast due for two quarters, it cannot be recognisedproportion basis that takes into account theshareholder’s right to receive dividend is4. Effects of changes inforeign exchange rates in two ways. The exchange rates in respect of foreign currencyenterprise may undertake transactions in, alternatively it may operate part of its business in a foreign country which overseas branches of Indian banks, the RBIinstructions are that any translation gains shouldnot be recognised as income but transferred to a42separate account in the balance sheet.has a different currency.foreign currencyare as per international standard. transactions foreign exchange ratesestablished.effective yield on the assetfollowing basis.royalties and dividends.by others of enterprise assets yielding interest,of goods, the rendering of services and the riseon accrual basis.reliably.3.  Revenue RecognitionRevenue is recognised when it is probable thatrisk, credit risk fair value and hedges.introduce these products in the banking sector. termsderivatives interest rate swaps etc. and Presentationinstruments: Disclosuremanaging for foreign currency liabilities which are(iv) FinancialInternational Standard. and loss accountiii) Employee benefitsComments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue. recorded in the reporting currency of theenterprise by applying the exchange raterelevant at the date of the transactionexchange differences arising from settlementor reporting of monetary items should berecognised as income or expenses in theintegral to the operations of the reportingenterprise or whether it is an operation whichenjoys a significant degree of autonomy from5. statements should consolidate all subsidiaries example where a subsidiary operates undersevere long term restrictions which one of the core principles for effective bankingsupervision, it is proposed to call for a off-sitewith many of the problem areas of groupnature of a business combination;consolidated financial statements andinvestments in subsidiaries; investments in43accounted under the equity method.associates and interests in joint ventures.accounting such as foreign exchange rates; thereporting on consolidated basis.to the parent.significantly impair its ability to transfer fundscarried at cost.accounted for under equity method. Investments are foreign and domestic with few exceptions. ForConsolidation is not required. Group accountingthe reporting enterprise.depends on whether the foreign operations areperiod in which they arise.Comments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue6. Disclosure andpresentation –International AccountingStandard 30 whichspecifically deals withdisclosure in thefinancial statements ofbanks and other similar2. Income statement: A bank should present an 2. income statement complies with internationalincome statement which groups income andexpenses by nature and discloses the amounts of3. Income and expenses should not be offsetexcept for those relating to hedges and to assetsand liabilities where there is a legal right to set offand the offsetting represents the expectation as tothe realisation or settlement of the asset or4. a bank should present a balance sheet that 4. groups assets and liabilities by nature and liststhem in an order that reflects their relative5. a bank should disclose the market value of 5. Market value of current investments is disclosed.dealing securities and marketable investmentsecurities if these values are different from the6. the amount at which any asset or liability isstated in the balance sheet should not be offset bythe deduction of another liability or asset unless alegal right of set-off exists and the offsettingrepresents expectation as to the realisation or44settlement of the asset or liability.6. IAS compliantcarrying amounts in the financial statementsMarket value of permanent investments is not disclosed.Investmentsliquidity.Assets listing reflects liquidity but not the liabilities. Balance sheetliability.3. IAS compliantthe principal types of income and expensesstandard1.  Accounting policies are disclosed 1. Accounting policies disclosure Income statementfinancial institutionsComments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue7. a bank should disclose specified contingencies 7. IAS compliant – as per assessment of externaland commitments and events occurring after the8. a bank should disclose an analysis of assets and 8. Banks are yet to build up information on maturityliabilities into relevant maturity groupings based pattern. RBI has advised banks to put in place suitableon the remaining period at the balance sheet date9. a bank should disclose any significantconcentrations of its assets liabilities and off sector Government and banks. Secured and unsecuredbalance sheet items. Such disclosures should bemade in terms of geographical areas, customer orindustry groups or other concentrations  of risk. A10. a bank should disclose the following in regard•  the accounting policy which describes thebasis on which uncollectable loans and advances are recognised as an expense and•  details of the movements in provisions forlosses on loans and advances during the•  the aggregate amount of the provision forlosses on loans and advances at the balance•  the aggregate amount included in the balanceis not being accrued and the basis used todetermine the carrying amount of such loansare prohibited from giving loans to companies/firms in45which directors are interestedtransactions11. Not disclosed.  However, as per Banking Law, banks 11. .related party transactions should be disclosed Related partyand advances.sheet for loans and advances on which interestsheet date andperiod.Indian regulations not IAS compliant.written off.net non-performing assets to net advancesprovisions made during the yearaccounting policiesto losses on loans and advances: advances10 The following disclosure is mandatory. Losses on loans andnet foreign currency exposures.bank should also disclose the amount of significantexposures are also disclosed. balance sheet itemsliabilities and off-9. The banks disclose exposures to public sector priority Concentrations of assets,to the contractual maturitysystems to capture this information.assets and liabilitiesMaturity pattern ofbalance sheet date as already stated above.auditors commitmentsContingencies andComments Indian Standard/Regulation  as applicable to banks International Accounting Standard Issue IV• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •  on 46Minimum size of CP toRequirement of minimumindividuals can invest inwith.availablerepatriable basis andcurrent ratio dispensed Facility of stand-byNRIs on a non- FIs, Banks, Requirement of minimumworking capital)rated.abolished.The issue requires to be linked to fund basedFacility of stand-byaggregate amount of CPlakh. Rs.25 cent of working capital Bank Borrowing (ceiling onThe minimum size of CP isand floating rate CP. Ceiling increased to 100 per Maximum Permissiblematurity of 1 year.Issue of CP linked tosuch as coupon bearing CP dispensed withdays and maximumVariation to instrument Prior permission of RBI required.minimum maturity of 15Prior permission of RBIElectronic Dealing System. Discounted instrumentdiscounted instrument for aDiscounted instrumentduty structure permitted to issue CP as a issue CPRationalisation of stamp PDs are Corporates and PDs are also allowed to corporates Issued by 2. Commercial PaperTelephone oriented marketstatutory ceiling on NDTL.CRR and SLR subject toexempted for purpose ofInterbank liabilitiesstipulated ceilings.periods 3-6 months withinterm money market forpermitted to borrow frommoney market. EXIM Bank and NABARDexposure of banks in call IDBI/ICICI/IRBI/SIDBI/ALM guidelines to limitcrore.Reuters/NSE.Electronic Dealing System. reduced gradually to Rs.3emerging throughoperationalise Proposal to crore, which was at Rs.20 Telephone oriented market.liabilities. Reference raterepo. minimum size of operations liabilities.interbank exempted for DFHI as lenders with interbank maintained Others to operate through to lend. CRR/SLRallowed to entities through CRR/SLR required to beborrowers. PDs are permitted through Routing of transactions allowed as lenders.operating as lenders and funds/corporate entitiesPDs with only banks/ companies/mutual allowed as lenders. Financial institutionsPrivate Mutual Fundsinterbank market purely an FIs/insurance borrow. borrowers and lenders.call/term money market permitted to lend and lenders and borrowers. participate in market asMarketProposal to make the PDs are Banks and Primary Dealers allowed as Only banks were allowed to1. Call/Notice/Term MoneyComments/outlook Current Status Reform Status Pre-Reform Status Elements of ReformMoney Market AnnexureCP.• • lakh.• • • • • • of  3• • • lakh.• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 47debentures/bonds with Units could be issued toinvest in corporate daysMMMFs permitted to Subsequently reduced to 15period – 46 days.schemes.have floated MMMF Initial Minimum lock-in-Mutual   Funds Pioneer repatriation basis.Kothari IDBI, UTI and NRIs can invest on non-facilities.MMDA or MMMFConsider cheque issuance MMDAs. MMMFs/ existing mutual funds as15 days. and institutions to set up directly or through theminimum holding period of been given for 10 banks PFIs Commercial Banks/Consider reduction in In principle approval has Can be set up by Scheduled Did not exist.4. Money Market Mutual Fundsdays.Initial lock-in period of 45year.deposits in the previousoutstanding aggregatefortnightly averageCD at 1 per cent ofdays. Bankwise limit on issue ofreduced gradually to 15 year.Initial lock-in periodnot more than 1 maturity lock-in period is 15 days. later withdrawn. months and maximumlakh and the minimum Rs.5 raised up to 10 per cent and should not be less than 3The minimum size of CD is Bankwise limits gradually Minimum maturity of CDrate CD.discounted instrument. lakh. multiples of Rs.25 interest bearing CD and floatingCD is issued as a gradually reduced to Rs.5 crore, and issued inVariation to instrument such asMinimum size of CD CD : Rs.1 Minimum size of years, respectively.structure.Rationalise stamp duty months to 1 year and 1 to 3 1-3 years. a discounted instrument.structure of CDs. CDs for maturity also issue CD for maturity RRBs) as banks (excluding FIs can issue Banks and Financial institutions can Issued only by commercialRationalise the maturity 3. Certificate of DepositsRating required.Rating requiredyear.months.maturity elongated to 1days and maximum Maturity range of 3-6gradually reduced to 15Minimum maturity denomination of Rs.25crore in at Rs.1 lakh. Rs.5 lakh with denomination of Minimum size of CP issueinvestor reduced to Rs.25 current ratio (1.33 :1)• • • • • • • • 48rediscounting.No minimum period ofNo ceiling on interest rates.participants in this market.days.money market arefor a minimum period of 15rediscount commercial bills (April 1995). All participants in the callmoney market can prescribed for rediscounting bills not to exceed 30 days. RediscountingAll participants in the call Minimum period of 15 days Maturity of commercial5. Commercial Billsfrom RBI.fund with liquidity supportLaunched 100 per cent Giltless than one year.Securities with maturityCP/T-Bills/CD/Datedmarket instruments such asInvestment in money(April 1996)year, within limits. par with other mutual fundsmaturities less than one Corporates and others on• • • Limit • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 49commission introduced inreplaced the system of(since June 1997). ThisPDs) Primary Dealers (amount underwritten byA portion of the notifiedeach auction (Oct 1998).of preannounced in respect Notified amountbonds, etc.paid stock, capital indexedfloating rate bonds, partlysuch as zero-coupon bonds,Variety of instruments used securityon prevailing conditions.and also on tap, depending not more than 10 years. vanilla fixed couponMaturity of security usually Instrument used was plainpreannounced coupon rateauctions. related market auction (June 1992). issued.market clearing  yields at Securities also sold at Discriminatory type of 20-30 years were beingtotally Aim to move to auction process. 1992). Long-Dated Securities ofinstruments. through discriminatory auction process (June preannounced coupon rate. SecuritiesCan consider new Securities generally sold Securities sold through Dated Securities sold at low 2. Dated Government(since April 1, 1997).Day Intermediate T-BillsTap T-Bills replaced by 14-2 percentage points.overdraft at Bank rate plusdebt officials. Maximum period of4.6 per cent.constituted with RBI and agreed limits  at Bank rate.and Debt Market advances (WMA) within System of Tap T-Bills atMonitoring Group of Cash system of ways and means interest rate of 4.6 per cent.after March 31, 1999. 1997) and introduction of system of ad-hoc T-Bills atcrore.permitted beyond 10 days second half at Rs.7,000 hoc T-Bills (since April 1, budget deficit through aNo overdraft will be crore and for the Rs.11,000 of  system of Ad- Abolition monetisation of Automatic reviewed further. half of 1998-99 fixed at policy . management policyLimits of WMA to be of  WMA for the first Active debt management Absence of internal debt1. PolicyComments/Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Measures Elements of  ReformGovernment Securities MarketAnnexure V• • • • • • • • • • • • • • PDs.• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 50an SRO PDs have formed (March 1996) and can raiseissued market. of the notified amount. borrowers and lendersConsider introducing when- money market both asunderwrite more than 30 %PDs have access to callnotified amount. PDs cannot Individual underwriting to 100 % of commitments.1998).Increase the proportion of principle approval (October PDs given biddingPDs. number of have been given in- (March 1996).Consider increasing the PDs Recently, seven new PDs licensed Initially six Did not exist. 5. Primary DealersGovernment Securities.markets and retailprimary and secondaryestablished to activate1996) have beenSatellite Dealers (DecemberDealers (March 1995) andof  Primary A system status.Government Securities.STCI has acquired PD 1994) to develop trading inminority shareholder. Promoted by RBI (Julyholdings in STCI and is a Corporation of India Ltd.RBI has diluted most of its Securities Trading No specialised institution4. Institutional Developmentunderwritten by T-Bills auctionamounts.kept outside notifiedDay and 91-Day T-Bills)(allowed in respect of 14-market conditions.Non-competitive bidsprevailing depending on Notified amount varied announcedNotified amounts pre-respect of 91-Day T-Bills.uniform type auction in 1992).and 364-day T-Bills and auction basis (since Aprilused in respect of 14-day T-Bills sold throughgained.Discriminatory auctionsdepending on experience withdrawn.or discriminatory auctions alternate Wednesdays. Day. 182-day T-billsCould sell through uniform and 364-Day auctions every 14-Day, 91-Day and 364-auctions held every Friday exist – A variety of T-Bills Bills.14-Day and 91-Day T-Bills 182-Day T-Billsand reintroduce 182-day T- (April 1, 1997).introduce 28-day T-Bills auctions. Day Intermediate T-Bills coupon of 4.6 per centAnnounced intention to T-Bills sold through Tap T-Bills replaced by 14- 14-day Tap T-Bills at a3. Treasury BillsJuly 1996.) .• • • • • • • • SDs • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 51TDS abolished.Boards.needs ratification by bankincrease in broker limitsfixed for banks. AnyIndividual broker limitsrecognised stock exchange. transactions.they must be through a from secondary marketIf routed through brokers of  income (TDS) in respect two way quotes. active Tax deducted at sourcePDs are expected to give counterparties.limits may be considered. directly between brokers.secondary markets.Ease in individual broker Transactions are usually Transactions routed throughusually active in thebeing put in place. private sector banks are conducted over telephone. over telephone.Electronic Dealing System PDs, foreign banks and new Transactions continue to be Transactions conducted 8. Secondary Market Tradingbanks, etc.constituent accounts withencouraged to openaccounts with RBI andPFs asked to close SGLfor constituents.transactions and the other Delivery Versus Payment.SGL accounts, one for own Manual Accounting and noParticipants  given twoSGL accounts.settlement. PFs holding FIs, Banks, current account. current account with RBI. with DVP system forDebt Office of RBI.To integrate SGL and /SHCIL have SGL and Computerised environment maintained in the PublicPDs/NSE/NSDL FIs/ Banks/settlement system. maintained in PDO of RBI General Ledger AccountsTo move to real time gross DVP system in operation. Through SGL accounts Through Subsidised 7. Settlement Systemcall/notice money market.do not have access to(June 1998). given to banks (Nov 1997).SDs permitted to issue CP approval Two in-principle SDs. number of PDs. graduated as initially (Nov 1997).Consider increasing the SDs have Four out of nine SDs registered Nine Did not exist. 6. Satellite Dealers(August 1998).notified amounts in auctionPDs underwrite 50 % ofmarket (September 1996intercorporate and from the Association. by way of loans from bankscalled Primary Dealers funds through issue of CP,• • • • • • • • • • • repos.• • • • • • • 52and secondary markets.Bills also in both primarypermitted  investment in T-FIIs Since May 1998, markets.primary and secondaryoperate Dated Securities inInvestors  can Institutional Bodies/ ForeignNRI/ Overseas Corporate11. Foreign Investmentvolume tender (Nov 1997).auction basis and fixed ratenecessary.Repos conducted both onconducted as and when volume tender basis.contemplated and will be repos  on fixed rate 3 /4 day repos.repo being 1 day conducts Currently RBI RBI conducts 3 /4/14 day Repos 10. RBI repos.standardised contracts forfor market practices andIntroduce code of conductIntroduce different form ofGovernment debt.dematerialisation of non-1998).Encouragereduced to 1 day (Octoberdematerialised formone day repo Minimum period of Non-Government debt inrepos is Minimum period of repos (April 1997).market in Government andholders can lend throughrepo allow access to the repos.select Mutual funds/other market can lend throughall non-bank participants toare lenders in call money (June 1994).The sequencing will requireinterbank. market purely Non-bank participants who repos and lend through PDs can borrow Banks and interbank call money repos. and borrow through the It is proposed to make PDs can lend Banks and Heavily restricted Freely done Repos 9. Inter-Bank • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • and• • • • • 53for small value instruments like(screen-based dealing).form of NSE and a stock exchangeNational Stock Exchange set upelectronic stock exchange in the regulatory bodySHCIL.There is an custodians like Issues abolished. India set up as adepositories like NSDL and Office of Controller of Capital Exchange Board of DevelopmentSEBI is the regulator. There are SEBI accorded statutory status. Securities and Institutionalrates, deep discount bonds, etc. instrumentsand put options, step-up interest Traditional debtdebentures, debentures with calldeposits.optionally fully convertiblecent of incrementalconvertible instruments, debentures at 1.5 perZero interest fully bonds and corporatewith detachable equity warrants,investments in PSUnotes, Non-convertible debentures banks Ceiling of deferred interest secured paymentcompulsoryInnovative instruments such asintroduce interest rate swaps debenturesPSU bonds removed.Announced the intention to of convertiblebanks investments in Ceiling on instruments. Conversion in respectintroduced. can invest freely in such choice of investor. debenturesDerivatives will be Conversion made optional at theinstruments are available. Banks 14% on taxableInnovation will continue. A variety of corporate debt Interest rate ceiling removed. Interest rate ceiling of 2. Corporate Debtfinancial institutionsdeposits.PSUs and public in bonds of cent of incremental15% of their incremental depositsdebentures at 1.5 perPFs initially allowed to investbonds and corporatebonds increased to 30 per cent.PSU bonds removed.investments in PSUPFs investment in PSU Limit of banks investments in Ceiling of Ceiling of banksawaited. as Stamp Duty clearances recognised stock exchangesthrough NSE. But, yet to take off fixed at 10%demat form and throughrate on tax-free bondsdemat form and done are in Repos permitted in PSU bonds in Maximum interestRepos are permitted if PSU bondsto 10.5 per cent. at 14%.variety of bonds in the market.Ceiling on tax-free bonds raisedfreely in PSU bonds. There are a rate on taxable bondsfreed Maximum interestmarket trading. taxable bonds. Banks can investInterest rate on taxable bondspromote secondary on tax-free bonds and no ceiling on issued.stamp duty structure to issued. There is ceiling of 10.5% continue to be permitted. bonds permitted to beProposal to rationalise Taxable and tax-free bonds can be Tax-free and taxable bonds Tax-free and taxable 1. PSU BondsReformComments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Status Elements ofNon-Government Debt Market• • • • 54Credit Rating Agencies set up.Ltd. (Depository).National securities DepositoryIndia set up (custodial services).Stock Holding Corporation ofsecurities).OTCEI set up (for small valueOTCEI.Elements of• Exchange rate  officially • A significant two stage downward adjustment • Exchange rate of the rupeedetermined by RBI in terms of aweighted basket of currencies of on the demand and supplyIndia's major trading partners. The • Simultaneously EXIM Scrip scheme wasregime was characterised by dailyintroduced. LERMS was in place during1992-93, under which 40 per cent of the• Given the RBI's obligation to buy proceeds of the exchange earners had to beand sell unlimited amounts of the surrendered at the official rate and 60 per centintervention currency i.e., pound at the market rate. With effect from March 1,sterling, arising from the banks' 1993, the exchange rate of the rupee wasmerchant purchases, its quotes for unified and the era of fully floating market-buying/selling effectively becamethe fulcrum around which the • RBI discontinued quoting of  buying andselling rate from October 4, 1995. The RBI• now quotes its buying rate to any authorised• With effect from July 3, 1995  Debt ServiceUniform limit of Rs 15 crore on the• Consequent upon the recommendations of the • Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Market advised to report  (at close(Chairman: Shri O.P. Sodhani), the uniform of business everyday) theirRs 15 open position as at 10.a.m.of the ADs was removed with effect from as also their peak intra-dayJanuary 4 1996. Banks allowed to operate onthe limits fixed by their management’s and• Aggregate Gap Limit (AGL) was left to bedepending upon their foreign exchangeoperations, risk taking capacity, balance sheetsize and other relevant parameters subject to55the approval from the Reserve Bank.fixed by the individual banks since April 1996vetted by RBI.positionADs). Dealers (Authorisedcrore on the overnight positions limit of six times the net owned funds of a bank. Limits (AGL) of AGL not to exceed US $ 100 million or Aggregate GapADs. overnight positions of Positions/ADs Since August 20, 1998,      - 2. OvernightPayments routed through the market.dealer on receiving a specific request. through foreign exchange reserves.Debt Service Payments were routedmarket moved.determined exchange rate began.price setting by RBI.of  foreign exchange.July 1 and 3, 1991.is market determined, based in the exchange rate of the rupee took place onRate Regime             - 1. ExchangeReformsComments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform StatusForeign Exchange MarketAnnexure VIElements of• No cross currency • Since April 1996, ADs were allowed tooptions/derivative products were initiate cross currency position overseas, tocancel and rebook cross currency options andoffer derivative products to enable their• Banks  not permitted free tradingopportunities in the overseas• Since August 1996, ADs allowed to offer (a)Interest rate swaps (b) Currency swaps,)Coupon swaps, (d) Purchase of interestrate caps/collars and (e) Forward rateagreements to their corporate clients for theirasset-liability management either by bookingthe transactions overseas or on a back-to-back basis, without prior approval of  theupfront premia as well as other chargesincidental to the hedge transactions couldalso be effected by ADs without prior• Since September 1996, ADs accordedfreedom to offer to their customers costreduction strategies and risk-reduction optionstrategies like Range Forwards, Ratio RangeForwards etc. subject to the condition thatthere is no net inflow of premium to thecustomers by shorting volatilities. were allowed to freely book and cancel• Banks not allowed to offer foreign Banks permitted in October 1996 to provideforeign currency denominated loans to their56resident deposits.FCNR(B) deposits. customers out of the pool of Loans.currency loans from the pool of non-Currency          -         - 4. Foreignoptions.Corporatesof  the Reserve bank. approval government or the Reserve Bank. Payment of(cmarkets.customers to hedge their external liabilities.Productsderivativeavailable. Options andCurrency     -        - 3. CrossReformsComments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform StatusElements of•  • ADs advised informally not • As the forex marketfrom their overseas offices/ correspondents as to arbitrage  between the deepens further and thewell as to invest funds in overseas money money and foreign markets becomemarket instruments up  to US $ 10 million. In exchange markets which integrated, this October 1997, this limit was raised to 15 per could bring in additionalcent • The Report on Capital• Limit modified to include overnight Account investments out of nostro account balances of recommends that  theonly restriction should1949 and open• To access the forward market •   permitted to book forward cover for • • The need for documentscorporates were required to exporters and importers on the basis of a based on presumptive to enter into a forwardproduced ocuments evidencing declaration of exposures supported by past exposure temporarily contract would bewithdrawn since December•  Unlimited cancellation and the total forward contracts outstanding at any 2, 1997 in view of  thepoint of time did not exceed the averagerebooking of forward contracts notand presently forward cover• Corporates were given complete freedom in is allowed based only on• The participants in the forwarddocuments evidencing1992 to actively hedge their exposures byfreely booking and cancelling forward• Facility for rebooking of• cancelled contracts ispresently available only forcontracts on non-trade transactions for thesame underlying exposure was banned and exports. Rebooking ofcancelled contracts is notallowed in case of non-trade• Since August 20, 1998, it was decided towithdraw the facility of rebooking cancelledcontracts for trade related transactionscovering imports. However, contracts can be• Participants in the forward market have beenincreased considerably. In August 1997 ,  were allowed to cover their debt exposures in• In October 1997, the facility of forward coverwas extended to NRI depositors in respect of57the forward market.FIIsrolled over before maturity.transactions and imports.only rollover was allowed.Since December 1, 1997 rebooking of forwardcontracts.exposures.market were limited.allowed.export/import turnover of  the last two years.forex market volatility in the withdrawn. performance and business projection provided exposure.MarketBooking of forward contract ADs 6. Forwardposition/gap limits.be Section 25 of BR Act,the banks.Convertibiltyvolatility in the market. of  the Tier I capital of the banks.would be raised.limit banks.investments byborrowings/  were permitted  in April 1997 to borrow ADs Banks not permitted 5. OverseasReformsComments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Statusdeposits held in Non Resident (External)Rupee accounts [NRE(R)A] and ForeignCurrency Non-Resident (Banks) [FCNR(B)]• facility for equity investment by FIIs was(over and above the level of investment inequity prevailing at the end of business on• Since August 20, 1998, ADs were allowed tooffer forward cover facility to FIIs to theextent of 15 per cent of the value of theirinvestments as on June 11, 1998. This facilitywas in addition to the facility already• Forward contracts have also been allowed forremittance of dividend in respect of direct58foreign investment.available for incremental investments.June 11, 1998).made available for  "incremental investments"With effect from June 12, 1998, forward coverschemesElements of• No rupee based derivatives were • In April 1997, RBI permitted  ADs  to offer • Once this was permitted the Rupee based derivativeswould be developed furtherdollar-rupee swaps to corporates market has seen forwardand run  a swap-book within their open deals upto 5 years whereas with the deepening of theposition/gap limits without prior approval of earlier a price beyond 6 forex market and emergence of a stable rupee8. Exchange The ultimate objective is to• Exporters and exchange earners • were not allowed to retain  any retain 50 per cent of their foreign exchange allow exporters andexchange earners to retainearnings in the Exchange Earners’ Foreign100 per cent of their• 100 per cent EOUs are allowed to retain 70• Since August 20, 1998, it was decided topermit exporters to use the balances in EEFCaccounts for all business related payments inIndia and abroad at their discretion including59payments of airfare and hotel expenditure.per cent of their earnings in such accounts.Accountproceeds. (EEFC)Currency (EEFC) accounts.Currencyportion of their proceeds.ForeignEarners'Exporters and exchange earners are allowed to                 -yield curve.month was not available. the Reserve Bank of  India.thecorporates available.derivatives7. Rupee basedReformsComments/ Outlook Current Status Reform Measures Pre-Reform Status
