Credit through Co-Operatives : Some Thoughts*Let me at the outset thank the Chairman and other Executives of the National Co-operativeAgricultural & Rural Development Banks’ Federation Ltd. for having invited me here today. TheFederation has played a very important role in providing the members a forum for jointconsultations and inputs for policy formulation since its inception in 1960. It has also beeninstrumental in facilitating a series of initiatives for beefing up the co-operative structure byAs a significant part of the multi-agency approach to credit delivery in India, co-operative banks- both in the short-term and long-term structure - hold an important position especially in therural credit scenario and have played a pivotal role in the development of rural credit over theyears. The geographical spread of the entire co-operative credit system covers over 74 per cent ofrural credit outlets and it has a market share of about 46 per cent of total rural credit in thecountry. As you are aware, in conformity with the broad philosophy and strategy for reformsinitiated in our country in 1991, banking sector reforms, as an important component thereof,have focused on (i) policy framework, (ii) improvement in financial health of banks throughintroduction of prudential regulations and (iii) institutional strengthening. It is especially in thecontext of the third element, viz. the need for building a strong institutional framework in the co-operative sector, that the role of the National Co-operative Agriculture & Rural DevelopmentBanks’ Federation assumes particular significance in playing a catalytic role in putting togetherthe financial and other operational inputs required for restoring the momentum of growth in thisOver the years the long-term co-operative credit structure has grown tremendously with changesenvisaged in its role from time to time. The path traversed has been from being a provider ofloans merely for redemption of debt to meeting the investment credit requirements of the entireactivities in rural areas. The structure now has a membership of 1.3 crores, net owned funds ofRs. 3191 crores and loans and advances outstanding of Rs. 17261 crores respectively. Thestructure has however not developed uniformly and there are states where it has started showingpalpable signs of infirmity.  The gross net performing assets (NPAs) of the State Co-operativeAgriculture & Rural Development Banks (SCARDBs) and Primary Co-operative Agriculture andRural Development Banks (PCARDBs) have also been fairly high at 19.19 per cent and 16.05per cent respectively. Needless to say, such loan defaults have led to clogging of the co-operativecredit pipeline with the consequence that even in states where the co-operative system hasdeveloped to some extent it had not always functioned in the manner it was expected. Indeed,accumulated losses, provision for NPAs, etc. have affected both deposits and borrowings of theco-operative banks to a considerable extent.In retrospect, the development of the financial sector in independent India can be divided intothree broad phases: (a) the first two decades representing a foundation phase, (b) the next twodecades after bank nationalization in 1969 which was marked by rapid expansion and (c) the lastdecade that has been characterized by consolidation, diversification and liberalization. TheIndian financial system has over the years undergone a remarkable transformation and nowcomprises an impressive network of financial institutions, financial markets and a wide range offinancial instruments. As mentioned above, the co-operative credit structure has also grown tomassive proportions and land development banking too has gathered slow but steady momentumin the last few decades. In fact it has become a major instrument of capital formation in theprivate sector in rural areas. Despite this overall progress made by the financial system, reformshad become overdue as operational efficiency of the co-operative credit system, like many otherplayers in this sector, has as indicated above been characterised by low profitability, high and1growing NPAs and low capital base.sector in the new millennium.bringing together forces within and outside the system.An overriding problem plaguing the long-term co-operative credit structure in India has been theincidence of high NPAs/overdues. The recently-introduced NABARD guidelines for one-timesettlement (OTS) of chronic NPAs/overdues indeed afford a very good opportunity for the co-operative banks to get around this long-standing problem. While the banks will have to put inplace effective measures to strengthen their credit appraisal and supervision mechanism forarresting incidence of fresh overdues/NPAs, they should implement the OTS scheme as early asGiven this background, any observer of the co-operative credit scenario in India today isconfronted with a host of issues concerning the vulnerabilities that have weakened the systemvis-à-vis the need for co-operative reforms to achieve the twin objectives of effective creditdelivery and financial sustainability. These include organisational and managerial, financial andMember-driven Co-operatives : The high visibility of the State apparatus has distancedthe people from their day to day management and contributed to lack of involvement andownership in their functioning. All-out efforts are required for empowering the co-operativebanks by turning them into member-driven enterprises. This requires initiation of policies thatgive genuine character to Cooperatives, make the federal organizations more responsive andresponsible towards their members, develop self-reliance and self-confidence and decentralisepower of decision-making. The adoption of the essential features of the Model Co-operativeSocieties Act as recommended by the Choudhary Brahm Prakash Committee and bringing innecessary amendments in the State Co-operative Societies Acts so as to reflect the spirit ofDuality of Control: There is a need for doing away with the duality of control betweenthe State Governments and the central bank. Removing the overlapping of controls will go a longFocus on Development of the base Tier:  The PCARDBs need support in infrastructuredevelopment, strengthening resource base, improving connectivity and effective managementwith professionalization for inspiring the confidence of the people and muster their activeProfessionalization of Management: It is necessary to induct professionals like bankers,accountants, economists and rural credit experts in the co-operative bank boards who can guidein running the banks on sound business lines. In fact, appointment of Chief Executive Officers(CEOs) in these banks should be made on professional lines by considering all relevant factorslike qualifications, age, previous banking sector experience, etc.Human Resource Development : Co-operative banks have to evolve a systematicapproach towards Human Resource Development in many areas like manpower planning,recruitment, placement and leadership development for motivating staff and increasingproductivity.  A second line of effective management is necessary to support the CEO inoperational matters and to provide the CEO adequate time to concentrate on policy issues.Training and management development efforts in specific work areas and appropriateprogrammes should be designed and initiated in co-operatives to bring internal empowerment ofIntegration of Short-Term and Long-Term Structures : The need for having twostructures, viz. the short-term and the long-term, needs to be examined particularly in the contextof institutional viability and convenience to members. A number of committees/ fora have called2(vi)employees of these banks.(v)(iv)participation.(iii)way in imparting functional autonomy and operational leeway to co-operatives.(ii)democratisation and self-reliance will be a step in the right direction.(i)operational issues.possible and take maximum advantage of its provisions.for integration of the short-term and long-term structures, as a possible solution, by takingRevitalisation of Co-operative Banks:  The revitalisation package for co-operativebanks should take into account the financial, operational, organisational and systemic aspects.Any revamping process will of course need to have financial support for cleansing the balanceDeployment of Resources :  The co-operative banks have to be allowed greater freedomto deploy their funds on purely business considerations. This would enhance the profitability ofthe banks. Another emerging area of business is the recently-deregulated insurance sector whichmay need to be tapped by co-operatives in a big way. The National Co-operative Federation I amsure will effectively help out its member institutions in such diversification of their businessImproved external and internal checks & balances :  the core principles supervision in relation to co-operative banks have to be formulated and implemented by theNABARD, the cooperatives should also beef up their internal checks and balances throughadequate training and technical backstopping like a thorough overhaul of their weak managementinformation system (MIS) and tardy mechanisation as well as awarding of their audit work to and constitution of state level independent audit bureau(s).Recognising the continued relevance and catalytic role of co-operative banks in the developmentof agricultural and non-agricultural sectors of Indian rural economy in general and the need fortheir revitalization, a Task Force was set up by the Government of India in May 1999 under thechairmanship of Shri Jagdish Capoor, the then Deputy Governor of Reserve Bank of India tostudy the co-operative credit system in India and suggest measures for its strengthening.  ThisTask Force has also focused on the above issues and its recommendations are now underRural poverty in India does not wear a uniform face. Some of the poor manage to provide asteady subsistence level of income for themselves and their families. Others, truly destitute, areoften without any means of livelihood. Most gain their low socio-economic status as inheritanceand remain prisoners of it because they own little or no land and few productive assets.According to a 1998 study by T. Hague, P. Lanjouw and M. Ravallion, while 72.9 per centIndians live in rural areas, 76.3 per cent of the country’s poor consist of the rural poor. Viewed inthis context, the building up of the rural financial infrastructure for pro-poor growth hasconstituted and will surely constitute a major dimension of our developmental policy in theThe institutionalisation of savings with wide geographical and functional coverage ofinstitutional credit as its counterpart have been central to Reserve Bank of India’s credit planningall these years. Indeed, our Bank has over the years put its faith in the co-operative creditagencies for bearing the major share of the task of widening institutional agricultural credit if forno other reason than that its retail outlets are so much more widespread and far flung that it willtake a long time before any other type of institutional credit agency can percolate to all cornersof our country. I am confident that co-operative banks will prepare themselves to grapple withthe aforesaid challenges and convert them into opportunities. I congratulate the award-winningSCARDBs for their impressive performance during the year 2000-01 and wish the Federation3and all its member-institutions all the very best in their future endeavours.foreseeable future.consideration of the Government of India.Chartered Accountant firmsof Whereas (ix)operations.(viii)sheets of co-operative credit institutions with institution-specific conditionalities as a corollary.(vii)advantage of the diversified services.* Address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the National AwardsPresentation function for State Co-operative Agriculture & Rural Development Banks organized by National Co-4operative Agriculture & Rural Development Banks’ Federation Ltd. at New Delhi on July 20, 2001.
