This is the first Bank Economists’ Conference in the new millennium, and thesubject that you have chosen for this important conference “Indian Banking in the NewMillennium” will set the tone and pace of development in the banking and financialsector for the future.2. India’s banking system has several outstanding achievements to its credit , themost striking of which is its reach. An extensive banking network has been established inthe last thirty years, and India’s banking system is no longer confined to metropolitancities and large towns: in fact ,  Indian banks are now spread out into the remote cornersof our country.  In terms of the number of branches, India’s banking system is one of thelargest, if not the largest in the world today. An even more significant achievement is theclose association of India’s banking system with India’s development efforts. Thediversification and development of our economy, and the acceleration of the growthprocess, are in no small measure due to the active role that banks have played infinancing economic activities in different sectors.3. Our banking system, however, faces several difficult challenges. Some are grown – for example, the high cost of doing business, the high level of non-performingassets ( NPAs), and the relatively low level of customer satisfaction. Some of the newchallenges are external – for example, the phenomenal growth in the volume of capitalflows across nations and the consequent integration of financial markets across the globe.Unlike ten or twenty years ago, Indian banks can no longer be insulated frominternational developments and international capital movements.  These developmentshave brought with them both immense benefits (removal of capital constraints todevelopment) as well as costs (introduction of possibility of greater volatility and the4. In view of the do mestic as well as international developments that have beentaking place, it is extremely important for us to chart out a path for efficient developmentof banking in the new millennium. The subject chosen by you, therefore, could not bemore timely or more relevant.5. How should we look at the future of Indian banking in the new millennium? Oneway is to continue to do what we are doing now, but try and do it a little better.  Theother, and more exciting challenge, is to set ourselves an altogether different andambitious goal which can translate our country’s vast potential into an actual reality.  Inthis august assembly, and at the beginning of the new millennium, I would like to take thelatter course and think about the future of Indian banking against the background of the6. The sources of comparative advantage for nations are no longer factorendowments of capital, land and labour nor the locational advantages, nor the advantagesof early start or participation in the industrial revolution.  A prosperous country with oneof the best records of economic performance in the 1990s, i.e . the United States, isactually a net importer of capital.  The cost of manual labour is also rapidly becoming asmaller and smaller proportion of costs.  In most manufacturing industries in theshift that is taking place in the sources of comparative advantage amongst the nations.contagion).home-Banking and Finance in the New Millennium.industrial world, this cost is estimated to be no higher than one-eighth of total costs.  Thismeans that the older growth models of the Twentieth century – a model first developedEast-Asia, no longer works. Anothernoteworthy aspect is the steep fall in the material component in the final value of aproduct.7. The primary sources of compara tive advantage of nations today are “skills” andthe ability to adapt and change. These factors determine the prospects of prosperity andgrowth of an economy. It is important for the  emerging economies like India to basetheir growth on leadership in new technology, knowledge-based services, and manpower8. Against this background, I believe that the task that India should set for itself inthe new millennium is to transform our banking system from being a largely domesticone to a truly international one. It is striking that while we have made tremendous stridesin extending the reach of our banking system domestically, internationally the Indianbanking system is conspicuous by its absence.  We have very few branches in other partsof the world and even  these are mainly confined to India related business. We cannotclaim to have any significant presence in international financial markets and internationalbanking.  Banking is a service-oriented business requiring high levels of professional andpersonal skills and national boundaries are no longer very relevant in mobilisation andallocation of capital. Under the new circumstances, there is no reason why India shouldnot emerge as a major international banking centre, just as it has emerged as an importantlocation in the field of information technology and software.9. This objective is not something that can be achieved in a short period of time.  Itcan take 10 or even 15 years. But the time to begin and plan is now. This is a vision forthe new millennium that I would like to commend for your consideration. Let me nowbriefly mention some of the issues that we would need to tackle, if we have to 10. The institution of banks continues to have a unique place within the financialsystem. This is due to their ‘franchise’ i.e ., their unique ability to issue monetaryliabilities by leveraging non- collateralised deposits. Over the last three decades, however,the role of banking in the process of financial intermediation has been undergoing aprofound transformation, owing to changes in the global financial system. It is now clearthat  a thriving and vibrant banking system requires a well developed financial structure11. What are the compulsions underlying this interdependence? Firstly, theproliferation of financial innovations has led to a blurring of the boundaries betweenintermediation. Today, banks operate witha wide variety of financial assets and liabilities, some of which are created by the non-bank constituents of the financial system. Secondly, specialised markets have come intobeing for each class of financial instruments and banks have to transact business invarious segments of the financial market spectrum in the process of their routine day-to-day business. Thirdly, banks undertake leveraging transformations as part of theirintermediation - asset-liability, debt-equity, collateralised/ non- collateralised, maturity,traditional banking and other types of financial with multiple intermediaries operating in markets with different risk profiles.A Competitive Financial Sectorvision.realise thisskills (as did the US and Germany in the second half of the Nineteenth Century).by Japan in 1955, and then successfully replicated in size and risk.  This necessarily involves other types of financial intermediaries ascounterparties, in syndications and co-financing strategies, as also in the sharing of risk.Fourthly, active global capital movements and the growing volume of cross-border tradein financial services have exerted external pressures for reorientation and refocusing ofactivities for all players in financial markets.12. Competitive pressures in the financial sector are thus building up, both within andfrom outside the banking system. Other financial intermediaries are increasinglyrefocusing on core competencies and niche strategies. Banks as well as other financialintermediaries are undergoing radical organisational change with an objective ofsynergising strength and shedding activities with comparative disadvantage.Specialisation in financial intermediation provides competitive efficiency, depth andresilience to the financial system. Together, the spectrum of financial institutions can13. While we have made some progress in financial sector reforms, w e have a longdistance to cover in order to make our financial system truly competitive, well-structuredand resilient from an international perspective. In the emerging environment, the role ofmarkets in the formation of a host of financial asset prices is expected to be significantlyenhanced. The progressive easing of barriers to entry and exit will help to enhancecompetition  and bring a greater number of participants into various segments of thefinancial markets. It will also enable the development of sophisticated financial productsand innovations in market practices. Therefore, markets need to acquire greater depth andliquidity, especially in the money and debt segments. At the same time, rigidities in themarket microstructure have to be removed so that prices of financial instruments respondflexibly to different phases of the business cycle. Moreover, financial sector reforms haveto be supported by legal changes which strengthen the enforceability of contracts andallow for the resolution of problems, such as, insolvency, default and breach of contract.Continuous improvement in the technological infrastructure is also necessary to keeppace with the explosive speed of financial innovations. In order to ensure that reformsproceed apace in all segments of the financial sector, institutional development has to beintensified. Obviously, financial intermediaries as market participants have a crucial roleto play in the efficient functioning of the financial system. Organisational efficiency,human skill development and technological upgradation are the key prerequisites for14. Orderly behaviour of financial markets depends on greater transparency, stringentconditions for disclosure of assets and liabilities, adequate capitalisation and tighterprudential norms. We must continue to strengthen our prudential norms and align themwith the international best practices.  Investment decisions need to be based on fullinformation and an assessment of various types of risks. There is strong between prudential regulations and macroeconomic stability which, in turn, provides anenvironment for sustainable growth.  Strengthening the financial system is no longer amatter of choice; it is an essential prerequisite for long run financial stability and for15. Since the introduction of the capital adequacy ratios under the Basle Accord,efficient conduct of monetary policy.complementarityPrudential Normsoffs. managing the risk-return trade-bring about further financial deepening and encourage financial saving in the community.concerns have been expressed regarding the applicability of these ratios in the rapidlychanging financial environment. In particular, the “one-size-fits-all” characteristic ofcapital ratios has been subjected to some criticism. There is also some evidence, althoughby no means conclusive, to suggest that imposition of these norms may have increasedthe 16. In the Indian context, new methods of measuring market risk, such as, the value-at-risk and pre-commitment approaches, which are rapidly gaining currency in recentyears, should complement the risk weighted capital adequacy ratios until they have been17. All this has led the Basle Committee to propose a new consultative paper oncapital adequacy framework for comments from national supervisory authorities all overthe world. Based on these comments, the new norms would be finalised. While theexisting Accord specifies explicit capital charges only for credit and market risks, thenew proposal seeks to develop explicit risk weights for interest rate risks and other risks,particularly operational risk. Further, it seeks to ensure consistency of treatment ofmarket risk in banking books and in trading books. The proposal also envisages a newstandardised approach to risk weighting of asset in banking book which places a greaterreliance on internal and external credit assessments than in the present Accord.18. Under the supervisory review of capital adequacy, the new BIS proposal requiresregulators to ensure that banks’ capital positions are consistent with their overall riskprofiles and strategies. Supervisors would have the ability to prescribe capital in excess ofthe minimum regulatory ratios. Existing supervisory processes would be supplementedby internal capital assessment processes which would be subject to review andintervention. Under market discipline, higher disclosure standards and the role of marketemphasised. In essence, thenew market discipline would provide feedback to the setting up of minimum capitalrequirements.19. The Reserve Bank, which is a member of the international working group set upby the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) to provide the non-G10perspective on the new proposals, has also forwarded its comments to the BasleCommittee. So far, over 200 responses from the international community have beenreceived by the BCBS. These have been examined and a revised draft is presently under20. The new nor ms, when implemented, are expected to be tighter than the existingnorms. They are also expected to exert considerable strain on the resources of both banksand supervisors as skills will have to be acquired for the development, testing andvalidation of internal rating models used by the banks. Practices will also have to bedeveloped for generating accurate risk profiles. Sophisticated tools will need to beemployed for an appropriate evaluation of risks. Banks will have to devote greaterattention to risk management systems and to the competence of risk appraisal andmanagement personnel.  This will have far reaching implications for the organisation andmanagement of banks. Overseas operations of banks would be under even greater21. The new BIS paper has serious implications for the public sector banks as the newfora.pressure to conform as early as possible.discussion in international participants in encouraging banks to hold adequate capital are validated by more significant empirical evidence.riskiness of some banks’ portfolios.capital norms could involve injecting fresh capital into the banking system. The issueacquires significance in view of the Government’s resolve to reduce its holdings in publicsector banks. Moreover, injection of capital by the Government/ Reserve Bank hasramifications for the conduct of fiscal and monetary policies with consequences forgrowth and stability.  On balance, capitalisation of banks through raising equity capitalfrom the market appears preferable to either direct monetisation or expansion of the fiscal22. Transparency has come to be regarded as the golden rule for the orderlybehaviour of the financial system. There are several reasons for this development. First ,transparency backed by prudent supervision enhances the accountability of the financialsystem. This, in turn, builds in a check against undue risk-taking and reduces theprobability of failures and systemic risk. In particular, it lessens the vulnerability ofmarkets to sudden shifts in sentiment.  Secondly, it fosters healthy competition in thefinancial system. Transparency of business operations ensures market discipline. Thirdly,transparency facilitates efficient investment decisions. For banks, it translates intoallocative efficiency and a clear perception of the risk-return trade-off embedded in23. In the aftermath of the East-Asian crises of 1997-98, i t was realised thatinformation available in the markets, prior to the crisis, did not reflect the underlyingrealities. Dissemination practices, reliability, timeliness, and quality of data/informationalso varied sharply from country to country. Hence, considerable attention is beingdevoted to developing uniform transparency codes and standards, and substantialprogress has been made. The BIS has provided the primary momentum to the quest forinternational standards of transparency and is in the process of expanding its coverage ofreporting information on international bank lending. The IMF has also developedvoluntary standards of transparency and disclosure. At the macro level, there are theSpecial Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS)/General Data Dissemination Standards(GDDS).24. The IMF has also approved a Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency anda Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies. TheInternational Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO) is coordinating with otheragencies, such as, the International Accounting Standards Committee, to develop properaccounting and disclosure rules for the securities market. A noteworthy feature of theexercise is that these efforts encompass the private sector also as many of the standards,e.g ., accounting, auditing, bankruptcy, corporate governance, and securities marketregulation require to be implemented at the corporate level. The OECD, the BIS, theWorld Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development are working oncodes for corporate governance. The BIS’s Committee on Payments and Settlements isseeking best practices for payments and settlements. These international efforts indicatethe critical importance assigned to transparency in the emerging international financialarchitecture.25. India has been fully supportive of these efforts. It has been an active participant inthe Basle process. We were among the earliest countries to join the SDDS. The Reserveinvestment proposals.Transparency and Disclosure Practicesdeficit.Bank appointed a Working Group on International Banking Statistics in 1999 to reviewthe existing information available on cross-border assets and liabilities of the bankingsystem with a view to enabling banks to prepare for data reporting under the BIS system.The Group’s recommendations are being implemented as part of our efforts to get a clearidea of our banking system’s international presence. The existing disclosure practices at amacro level are already comparable with international standards. Daily and weekly dataon all relevant macroeconomic and financial indicators are put out by the RBI through‘hard copy’ releases as well as on the RBI’s website. Both the RBI and Governmentdisseminate a wide variety of financial and economic information through weekly,26. The Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes, whichwas constituted to monitor global developments and consider the applicability of globalstandards and codes to Indian conditions, set up Advisory Groups in ten core areas.  TheAdvisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies examined issuesrelating to the clarity of roles and responsibilities of policy making  authorities andtransparency in monetary policy formulation, conduct and implementation.  The report ofthe Advisory Group on Banking Supervision carries recommendations relating tocorporate governance in banks, transparency practices in Indian banking, supervision ofcross border banking and internal rating practices adopted by banks.  The report of theAdvisory Group on Insurance Regulation deals with the applicability of standards set bythe International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) and the twenty InsuranceGuidelines issued by the OECD to India.  The Advisory Group on Payment andSettlement System has also submitted its report which deals with issues relating to inter-bank payment and settlement covering Core Principles and Central Bank responsibilities.All these reports are available on the Reserve Bank’s website for public information and27. Commercial banks in India are also required to maintain disclosure standards onpar with those of international banks. This has been achieved by mandating disclosure ofsome of the essential strength indicators and performance related parameters as part ofcommercial banks’ balance sheets. The banks in India, since April 1997, even before theonset of the South East Asian crisis, have been disclosing capital adequacy ratios (bothTier I and Tier II separately), percentage of NPAs to net advances, provision madetowards NPAs, and gross and net value of investments. Secondly, since March 1998,banks in India have been asked to disclose further information regarding interest and non-interest income as a percentage of working funds, operating profit as a percentage ofworking funds, and information on the financial position of subsidiaries. Thirdly, witheffect from April 2000, the Reserve Bank has also advised banks to disclose maturityprofile of loans and advances, investments, and lending to sensitive sectors. Fourthly,public sector banks are required to attach the balance sheets of the subsidiaries to theirbalance sheets beginning from the year 2000-01, so as to bring more transparency in28. The Reserve Bank has set up the Regulations Review Authority (RRA) in April1999 to provide an opportunity to the public to seek relevant modification of regulations/circulars/returns issued by the Reserve Bank.  An important contribution of the RRA isthe compilation of subject-wise master circulars on important subjects. The RRA hasdebate.operations and move towards consolidated supervision.monthly, quarterly and annual publications.decentralised service charges of banks.  It has instituted arrangements to regularly displayupdated information on non-bank finance companies on the Bank’s website. Otherimprovements effected by the RRA are granting general permission to mutual funds forissuing units to foreign institutional investors, simplifying procedures for obtainingsuccession certificates by banks from legal heirs,  of payment of interestfor abnormal delay in collection of outstation instruments and dissemination of timelyinformation on foreign investment in Indian companies through the RBI  tofacilitate trading.  Modalities for classification and dissemination of information inelectronic form and through e-mail are being worked out.29. A working group appointed by the Reserve Bank has recommended the setting upof a Credit Information Bureau for the collection of information relating to borrowers andthe provision of this information to the entire financial system. The State Bank of Indiahas entered into an MoU with the HDFC to set up a Credit Information Bureau and themodalities for setting up of the Bureau in regard to ownership and equity participation,management structure, security standards, rights and liabilities of the Bureau, etc. , arebeing worked out.  The banks and financial institutions are being encouraged to make thenecessary in-house arrangements for collection of such information to the Bureau. TheBureau is expected to expedite credit and investment decisions by banks and financialinstitutions as also curb the growth of fresh NPAs through better institutional30. The goals of financial sector reforms and macroec onomic stability are bestachieved in an environment fostered by improved transparency. Transparency in balancesheets, income statements, objectives and policies can help this process. In this sphere,our goal for the future should be to identify and monitor international developments witha view to aligning transparency standards and practices in the Indian financial systemAsset-Liability and Risk Management31. Mismatches between assets and liabilities of banks exp ose them to various typesof risks. The experience of the South East Asian crises showed the dangers posed bycompromising asset-liability management principles and allowing the disproportionateaccumulation of mismatches both on and off the balance sheets, leading to even insolvency.  Risk management is a continuous process of planning, organising andcontrolling the assets and liabilities, volumes, maturities, rates and yields.  With thegrowing complexity of operations in financial markets, banks would have to rapidlyequip themselves with a variety of knowledge-intensive skills and appropriate32. To help manage this fragile transitional phase, the Reserve Bank has providedasset-liability managers with guidelines that serve as benchmark for an integrated riskmanagement system. Asset-Liability Management (ALM) guidelines were issued tobanks in April 1999 for managing liquidity and market risks. In October 1999, the ALMguidelines were subsumed in a broad framework of guidelines for risk managementsystems in banks to cover the management of credit, market and operational risks.  Theseguidelines would help to prepare the bank management to meet the challenges posed bythe changing context of regulation and supervision. Banks are encouraged to evolve risktechnology.illiquidity andwith the international best practices.mechanisms.websiterationalisationrating systems and internal control mechanisms based on value-at-risk and durationmeasures. The primary responsibilities of prescribing risk parameters and 33. Adequate internal controls are a key prerequisite for the system of risk-basedsupervision which is gaining currency all over the world.  Internal control consists of awide spectrum of internal inspection and audit, submission of control returns bybranches/controlling offices to higher level offices, visits by controlling officials to thefield level offices, risk management system, simplification of documentation procedures34. A critical precondition for the smooth functioning of the financial system is theenforceability of contracts. At present, it is extremely difficult to deal legally withdefaults and breach of contracts and this is one of the major reasons why our banks’books are saddled with NPAs for a long period of time. Legal reforms must support andcomplement financial sector reforms by providing for internal governance as well asexternal discipline. The legal framework has to be flexible to enable automation,electronic fund transfers, recoveries, . In this context, efforts need to be made tostreamline the working of debt recovery tribunals. Undoubtedly, legal reforms are now an35. The face of banking is changing rapidly and banks all over the world are re-orienting their strategies, practices, products and clientele in tune with their changingenvironment. Increasingly they are focusing on core competencies.  Internationally, bankmergers are occurring not through acquisition of weak by the strong but among equals instrength.  The objective of such mergers is to synergise strength of the merginginstitutions in a new powerful entity. Activities and even subsidiaries not relevant formaximising profits and expansion of assets are being divested.  In India, the Committee and the Verma Committee have shed considerable light on the possible futureorganisational change.36. Public sector banks, in particular, are now in need of major capital andmanagement restructuring. The Government has so far contributed an aggregate amountof Rs.204 billion to recapitalise public sector banks, and more is needed.  This willimpose a substantial fiscal burden, which the budget is unable to bear. Some banks have,therefore, been encouraged to raise capital through public issues and to raise subordinateddebt for their Tier - II capital.  They have also been allowed to write-off accumulatedlosses so as to enable them to have higher earnings per share in their public issues. Boththe Government and the Reserve Bank have proposed dilution of their holdings in thesebanks with a view to 37. While these efforts must continue, there is a need for a major change inmanagement styles, human resource inputs and technological upgradation to enablepublic sector banks to face the intensifying competition. Furthermore, it is necessary toNPAs in India38. The most critical condition for bringing about an improvement in the profitabilityof banks is a reduction in the level of  . In fact, it is a precondition for the stabilityNPAsSpecial Problems of focus on restructuring in the entire financial system and not the banking industry only.broadbase their ownership pattern.course of action for a financial system undergoing an Narasimhamimportant part of the agenda of financial sector reforms.etcand efficiency in inter-office communication channels.effective control systems are vested directly in the boards of directors of the banks.establishingof the financial system. Although the level of NPAs has declined significantly in recentyears, it is still considered relatively high by international standards. There are, of course,varying country practices for provisioning and therefore, of carrying NPAs on balancesheets of banks. Due to time lags in recovery, banks in India continue to hold NPAs ontheir books even after making provisions. Moreover, in India, provisioning is relativelymore stringent; for instance, provisions are required to be made even on the securedportion of advances.  In other countries, identified losses are written off at an early stageand banks carry very little NPAs on their books.  Even so, the provision adjusted level ofNPAs at 8.1 per cent of net advances for public sector banks ( PSBs) in India is high. distribution of  across the public sector banks shows that there is some rigidity tomove down in the category of banks with net  between 10 and 20 per cent of netadvances as also in the category of banks with net  of up to 10 per cent of netadvances. In these categories, there has not been any significant improvement since 1995-96. The Narasimham Committee has underscored the need for moving to zero net NPAlevels for our banks which have an international presence. If we believe in actualising ourresolve to build a banking system with an international orientation, this must be our39. Our studies on NPAs in the banking system suggest that the problems of has a sizeable overhang component arising from infirmities in the existing processes ofdebt recovery, inadequate legal provisions on foreclosure and bankruptcy, and difficultiesin the execution of court decrees. Banks in India face external constraints such as thedominance of traditional industries in credit portfolios, industrial sickness and labourproblems. The studies also reveal that there are several internal factors such as weakcredit appraisal, non-compliance to lending norms, and wilful default that contribute tohigh NPAs. This calls for immediate corrective steps in recovery processes so that the40. What are the strategies for making this possible? First, at the policy level, problems of  should be addressed by strict enforcement of prudential norms andrequirements of transparency.  Secondly, the most important policy contribution in thisarea is the need for legislation which will make recovery processes smoother and legalaction quicker. Thirdly, banks are being provided with a menu of alternatives such asDebt Recovery Tribunals, Lok Adalats and Asset Reconstruction Companies. TheReserve Bank has provided indicative guidelines for compromise settlement of chronicNPAs in the small scale sector. Settlement Advisory Committees have also been formedat regional and head office levels.  These alternatives will no doubt require the enablingenvironment to be created by appropriate legal reforms which are being addressed jointly41. As regards internal factors leading to NPAs, the onus rests with the banksthemselves.  This calls for organisational restructuring, improvement in managerialefficiency, skill upgradation for proper assessment of creditworthiness and a change inthe attitude of the banks towards legal action which is traditionally viewed as a measure42. In the banking and financial sector s, the introduction of electronic technology forNew Technologyof the last resort. These are the elements on the agenda of the second phase of reforms.by the Reserve Bank and the Government of India.NPAstheproblem is contained.NPAspriority target in the next two to three years.NPAsNPAsNPAsThetransactions, settlement of accounts, book-keeping and all other related functions is nowan imperative.  Increasingly, whether we like it or not, all banking transactions are goingto be electronic. Those who do not keep pace with the trend are bound to lose out.43. Initiatives for technological change have been an integral part of the reformprocess. In the recent period, the imperatives for speeding up the modernisation oftechnology and intensifying the use of technology have become sharper. First, inresponse to the compulsions imposed by the technological environment, the bankingindustry has accelerated the pace of computerisation of branch operations, controllingoffices and head offices.  The thrust is on commercially important  which accountfor 65 per cent of banking business in terms of value.  There are now a large number ofcomputerised branches across the country.44. A switchover from cash based transactions to paper based transact ions is beingaccelerated.  MICR clearing of cheques is now operational in ten cities, besides the fourmetropolitan cities.  The average daily volume of cheques processed in clearingoperations in four metropolitan cities has amounted to a fairly sizeable daily averagevalue of about Rs. 20,000 45. The development and use of communication networks have also helped thebanking industry to improve the quality of its services.  Beginning modestly with leasedline terrestrial technology i.e. the BANKNET and its communication software, the RBINet, a milestone was passed in February 1997 with the operationalisation of the SharedPayment Network System (SPNS) of ATMs of the Indian Banks Association in Mumbai.In June 1999, the setting up of the INFINET, a Wide Area Satellite based network usingVSAT technology, was a landmark in the use of the communication technology in theIndian financial system.  Currently, the INFINET connects 439 VSATs.  As additionaltransponder space becomes available, connectivity could be extended to 5,000 branches.10 banks are already using the VSAT network of third party service providers for various46. Needless to add the payments system plays a critical role in the development ofthe financial system.  In India, the design, management and regulation of electronicallybased payments system are becoming the focus of policy deliberations.  The imperativesof developing an effective, efficient and speedy payment and settlement systems aregetting sharper with the introduction of new instruments such as credit cards, ATMs, retail Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) and Electronic Clearing Services (ECS).We are moving towards smart cards, debit cards and financial Electonic Data Interchange47. Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) is generally regarded as the cornerstone ofan integrated payments system. Setting up an RTGS environment has became the focalpoint of payments system reforms all over the world. Access to major financial centresand cross-border payments systems is becoming conditional to the availability of a full-fledged domestic RTGS. Apart from providing a real time funds settlement environment,RTGS is critical to an effective risk control strategy for preventing domino effects ofindividual defaults. In the context of internationalisation of the financial sector, RTGSprovides both the technology and process controls to manage risks better.48. The preparation of the financial system for the implementation of RTGS has been(EDI) for straight through processing.telebanking,banking applications.crore in 1999-2000.fully centresa priority for the Reserve Bank. Considerable progress has already been made. The mainprocessing system for RTGS is in place at the National Clearing Cells at the fourmetropolitan cities. The system would provide large value fund transfers with settlementon a gross basis. The Reserve Bank has taken a number of steps towards the developmentof the Payment System Generic Architecture Model for both domestic and cross-borderpayments. The Model conceives networking of computerised bank branches, with theircontrolling offices, central treasury cells and head offices with the proviso for introducingstandardisation of operating system and networking platforms within the bank and abank-level standardised gateway to INFINET. System Requirement Specifications wouldtake into account the international best practices and the specific requirements of Indianbanking. Extending the spread and coverage of the INFINET to cover all commerciallyimportant  in the country, development of the Structured Financial Messagingbackbone for exchange of financial messages based on international standards,integrating various segments of the payment and settlement system and consolidation ofthe various Deferred Net Clearing Settlements constitute the action plan for 2000-01.49. However, there are several areas of concern that need to be addressed.Authentication of payments instructions, responsibility of the customer for secrecy of thesecurity procedure, the legal framework for the payments system, the lack ofstandardisation and intra-bank connectivity are some of the areas which deserve urgentattention.  A Committee on Technology Upgradation in the Banking Sector appointed bythe Reserve Bank has made wide ranging recommendations relating to communicationinfrastructure and the use of INFINET, standardisation and security, data warehousing,data mining and management information systems, new legislation on EFT, humanresource development and other related issues. These recommendations should guide thepath of technological upgradation in the years to come.  Banks will have to evolve a50. It needs to be emphasised that the process of technological change is onlybeginning in India and several countries are way ahead of us in the modernisation oftechnology for their financial sectors. Moreover, the intensity of use of the existingtechnology is at low levels. Computerisation efforts in our banks have been mostlydirected towards accounting and related activities with lack of emphasis on critical areassuch as management information systems and customer service. We have to redouble ourefforts to equip our financial system with the state-of-the-art technological infrastructureif it is to achieve an international stature.51. In a service industry like banking, the most important need is naturally the humanresource development.  During the early phase of banking development in India afterindependence, opportunities for employment of the educated man-power were relativelylimited. The banking sector was the preferred employer for the educated persons in thecountry in addition to civil services.  In recent years, this position has changeddramatically.  Certain rigidities have also developed in human resources developmentwithin the banking system itself because of this industry being largely in the publicsector. The public sector’s hierarchical structure, which gives preference to seniority overperformance, is not the best environment for attracting the best talent from among theyoung.Human Resource Developmentstrategic vision that builds over the present technology base.centres52. A radical transformation of the existing personnel structure in public sector banksis unlikely to be practical, at least in the foreseeable future ,   However, certainimprovements can be made in the recruitment practices as well as in further training andredeployment of those who are already employed. Banks have to create an environmentin which they will be able to expand business largely through redeployment, extensivetraining and better incentives. There is a pressing need to develop work practices whichencourage efficiency.  In these areas, a break from past practices is essential. Incentivestructures need to be conceived, supported by appropriate training and motivation, whichalign the employee’s goals and orientation with the core competencies and strategic53. The recommendations of the second Narasimham Committee could provideuseful guidance to banks in designing new recruitment practices and training facilities.The Committee recommended a system of recruiting skilled manpower from the openmarket, including lateral induction of experts. Supporting this should be an ongoingstrategy of redeployment of existing staff in new businesses and activities, after suitable54. Banks could also explore the feasibility of entering into collaborativearrangements with universities and other institutions in India and abroad, to identify andprovide specialised training to the financial services industry with an ongoing flow ofemerging training packages. This is particularly important for external regulatoryagencies. Information technology is an area where human resource development iscritical.  Fortunately, Indian professionals are world leaders in this area and a spirit of co-operation and partnership between the IT and banking industries will result in a strong55. In the last BECON Conference in Bangalore, I had referred to the role ofeconomists in our banking system.  In all the above areas that I have highlighted, this roleis even more crucial.  The financial system has been a natural and preferred habitat forsome of the best talent in the field of economics.  In fact, economists have branched outto specialise in various areas in the commercial sector and have gained considerableexpertise.  Recent developments have released new impulses which have brought financeand economics even closer.56. Operational areas of banking are also increasingly drawing the interest ofeconomists all over the world. In the recent economic literature, there is a proliferation ofwork on modelling of various types of risks, internal control mechanisms such as thevalue-at-risk and precommitment models, behaviour of financial asset prices and theirimpact on banks’ balance sheets and contingent exposures. These are exciting areas forimproving the operational efficiency of banks and economists can make a tangiblecontribution to strengthen their functioning. The tools of economists such as probabilityanalysis, time series techniques, discriminant functions and capital asset pricing modelscan be particularly useful in developing independent views of the fundamentals of themarket place. Perhaps this is the reason why one finds so many economists working intreasuries, dealing and trading rooms of banks today, besides the back office and the datawarehouse.  Fundamental analysis complements technical analysis in most marketThe Role of Economistsand modern financial system comparable to the best in the world.training.advantages of the institution.research reports. The role of expectations in market processes is crucial and this isbecoming increasingly important as financial liberalisation gathers momentum. Banksneed to increasingly factor in the role of expectations in their forecasts and strategic57. Economists, on their part, need to break away from the strait jacket of theirnarrow specialisation and understand the operational realities faced by banks.Conventional economic analysis needs to be tempered by the emerging principles offinancial economics to be meaningful in the context of the banking system.  That is whyit is important for economists in the banks to acquire field level experience as well as theknowledge of operational departments so as to enable them to make a meaningful58. Let me conclude by reverting back to the question that I raised at the beginning ofthis talk.  Is it realistic for India to set itself the goal of becoming a major internationalbanking and financial centre in the early part of this new century?  I have alreadymentioned some of the preconditions that need to be fulfilled for this vision to berealised.  We have made some progress in several of these areas, such as, thedevelopment of a competitive financial sector with multiple intermediaries; themovement towards best international practices in regard to capital adequacy, prudentialnorms and supervisory standards; strengthening the transparency and disclosure practicesby banks and other financial institutions; and better application of asset-liability and riskmanagement by financial intermediaries.  Some progress has also been made in reducingthe extent of Non-Performing Assets and introducing speedier mechanisms for settlementof bank dues ( e.g. Debt Recovery Tribunals).  So far, the progress in respect of legal andinstitutional reforms, including bankruptcy procedures, has been slow.  Nevertheless,there is a growing consensus in favour of such reforms and the high level Committee setup to suggest appropriate measures in these areas has recently submitted its report.  It ishoped that the necessary legislative action in these areas will be initiated without much59. The Indian financial system, and the banking sector in particular, is dominated bypublic sector institutions and banks.  A sensitive and controversial question which wouldneed to be faced, sooner or later, is whether the “public sector character” of our banksand other institutions is consistent with their being able to play a globally competitiverole in the future.  In order to consider this issue dispassionately, both the advantages anddisadvantages associated with this particular characteristic of the financial system have tobe recognised.  An important advantage is the reduced “vulnerability” of the system as awhole because of sovereign ownership.  Another important advantage is its wide reachand the availability of an established institutional infrastructure.  Importantdisadvantages, however, are the relative insensitivity of the system to its cost structure,inability to respond quickly to the changing market trends, and greater rigidities in themanagement decision-making processes because of what may be described as“noncommercial” considerations.  Development of human resources, and introduction ofan appropriate incentive structure to foster a competitive culture have, in this background,proved to be particularly difficult.delay.Conclusioncontribution in a rapidly changing financial system.plans.60. Can some of these intrinsic disadvantages of publi c sector institutions beovercome?  Frankly, I do not know.  It is true that almost all the leading banks andfinancial institutions in the world today are in the private sector.  At the same time, it isequally true that the private sector character of a country’s banking system has been noguarantee of its global success or its economic strength.  The continuing weaknesses andproblems faced by the Japanese banking system, and strong international consensus infavour of public intervention, provide ample testimony for this observation.  Anotherinteresting fact is that all the leading central banks around the world are either owned byGovernments or have been set up by statute, and are subject to Governmental orParliamentary control.  Yet, in recent years, many of them are functioning as trulyindependent institutions with no political or extraneous interference in their operations.Given the necessary will and a political consensus, in principle, it should be possible forus to grant, by legislation, complete functional and operational independence to publicsector banks and institutions with the sole objective of providing best service at the leastcost, and thus enable them to compete freely among themselves as well as with otherprivate sector institutions.  If, in practice, this is not a feasible option, then the onlyalternative is for public sector banks to be transformed into widely held private banking61. The lo ng-term vision for India’s banking system to transform itself from being adomestic one to the global level may sound far-fetched at present.  However, it is notbeyond our capacity provided we have the will and the determination. Taking the bankingindustry to the heights of international excellence will require a combination of newtechnologies, better processes of credit and risk appraisal, treasury management, productdiversification, internal control and external regulations and not the least, humanresources. Fortunately, we have a comparative advantage in almost all these areas. Ourprofessionals are at the forefront of technological change and financial developments allover the world.  It is time to harness these resources for development of Indian banking in62. I hope your deliberations at this conference would show us the way, and herald aThank you.Patra of the Reserve Bank of India for his help in the preparation of this lecture. I am thankful to Dr. M.D. new beginning for our banking system in the new millennium.the new century.corporations, subject to transparency, regulations and accountability to shareholders.
