Challenges to Monetary Policy in a Globalising WorldRakesh Mohan*I. Introduction  Recent global developments have transformed the environment in which monetarypolicy operates, throwing up   opportunities as well as challenges. Globalisation hasexpanded economic interdependence and interaction of countries greatly. This has created theneed for greater coordination in terms of the design of appropriate institutional architecture aswell as standardisation reflected in the adoption of similar monetary policy approaches. It hasalso been associated with a dramatic lowering of inflation worldwide. Central banks haveseized these opportunities to bring about institutional reforms to enhance their ownaccountability and credibility of monetary policy making. Moreover, they have had to honetheir technical and specialist management skills to acquire adequate competence to deal withthe emerging complexities of financial markets.The more recent evolution of the global economy has accentuated the challenges thatface monetary authorities. Increasingly, monetary policy decisions have to be made in anenvironment of heightened uncertainty. Structural changes associated with globalisation haveincreased the uncertainty in interpreting macroeconomic indicators regarding the state of theeconomy. Another form of uncertainty stems from the strategic interaction between privateagents and monetary policy authorities and, in particular, the role of expectations in themonetary transmission mechanism. Financial markets, driven by massive cross-border capitalflows and the information technology revolution, immediately transfer the valuation of risksassociated with uncertainty across the globe and this can lead to contagion. Indeed, globalinterdependence is marked by common shocks and a “confidence channel” rapidly transmitsthese shocks to various parts of the world.All this has rendered the conduct of monetary policy extremely complex in such anenvironment of interdependent risks. Therefore, even though monetary policy is conductedtowards achieving domestic objectives, central banks have to follow developments across theworld carefully. More than ever before, the choice of monetary arrangements dependson the choices that other countries make (Meltzer, 1997).  In my lecture today, I propose to dwell upon the uncertainties that characterise themonetary policy environment, the underlying macroeconomic conditions in which monetarypolicy has to be set, the process of inflation and the changing institutional response to thecommitment to price stability, the role of capital flows and what the future holds in store.Against this backdrop, I hope to shed some light on the emerging discussion among centralbankers about the course of monetary policy that is of greater relevance to developingcountries such as ours.II. The Current Global Economic ScenarioThe growing internationalisation of monetary policy has been brought into sharp focusby the synchronised global downturn since the late 1990s. In response, monetary authoritiesall over the world have made concerted efforts to ease their policy stance significantly. TheUS has powered the world economy during the last 7-8 years and has been responsible forabout 60 per cent of world growth.  Despite bursting of the stock market bubble, a rash ofcorporate governance problems and the IT bubble, US has been the main engine of worldgrowth in recent years and has been partly responsible for the recovery of Asian countriesafter the 1997 crisis. In the bargain, the US has accumulated twin deficits – current accountdeficit (CAD) of five per cent, and fiscal deficit of six per cent (a sharp turnaround from asurplus of 1.2 per cent in 2000) (Chart 1).  With the emergence of such an imbalance in theUS, other regions in the world have to exhibit an equal and opposite imbalance of their own.Ironically, it is the developing countries of Asia who are funding the CAD of the US andexhibiting surplus.  The central banks of Asia are financing roughly 3-3.5 per cent of theCAD of US and most of its fiscal deficit, as compared to the earlier situation where it wasprivate sector flows that were funding these deficits. In view of the difficulties in monetarymanagement that the situation entails, this situation is clearly not sustainable indefinitely.There are no short-cut solutions since the problems are deep, structural and inter-dependent:hence these cannot be solved through independent or unilateral action.  For example, difficultstructural reforms are necessary in the Euro area; more structural reforms are needed inJapan, particularly in the financial sector; India has a large fiscal deficit problem, and Chinacannot afford a major appreciation.  Hence, relatively coordinated medium term action iscalled for among the major economies of the world. Unilateral action by any country isunlikely to solve its own problems.Recent months have seen the emerging signs of a recovery in economic activity,particularly in the US, Japan and emerging Asia. In the US, the pace of growth has picked up,assisted by expansionary macroeconomic policies and supportive financial conditions. Equityand bond markets have responded with optimism to prospects of recovery with investorinterest returning to technology stocks more rapidly than to other sectors. In Japan, there arestronger signs in the third quarter that a cyclical upswing is underway, led by industrialactivity and exports. In the UK and Australia, signs of recovery are clearly evident with risinghousehold spending reflected in retail price inflation, prompting monetary authorities in thesetwo countries to raise key policy interest rates against inflation surprises. China continues togrow at a remarkably strong pace while activity in other parts of Asia is bouncing back fromthe effects of SARS. There is nevertheless considerable uncertainty regarding the durabilityof the pick-up. In the US, labour markets remain sluggish and significant excess capacitypersists. Moreover, the substantial support provided to consumption by tax cuts is unlikely tobe sustained. Despite the prospects of stronger growth, Japan continues to experiencedeflation. The ongoing concerns relating to structural weaknesses in the financial systemremain. In contrast to the rest of the world, the euro area remains conspicuously weak1although there are tentative signs of a modest recovery in recent months. Household demandremains sluggish and the unemployment rate for the area as a whole has risen.The burden of adjustment to the global slowdown has been highly asymmetric and thisraises the risks associated with sustaining the recovery. The US has been virtually aloneamong the OECD countries in pursuing an aggressive and flexible countercyclical monetaryand fiscal policy – cuts in policy interest rates have been the largest and the swing instructural government balance from a surplus of 0.6 per cent of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of5.1 per cent in 2003 is the largest in three decades. Global growth will continue to be led bythe US, but significant downside risks could emanate from the emergence of the recordcurrent account and fiscal deficits of the US. While the depreciation of the US dollar has sofar been relatively orderly, further and substantial depreciation remains a danger to globalrecovery in the shadow of the twin deficits. History suggests that even an orderly adjustmentin key exchange rates is likely to be associated with a slowdown in US growth – and, ifgrowth in the rest of the world remains weak, in global growth as well (IMF, 2003). Thecontinuing dependence of the world on the US heightens the risks of disorderly adjustment,particularly if it translates into an off-setting appreciation of the euro. In contrast to the mid-1980s, when the US ran current account deficits of similar order as in 2003, neither Europenor Japan is in a position today to pick up the slack. Looking ahead, it is unlikely that the UScan provide the degree of support to the global economy that it has in the past. In particular,high fiscal deficits would offset the longer-term benefits of tax cuts and rising debt serviceburdens in the household sector will curb future consumption spending.In the euro area, whereas monetary policy can be adjudged to have been successful in aninflation targeting framework (Chart 2), the economic slowdown has been deep andprolonged, with GDP declining in the second quarter of 2003. The largest economies –Germany, France, the Netherlands and Italy – are in recession with high levels ofunemployment. The unemployment rate is 8.8 per cent for the euro area as a whole and evenhigher in some individual countries: 13.2 per cent in Belgium, 9.7 per cent in France, 10.5 percent in Germany, 8.5 per cent in Italy and 11.4 per cent in Spain (Chart 3). Despite somerecent improvement in expectations, household and business confidence remains depressed.The poor performance of Germany, in particular, threatens to hold back the region’srecovery. Corporate balance sheets are still adjusting to the bursting of the asset price bubbleof the late 1990s and this is holding down investment spending. Exports have been adverselyaffected by weak external demand as well as the substantial appreciation of the euro over thepast two years. Monetary policy has been accommodative but different inflation andunemployment rates in different countries blur the effectiveness of the common monetarypolicy. A more activist approach is warranted especially when downside risks to individualcountries have potentially area-wide spillovers. Although Germany and France are expectedto post fiscal deficits above 4 per cent of GDP in 2003, the scope for countercyclical fiscalpolicy is limited by the Stability and Growth Pact. Structural reforms hold the key toimproving Europe’s economic performance, including further liberalisation of labour andproduct markets, pension reforms and offsetting measures to deal with the aging ofpopulation.2In Japan, macroeconomic performance during 2003 has exceeded expectations alongsidean improved external environment and upturn in equity markets. The outlook remainsovercast with deflationary pressures and persistent weakness in the financial sector. Thepossibility of declines in equity or bond prices, a sustained appreciation of the Yen and risingpublic debt remain dangers to a durable recovery. More rapid and bolder reforms in thefinancial sector are needed to address the large overhang of non-performing loans and thepoor quality of capital in the banking sector. Financial sector measures need to becomplemented by corporate restructuring. Quantitative easing of monetary policy has keptshort-term interest rates at zero, but has not been aggressive enough to end deflation. Thebuild-up of public debt and pressures from population aging necessitate a medium-termstrategy to impart sustainability to fiscal policy.Overall, global macroeconomic imbalances and the associated misalignment of the G-3currencies remain the most serious threat to a broad-based and robust recovery. This hasimplications for the pattern of capital flows. In contrast to preceding years, the US currentaccount deficit has been financed primarily by sale of government and corporate paper ratherthan equity inflows. The bulk of these investments has been by central banks, particularlythose in Asia. This is clearly unsustainable and adjustments will be needed to achievemedium-term stability. An eventual narrowing of the US current account deficit will require3emerging economies to share in the adjustment to prevent an undue burden on the euro area.A current issue of concern is the practice of greater flexibility in the exchange rate regimes ofthese countries, and the resulting efforts on the real economy. Studies have shown that greatervolatility in developing countries’ real exchange rates has been associated with greatermisalignment in G-3 countries with disruptive effect on both trade and finance channels. Thisemerges as a major source of uncertainty for the conduct of monetary policy.The current imbalances in the world where Asian countries are financing Westerncountries, particularly the US, could have their roots in longer term demographic imbalances.The long-term demographics facing the world, which have an effect on the savings rate arenot encouraging.  The demographics in Europe, Japan and the US are against high savingrates.  The median ages in Japan, Europe and the US are 4l, 40 and 35 years, respectively.Current trends indicate that the median age in Japan will increase to 50 by 2025.  Thesituation in the US may not turn adverse due to their flexible immigration policies.  WithinAsia, India and China can expect their savings rate to increase further, given that the privatesavings of these two countries are among the highest in the world, and in view of theirfavourable demographics over the next 20 years.  Countries like India and China, whichaccount for a large proportion of world population, also have low urbanisation levels of 30 to35 per cent and will be moving to 50 to 55 per cent in the next 20 to 30 years.  This wouldnecessitate higher infrastructure investment requiring higher capital inflows and a highercurrent account deficit.  Thus, if the Asian countries are to run large capital account surplusesand current account deficits, the situation in the US and Europe would meet reversal.  Theissue is to try to comprehend what would be required for this macro reversal to occur. Thecurrent demographic trends in Europe and Japan are not sustainable.  In the future, they maynot be able to afford the pension system and social security as they exist now.  The onlysolution in Europe seems to be US type of immigration policies towards labour marketreforms. Currently, this is not possible because of high unemployment.III. Inflation: What is Going onIn this brief overview of the global economic situation today, I have tried to indicate thatglobal imbalances are inter-related and how monetary policy making in countries like ourshas become that much more difficult on a day-to-day basis. The most notable achievement inrecent years has been the substantial success in almost all countries in reducing inflation tothe lowest level in several decades. Sustained inflation is a relatively modern phenomenon.Until World War I, the international experience was one of long-run price stability.Following the turbulence of the inter-war period, the Second World War and the Korean Warof the early 1950s, the Vietnam war of the 1960s and early 1970s, inflation graduallyincreased from the late 1960s, partly as a result of expansionary fiscal and monetary policies.The massive oil price hike of 1973 stepped up global inflation to double-digits in the US andWestern Europe. There was a huge transfer of resources to the Middle East from the rest ofthe world including Asia. The lasting consequence of this development of the 1970s has beenthe migration of workers from countries like ours who are now remitting back large  sums ofmoney on a sustained basis. Although inflation abated in 1978, it rose to double-digit levelsagain by the end of 1979 following the second oil shock. Inflation finally broke in 1982,under the impact of aggressive disinflationary policies.The 1980s were marked by strong and widespread efforts to restore reasonable pricestability through a combination of tight monetary policy, fiscal consolidation and structuralreforms. The reduction in inflation, facilitated by a significant decline in oil prices, set the4stage for a robust economic recovery that continued till the end of the 1980s. Anotherinflation episode in 1989-90 due to the hardening of oil prices was met with aggressivemonetary policy action which enabled a cooling-off by 1991 at the cost of a much shallowerrecession than the early 1980s.Since then, the world has been going through one of the longest phases of low inflationin post-World War II history. The decline in inflation is evident across countries at differentstages of development (Chart 4). It has been most spectacular in developing countries whereinflation fell from 31 per cent in early 1980s to under 6 per cent in 2000-03. In Latin Americaand the countries in transition where inflation averaged 230 per cent and 360 per cent,respectively, during 1990-94, it is projected at around 10 per cent in 2003. Out of 184members of the IMF, 44 countries had inflation greater than 40 per cent in 1992. In 2003, thisnumber has fallen to 3. For industrial countries, inflation, currently at around 2 per cent, hasfallen below the lows of the 1950s. Arguably, deflation threatens more countries today thandoes high inflation.What has brought about this significant decline in inflation globally? A significant strandin the literature points to institutional changes in the conduct of monetary policy -independent central banks, increased transparency, greater accountability through contractualframeworks, and greater coordination between monetary and fiscal authorities – which hasenhanced the reputation of monetary authorities and increased public credibility in theirability to deliver low inflation. An equally influential body of work, however, suggests thatmonetary authorities have just been lucky and that there are other factors at work such asincreased level of competition due to the forces of globalisation, successful fiscalconsolidation in developed countries, particularly in the context of the Maastricht Treaty, andstructural changes in the global economy in which productivity has a major role to play andthe rising prominence of the new economy. Have central banks been lucky or good? Perhapsa bit of both (Rogoff, 2003). While the evidence on either side is still evolving, the currentassessment is that it is unlikely that there will be a reversal of the current trend in inflation. Itis important, however, to introspect a little further in order to understand the dynamics of lowinflation and its future compatibility with monetary policy in an international setting.5An important factor that might have contributed to the lowering of inflation isproductivity growth. Although productivity growth in Europe may not have been as high as ithas been in the United States, the disinflationary effects of such productivity growth in oneregion get transmitted across borders through increased competition in a globalised world,operating through lowering of price mark-ups and erosion of monopoly pricing powerthrough the expansion of cross border trade. Increased competition has made prices moreflexible in their response to real activity, thereby reducing the incentive for monetary policyto be expansionary. This has reinforced credibility in the commitment of monetary policy tocontaining  inflation (Rogoff, op cit).Despite growing globalisation and synchronisation of business cycles, the most strikingchange over the past three decades has been the moderation of volatility in GDP growth inmost G-7 countries and this could also have contributed to reducing inflation (Chart 5) (Stockand Watson, 2003). A number of factors are at work. First, the services sector, which is lesssusceptible to volatility than manufacturing, has increased its share in output. Second,inventory management has improved. Third, financial markets have provided householdswith easier access to credit. In the US, the sector that witnessed greatest reduction involatility is housing. Moreover, there have been fewer oil supply and price disruptions as wellas smaller productivity shocks in the 1980s and 1990s than during the 1960s and 1970s.Although only a small part of the moderation in output volatility is attributed to monetarypolicy, this is hotly debated. For instance, it is widely believed that monetary policy in the UShas been successful in implementing anticipatory non-inflationary policies and has focusedon sustainable long-term real rates of interest. A significant increase in the flexibility of theUS economy to smoothen shocks as a result of deregulation, technology, better inventorymanagement and flexible labour markets has enabled it to absorb shocks. The manner inwhich a shock is defined is critical. The perception of a smaller shock is really 'net shock' i.e.gross shock minus what has been absorbed. Thus, events like September 11 can be measuredonly in a net sense. Moreover, in an integrated world, it would be difficult to distinguishbetween exogenity and endogenity; for instance, an increase in oil prices could very well betreated as endogenous.6Yet another set of forces operating on inflation emanates from technological change.Advances in architecture and engineering as well as development of lighter but strongermaterials has resulted in “downsized” output, requiring more technology sophisticated inputsrather than material intensive inputs. This process has accelerated in the recent decades withthe advent of the semi-conductor, the micro-processor, the computer and satellite. The impactof technological change is evident in the huge expansion of the money value of output andtrade but not in tonnage. As a consequence, material intensity of production has declinedreflecting, as Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan (1998) noted, “the substitution, in effect, ofideas for physical matter in the creation of economic value”. This has contributed to thesecular decline in commodity prices. In fact, a long-run trend decline in commodity pricesover the last 140 years shows little evidence of reversal. Concerns over increasing commodityprice volatility around this declining trend have, however, increasingly engaged monetarypolicy attention in the short-run.A significant strand in the literature credits changes in the institutional and operatingframework of monetary policy with the success in achieving low inflation. After theexperience of sustained inflation of the 1960s and 1970s, the objective of inflation controlbecame stronger, and the movement of inflation targeting emerged. Massive cross-bordercapital flows, globalisation of financial markets and the information technology revolutionhave combined to alter significantly the choice of instruments of monetary policy, operationalsettings, lag structures and transmission mechanisms. In particular, these forces have led tothe progressive erosion of the traditional anchors of monetary policy. In general, there hasbeen a waning of the importance of intermediate targets. Even as monetary authorities dealwith this difficult transition, several countries have radically altered the institutionalarchitecture of monetary policy, including increased independence of the monetary authority,clarity of rules and responsibilities and constrained discretion. About 22 countries haveadopted policy regimes with inflation as the single target of monetary policy. Indeed,inflation targeting has emerged as the received orthodoxy in the design of monetary policy.The ongoing slowdown in global economic activity and the threat of deflation has, however,weakened its analytical edifice. Although the practice of inflation targeting is associated witha lowering of inflation, the jury is still out on the extent to which inflation targeting policieshave actually contributed to the reduction in inflation that has occurred. Moreover, inflationthat is too low, which is being observed today, is not just a disincentive for productiondecisions, it also delays consumer spending at a time when it could have been critical fortriggering the upturn. It imparts inflexibility to labour markets, causing unemployment anddeepening the slowdown. Signals from financial prices get blurred and this leads tomisallocation of resources. In this context, the recent experience with inflation targeting as aframework for monetary policy warrants a close and hard scrutiny.The fixation with short-run price stability or ‘inflation nutting’, to borrow a term fromMervyn King, Governor, Bank of England can easily lead to neglect of important signs ofmacroeconomic and financial imbalances. Moreover, there is no available empirical evidenceto suggest that inflation targeting improves economic performance. In the euro area, forinstance, setting the inflation target at close to 2 per cent is associated with weakeningeconomic activity. This got pronounced in the second quarter of 2003 when real GDPdeclined, accompanied by large scale unemployment and the threat of deflation in the largerconstituents. Furthermore, the relevance of a single inflation target for a large economy, inparticular, can be debated. The inflation target for the euro area suffers from the problems ofa ‘one size fits all’ monetary policy. Regional disparities warrant different short-run monetarypolicy approaches to its objectives. A certain amount of target flexibility and balancing of7conflicting objectives are unavoidable in the real world, particularly that of emerging marketeconomies (Eichengreen, 2002). Indeed, there is a growing sense that by the time the currentphase of the global business cycle has run itself out, inflation targeting may not be seen tohave stood the test of time.High and sustained growth of the economy in conjunction with low inflation is thecentral concern of monetary policy. The rate of inflation chosen as the policy objective has tobe consistent with the desired rate of output and employment growth. An inappropriatechoice can lead to losses of macroeconomic welfare. Monetary authorities have to continuallycontend with the short-run trade-off between growth and inflation. The problem iscompounded by the fact that the association between growth and inflation is non-linear. Atsome low rates, inflation could operate in a manner that assists in bringing back unemployedresources into the economy and be beneficial or, at worst, neutral to growth. At higher levels,inflation is inimical to growth. There are also very low levels of inflation that are associatedwith no growth or even deflation. At what level should the policy choice of inflation be orwhat is the threshold rate of inflation, if there is one, which is associated with the absence ofharmful effects of growth? There have been various studies that have attempted to estimatethreshold inflation rates. They suggest that the threshold inflation rate depends upon anumber of factors such as the structure of the economy, past inflation history, the degree ofindexation, and inflation expectations. Some studies suggest that the threshold inflation fordeveloped and developing countries fall in the ranges of 1-3 per cent and 7-11 per cent,respectively (Khan and Senhadji, 2000). An abiding problem with cross-country studies,however, is the risk of being influenced by extreme values since samples include countrieswith inflation as low as one per cent and as high as 200 per cent and even higher. Theestimation of such inflation threshold rates, therefore, needs to be done for each countryseparately (Rangarajan, 1998), in order to understand the behaviour of the economy inrelation to inflation.       A major source of uncertainty in conducting monetary policy is the lack of a clearunderstanding of the inflationary process as it has unfolded in recent years. This has obscureda proper assessment of the nature of shocks impacting on the economy and the resulting risksto price stability. Variations in the timeliness and reliability of inflation indicators,uncertainty surrounding unobservable indicators like potential  output and gaps in theintrinsic knowledge of the central banks about the state of the economy complicate themaking of monetary policy. In countries like ours, there are other rigidities related toadministered prices, wage setting procedures, and weather induced supply shocks thatinfluence prices.  Knowledge of the relationship between inflation and its determinantsremains limited (ECB, 2001). Even if there were a consensus on a suitable model,considerable uncertainty would remain regarding the strength of the structural relationshipswithin the model. An even more fundamental problem is that parameters may vary over timeas a result of structural changes in the economy. This presumably explains why no centralbank uses a formal model to derive its actual policies; for the foreseeable future, models willbe an aid to judgement rather than a substitute for judgement (Feldstein, 2003).  The simpleprinciple of inflation targeting thus is also not so simple and, poses problems for monetarypolicy making in developing countries.IV. The Prime Mover: International Capital FlowsGlobal capital flows impact the conduct of monetary policy on a daily basis. Theproblem, however, is that capital flows typically follow a boom-bust pattern. Net capital8flows are currently limping back from the severe retrenchment imposed by the Asianfinancial crisis, which brought to an end the most dramatic surge of capital flows in post-World War II history. It is only in the recent period, particularly in 2003, that conditions forthe rejuvenation of capital flows are emerging.Large swings in capital flows are observed not only in the short term but there have beenlong term patterns as well. A major surge in capital flows started around the 1870s andcontinued till the first World War. The flows were mainly between the so-called developedcountries – from the core countries of Western Europe to peripheral Europe and overseasEuropean settlements - and in the form of foreign investment, with more than two-thirdscomprising portfolio inflows. This era, which coincided with the operation of the classicalgold standard, is widely regarded as the high watermark of capital mobility. The boom endedwith the first World War. A brief restoration of the gold standard was shattered by the GreatDepression and the ensuing period up to the early 1940s was characterised by modest flowsto the then emerging market economies for development finance. Capital controls werewidespread in the attempt to maintain gold parities and international finance becamefragmented by bilateral trade agreements. In the post-World War II period up to the 1970s,controls spread and intensified. International capital flows were primarily among industrialeconomies. The US removed restrictions on capital outflows in 1974-75 while Germanyretained controls over inflows until the late 1970s. The UK maintained controls until 1979and Japan completed liberalisation of the capital account in 1980. Developing countriespersevered with controls with some Latin American countries embarking on flawedliberalisation as part of exchange rate-based stabilisation programmes in the mid-1970s.In the period since 1973, dramatic changes set in. Private capital flows to developingcountries were renewed as commercial banks furiously recycled oil surpluses. Asia and LatinAmerica received the maximum share. Developing country debt exploded, rising at acompound annual rate of 24 per cent (World Bank, 2003) until the debt crisis of 1982 burstthe bubble. Capital flows to developing countries slowed down substantially but did not dryup. Between 1983 and 1989, they fell to less than a third of their level in 1977-82.  Ageneralised risk aversion to developing country debt dominated international financialmarkets and developed countries turned into attractive destinations. By the end of the 1980s,direct investment inflows to developing countries were only one-eighth of flows to developedcountries; portfolio flows to developing countries were virtually non-existent. During the1980s and the 1990s, several developing countries in Asia undertook capital accountliberalisation as part of unilateral financial deregulation, often in the face of large externalsurpluses. In general, the period from the mid-1980s to mid-1990s was characterised byremoval of official restrictions on financial markets and wider market-oriented reforms inboth mature and emerging market economies. The most dramatic move towards capitalaccount liberalisation occurred among the continental members of the European Union.Investor confidence returned to the developing world in the early 1990s in the aftermathof the Brady Plan. Net capital flows surged to pre-1914 levels by 1996, temporarily slowedby the EMS crisis of 1992. The impact of the Mexican crisis of 1994 was absorbed by thelarge mobilisation of official financing which acted as a buffer. The composition of flowsaltered significantly, with private flows exceeding the official flows by the end of the 1980s.Whereas in the 1970s bank lending was the dominant component of capital flows to emergingmarkets, starting in the early 1990s, equity and bond investors became dominant. Over thelast decade, portfolio investment exceeded bank lending in eight years. The range of investorspurchasing emerging market securities broadened. Specialised investors such as hedge funds9and mutual funds accounted for the bulk of portfolio inflows up to mid-1990s. In thesubsequent years, pension funds, insurance companies and other institutional investorsincreased their presence in emerging markets. Although portfolio flows became important, itwas FDI which accounted for the bulk of private capital flows to emerging marketeconomies, going through a 6-fold jump between 1990 and 1997. International bank lendingto developing countries increased sharply in this period, and was most pronounced in Asia,followed by Eastern Europe and Latin America. Much of the increase in bank lending was inthe form of short-term claims, particularly on Asia.In the late 1990s, capital flows to developing countries received severe shocks – firstfrom the Asian crisis of 1997-98, then by the turmoil in global fixed income markets, andmore recently by the collapse of the Argentine currency board peg in 2001 and the spate ofcorporate failures and accounting irregularities in 2002. Net flows to developing countriesdeclined almost continuously after 1997 (Charts 6-8). The fall was particularly sharp in theform of bank lending and bonds, reflecting uncertainty and risk aversion. In 2002, net capitalflows fell again, remaining far below the 1997 peak. Flows to Latin America reached theirlowest level in a decade. Flows to Asia began a hesitant recovery with new bank lendingexceeding repayments for the first time in five years. Global FDI inflows, down by 41 percent in 2001, fell by another 21 per cent in 2002, attributable to weak economic growth, largesell-offs in equity markets, and a plunge in cross-border mergers and acquisitions. The USAand the UK accounted for more than half of the fall. Flows to Asia were held up by China.10Despite the global uncertainties, conditions for capital flows have improved in 2003.Sell-offs in international bond markets in June and July reflected upward revisions ininvestors’ expectations about growth prospects. Spillovers to credit and equity markets werelimited. Emerging markets, in general, outperformed the mature markets. Some positiveaspects of the roller-coaster of the last decade are: a steady consolidation of external debt bydeveloping countries cushioned by the resilience of FDI, and the growth of local-currencybond markets as an innovation to manage credit risk.The overall experience, however, is that capital flows are characteristically volatile, bothin terms of longer term waves and even more so in the short term. The longer term wavesinfluence monetary policy thinking during each era, whereas the short term volatility has tobe met through day to day monetary policy operations.11The experience of living with capital flows since the 1970s has fundamentally altered thecontext of development finance. It has also brought about a drastic revision in the manner inwhich monetary policy is conducted. In particular, there is a dramatic shift in the stillunsettled debate on the determinants of the exchange rate and the choice of the appropriateexchange rate regime, although the weight of opinion is clearly in favour of a flexible regime.According to conventional wisdom, it was trade flows which were the key determinants ofexchange rate movements. Consequently, the degree of openness to international trade, priceand non-price competitiveness and factors which determined market shares abroad werethought to have a crucial bearing on the level and the movement of the exchange rate. Inmore recent times, with the tail of mobile capital accounts wagging the dog of the balance ofpayments, the importance of capital flows in determining the exchange rate movements hasincreased considerably, rendering some of the earlier guideposts of monetary policyformulation possibly anachronistic. On a day-to-day basis, it is capital flows which influencethe exchange rate and interest rate arithmetic of the financial markets. Instead of the realfactors underlying trade competitiveness, it is expectations and reactions to news which drivecapital flows and exchange rates, often out of alignment with fundamentals. Capital flowshave been observed to cause overshooting of exchange rates as market participants act inconcert while pricing information. Foreign exchange markets are prone to bandwagon effects.The effects of capital flows on the exchange rate are amplified by the fact that capital flowsin ‘gross’ terms can be several times higher than the ‘net’ capital flows.The experience with capital flows has important lessons for the choice of the exchangerate regime. The advocacy for corner solutions – a fixed peg a la the currency board withoutmonetary policy independence or a freely floating exchange rate retaining discretionaryconduct of monetary policy – is distinctly on the decline. The weight of experience seems tobe tilting in favour of intermediate regimes with country-specific features, without targets forthe level of the exchange rate, the conduct of exchange market interventions to ensure orderlyrate movements, and a combination of interest rates and exchange rate interventions to fightextreme market turbulence. In general, emerging market economies have accumulatedmassive foreign exchange reserves as a circuit-breaker for situations where unidirectionalexpectations become self-fulfilling. It is a combination of these strategies which will guidemonetary authorities through the impossible trinity of a fixed exchange rate, open capitalaccount and an independent monetary policy.Capital movements have rendered exchange rates significantly more volatile than before.For the majority of developing countries which continue to depend on export performance asa key to the health of the balance of payments, exchange rate volatility has had significantreal effects in terms of fluctuations in employment and output and the distribution of activitybetween tradables and non-tradables. In the fiercely competitive trading environment wherecountries seek to expand market shares aggressively by paring down margins, even a smallchange in exchange rates can develop into significant and persistent real effects. For labourintensive export producers, volatility in exchange rate movements can easily translate intolarge losses of economic welfare. In the final analysis, the heightened exchange rate volatilityof the era of capital flows has had adverse implications for all countries except the reservecurrency economies. The latter have been experiencing exchange rate movements which arenot in alignment with their macro imbalances and the danger of persisting currencymisalignments looms large over all non-reserve currency economies.       The issue dominating the conduct of monetary policy and exchange rate policy today incountries such as India and China is that of excess of capital inflows. Are these flows12resulting from temporary global imbalances emanating from current economic policies andproblems of the G-3 countries? Or do they reflect global changes of a more lasting nature. Itis to the consideration of this issue that I now turn.V.  Looking Ahead: Economic DemographicsSome recent research has focussed on the macroeconomic effects of demographicpatterns (Joshi and Sanyal, 2003; UN, 2003). Over the next half-century, the population ofthe world will age faster than during the past half-century as fertility rates decline and lifeexpectancy rises. The proportion of children (0-14 years) is expected to decline from 30 percent in 2000 to 20 per cent in 2050 whereas the proportion of the aged (60+ years) willdouble, reaching 21 per cent of the total population by 2050. The phenomenon of globalageing is likely to be associated with a progressive decline in saving rates and growth. In theinterregnum, regional patterns of global population ageing are expected to bring aboutfundamental alterations in saving-investment balances which would be reflected in themagnitude and direction of international capital flows with implications for the conduct offuture monetary policy.In general, economies pass through three stages of demographic transition – (i) highyouth dependency (large proportion of population in the 0-14 years group), (ii) rise inworking age population (15-59 years) relative to youth dependency and (iii) rise in elderlydependency (60+ years) relative to working age population. The second stage is regarded asthe most productive from the point of view of secular growth since it is associated with thehighest rate of saving and work force growth relative to the other stages. So far, the moredeveloped regions have been leading the process of population ageing and are likely to bedeep into the third stage of demographic transition. In Europe, population ageing is mostadvanced and by 2050, this is projected to accelerate. Japan is currently the country with theoldest population; by 2050, it is expected to have the highest proportion of elderly peopleamong industrialised nations (Government of Japan, 2003) (Charts 9-11). Projections suggesta turning point between 2010 and 2030 when the European Union, North America and Japanwill experience a substantial decline in saving rate relative to investment which would bereflected in current account deficits. These regions will switch to importing capital.13Most of the high performers of East Asia and China are in the second stage of thedemographic cycle. Elderly dependency is expected to double by 2025. Their working agepopulations will increase modestly and then shrink. These projections suggest that East Asiacould increasingly become an important supplier of global savings up to 2025; however,rapid population ageing thereafter would reinforce rather than mitigate the inexorable declineof global saving. Increasingly it would be the moderate and the low performers among thedeveloping countries which would emerge as exporters of international capital. India isentering the second stage of demographic transition and over the next half-century, asignificant increase in both saving rates and share of working age population is expected. Theshare of the labour force in population is expected to overtake the rest of Asia, includingChina, by 2030.In this scenario, the current phenomenon of overall surpluses in the balance of paymentsbeing run by several* emerging market economies, including India, may not be a temporaryone. The largest reserve holding countries (excluding gold) in the world are emerging market14economies. Monetary authorities in these countries are grappling with the expansionaryeffects of net foreign assets on domestic monetary conditions. Faced with the loss of controlover the monetary aggregates, interest rates and exchange rates, almost all of these countriesare engaged in devising innovative methods of sterilisation to delay the inevitable sacrifice ofdiscretion in the conduct of monetary policy and its globalisation. The emerging patterns ofdemography indicate that this source of uncertainty for monetary authorities could becomemore significant than before.The key challenge for macroeconomic policies would be to ensure that the anticipatedexpansion in saving in developing countries is productively utilised within the economy andnot exported abroad. Accordingly, it is vital to ensure that the investment rate rises in closeco-movement with the saving rate. Sustainable growth hinges around the existence of acritical minimum in terms of physical infrastructure. The acceleration of growth in the futurerequires massive investments to close the gaps between demand and supply in keyinfrastructural areas such as power, roads and highways, ports and telecommunication, citiesand urban utilities. India, China and Indonesia, which account for more than a third of theworld's population can be expected to continue urbanising over the next 20 to 40 years.During this period, the investment demand for resources emanating from these countriesrelated to urbanisation will assume larger magnitudes.  The history of urbanization has beenthat countries that undergo such growth in levels of urbanization - from around 25 to 30 percent to around 50 to 60 per cent - typically have to attract external savings to supplementtheir own to satisfy the massive financing needs for infrastructure investment during thisperiod. If the conjecture regarding the course of demography and associated savings patternthat I have just posited are correct, it is unlikely that the current low inflationary scenario willcontinue in the medium term to long term. It is also possible that the current phenomenon ofincreasing savings rates in Asian countries like India and China does not continue to be validover the next medium to long term. If that happens, there could again be a reversal of capitalflows. There would then be tightening of liquidity in world capital markets with increasedcompetition for resources. Thus, there is no assurance that the current trends of excessliquidity accompanied by low inflation will necessarily continue in the world. Recentexperience tells us that such reversals can occur very rapidly.       This will pose significant problems in the conduct of monetary policy for our countries inthe years to come. The future growth strategy will also need to be more labour absorbing toaccommodate the projected expansion in the work force. Reforms in the labour market,educational systems, pensions and medical care would gather importance within the overallintensification of structural reforms. Monetary policy would have to play an important role inbringing these forces together by ensuring appropriate real interest rates and low and stableinflation.VI. The Emerging Challenges to Monetary PolicyThere are many issues that are of relevance to emerging economies like India and SriLanka that are opening up. It would be useful to summarise some of these here.In a world of generalised uncertainty, monetary policy has lost its traditional moorings.As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy has become increasingly complex. Thedeterminants of exchange rate behaviour have altered dramatically. Earlier, factors affectingmerchandise trade flows and the behaviour of goods market provided proximate guides foroperating monetary policy. In this environment, a monetary policy principally targeting low15inflation was relevant and commodity purchasing power parities seemed to offer asatisfactory explanation of exchange rate changes. Since the 1980s, vicissitudes of capitalmovements have shown up in volatility in exchange rate movements with major currenciesmoving far out of alignment of underlying purchasing power parities. On a day-to-day basis,it is capital flows which move exchange rates and account for much of their volatility.The impact of greater exchange rate volatility has been significantly different for reservecurrency countries and for developing countries. For the former, mature and well-developedfinancial markets have absorbed the risks associated with large exchange rate fluctuationswith negligible spillover on to real activity. Consequently, the central bank does not have totake care of these risks through its monetary policy operations.  On the other hand, for themajority of developing countries, which are labour-intensive exporters, exchange ratevolatility has had significant employment, output and distributional consequences, which canbe large and persistent.All this has made the operation of monetary policy more difficult and complicated. Fordeveloping countries, in particular, considerations relating to maximising output andemployment weigh equally upon monetary authorities as price stability. A crucial objectiveof the development strategy is to stabilise the fluctuations of output and employment.Accordingly, in developing countries, it is difficult to design future monetary policyframeworks with only inflation as a single-minded objective. Thus the operation of monetarypolicy has to take into account the risks that greater interest rate or exchange rate volatilityentails for a wide range of participants in the economy. Both the fiscal and monetaryauthorities inevitably bear these risks. The choice of the exchange rate regimes in developingcountries, therefore, reveals a preference for flexible exchange rates along with interventionsto ensure orderly market activity, but without targeting any level of the exchange rate. Thereis interest in maintaining adequate international reserves and a readiness to move interestrates flexibly in the event of disorderly market conditions. It needs to be recognised that mostdeveloping countries are engaged in the process of development and integration of financialmarkets. Consequently, signals from the market get blurred by the degree of managementwhich is unavoidable in this transition.The actual experience over the last two decades has been that with greater liberalizationof the financial system, inflation has fallen and output volatility has moderated. Monetarypolicy has played an important role in taming inflation in the last two decades. A valuablelesson for an economy in the process of opening up is that increased globalization andcompetition has contributed predominantly towards containment of inflation. Thus countries’perspective on inflation needs to be informed increasingly by world price trends, particularlyin commodities of interest to them. With continued deregulation and globalisation, it isunlikely that there will be a reversal of the current trends in inflation. However, this is not tosuggest that globalization is a solution for all problems. Any widespread relapses in therelatively favourable trends in globalization and deregulation, or relatively benign fiscalpolicies could reverse the achievement of recent years. An important consideration forreining inflationary expectations relates to the need to have clarity on price stability, effectivecommunication, consistency in conduct of policy and transparency in explaining actions.Central banks should speak clearly to markets and listen to markets more carefully to ensurethe intended objectives of policy.There have been some negatives from the process of globalization in the form of greaterprominence of credit and asset price booms and increasing incidence of financial crisis. The16wave of financial liberalization has raised the risks in the financial system. The key policychallenge for an emerging economy would be to put in place mutually supportive safeguardsto ensure both monetary and financial stability. The most important lesson for us is thatfinancial imbalances can build up even when inflation is low and hence monetary policyshould have a slightly longer time horizon in terms of inflation. Apart from the above, thereare merits to all countries in greater transparency, combining simple rules with discretion andeffective communication.  Orderly development of financial markets can make a bigdifference regarding the manner in which risks and shocks make an impact on the economy.A flexible exchange rate regime imparts greater flexibility in monetary policy to deal withshocks more efficiently. On the prudential side, it would imply strengthening further themacro-prudential orientation. Monetary policy and prudential regulation should, therefore,co-exist. Greater transparency and cooperation between monetary policy and supervision hasbeen increasingly recognised the world over and has resulted in many central bankspublishing financial stability reports. Although there is uncertainty about how economies operate and about monetary policyitself, uncertainty is no excuse for not pursuing price stability. In the pursuit of monetarygoals, monetary policy authorities could adopt formal models and policy rules, informaltarget rules or case-by-case decision making. In practice, no central bank relies exclusivelyon formal models to derive final policy. Models assist central banks to take judgments.Furthermore, as Alan Greenspan recently commented, most of the formal models are vastlysimplistic and despite efforts to quantify and capture more variables, they are inadequate.Their knowledge base is barely able to keep pace with the complexities of the world. Theproblem is not of the models but of the complexities of the world economy. An explicitnumerical target is good for anchoring inflation but it comes at a cost. If the explicit inflationtarget cannot be achieved it weakens the credibility of the central bank. Thus it may not beappropriate to formulate monetary policy based on a simplistic inflation target or a singlepoint inflexible point target as argued by many. The risks to the system can emanate from anyvariable, both exogenous and endogenous and policy makers response should be dynamic andcontextual. Rules can, therefore, only be viewed as thoughtful adjuncts of policy but cannotbe a substitute for risk paradigms. A case-by-case approach provides a simplistic frameworkfor analysis. Ultimately, a central bank has to judge the outcome of the policy choices itmakes and also take account of and anticipate market expectations, which have becomeincreasingly important for the attainment of desirable outcomes.To conclude, in a globalised world, it is not possible to formulate monetary policyindependent of international developments. Monetary policy formulation has become morecomplex and interdependent. Continuous monitoring of financial markets, upgradation oftechnical skills at the central bank, flexibility and eternal watchfulness hold the key tomaking monetary policy matter in the evolving global environment.  A key factor that guidesthe conduct of monetary policy is how to achieve the benefits of market integration whileminimizing the risks of market instability. An integral component of central bank work is thedevelopment of financial markets that can increasingly shift the burden of risk mitigation andcosts from the authorities to the markets. The adverse implications of excess volatility leadingto financial crises are more severe for low-income countries. They can ill-afford the downsiderisks inherent in a financial sector collapse. Central banks need to take into account, amongothers, developments in the global economic situation, the international inflationary situation,interest rate situation, exchange rate movements and capital movements while formulatingmonetary policy.17References1. Eichengreen, Barry. “Can Emerging Markets Float? Should they Inflation Target?”. PaperPresented to a Seminar at the Central Bank of Brazil. February 2002.2. European Central Bank. “Monetary Policy-Making under Uncertainty”. Monthly Bulletin.Pp. 43-55. January 2001.3. Feldstein, Martin. “Monetary Policy in an Uncertain Economy”. NBER Working Paper,9969. September 2003.4. Government of Japan. “Annual Report on the Japanese Economy and Public Finance”.October 2003.5. Greenspan, Alan. “Monetary Policy Under Uncertainty”. Remarks at a Conference on“Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy” at Jackson Hole,WY. August 29,  2003.6. -------. “The Implications of Technological Changes”. Remarks at the Charlotte Chamberof Commerce. July 10, 1998.7. International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook. September 2003.8. Joshi, Vijay and Sanjeev Sanyal. “India’s Opportunity”. Business Standard, Mumbai.September 9, 2003.9. Khan, Mohsin S. and A.S.Senhadji. “Threshold Effects in the Relationship betweenInflation and Growth”. IMF Working Paper, WP/00/110. June 2000.10. Meltzer, Alan H. “On Making Monetary Policy More Effective Domestically andInternationally”. In Iwao Kuroda, “Towards More Effective Monetary Policy”.MacMillan Press Limited London. 1997.11. Ranagarajan, C. “Indian Economy: Essays on Money and Finance”. UBS Publishers Ltd.1998.12. Rogoff, Kenneth. “Globalisation and Global Disinflation”. Paper presented at aConference on “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy” atJackson Hole, WY. August 29, 2003.13. Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson. “Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence andExplanations”. Paper presented at a Conference on “Monetary Policy and Uncertainty:Adapting to a Changing Economy” at Jackson Hole. WY. August 29,  2003.14. United Nations. “World Population Prospects: The 2002 Revision. Highlights”. UnitedNations. Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of theUnited National Secretariat, New York. 2003.15. World Bank. Global Development Finance. 2003Dr. Rakesh Mohan is Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India. He is grateful to Dr. MichaelPatra, Dr. A. Prasad and Shri Muneesh Kapur of the Reserve Bank of India for theirassistance.18
