Management Challenges in Banking*IntroductionIt gives me great pleasure in participating in the Annual Day function of NIBM where I havespent two years as a student of BMP in 1980s. NIBM has been playing a vital role inproviding a platform to bankers and at times to Regulators also for exchange of views andthoughts to meet the emerging requirements of banking sector.Recent developments have underscored the urgency to sensitise the banking industry onemerging issues and quickly adapt to the change. The theme chosen for discussion i.e.“Management Challenges in Banking” is most appropriate as it provides an opportunity todeliberate on the challenges that lie ahead of every one of us in the light of transformationstaking place in the financial sector. There are two ways in which this topic can be interpreted– firstly, as challenges faced by bank management and secondly as the management ofchallenges faced by banks. Both these issues are of concern to us and although there is acommon thread between the two topics, the focus of the two would be different. I havechosen to interpret today’s topic as an amalgam of both these issues and have accordinglycovered both in my address.Before the onset of the reform process, Indian banking was operating in a relativelycomfortable and protected environment. The reform process has brought the Indian bankingsystem into the era of intense competition even though it paved the way for achievingremarkable improvement in various parameters.  Every aspect of functioning of the bankingindustry, be it profitability, NPA management, customer service, risk management, humanresource development, etc. has to undergo the process of transformation to align with theinternational best practices. Managing the challenges effectively becomes the most urgenttask for the banks’ management.Against this backdrop, I would like to highlight some of the challenges confronting the bankswhich would require them to build up effective and well coordinated long term strategies tokeep pace with the reform process.ProfitabilityAn important indicator of the strength of any system is its profitability level. The financialsector reform process brought in its wake measures like tightening of prudential norms,which affected the profitability of banks in the initial years. However, banks had respondedwell to the reform process. This has been possible due to careful sequencing of introductionof various prudential norms by the Regulator as also proper planning by the banks inadopting these norms.Except for the year ended March 31, 2001, when public sector banks introduced VoluntaryRetirement Scheme (VRS), resulting in huge charge to their profit and loss account andaffecting their profitability, the operating and net profit of all bank groups for the last threeyears ended March 31, 2000 to 2002, as I see from the table below, had shown remarkableimprovement.BankOperating profit (Rs crore)* Net profit (Rs. crore)Group2000 2001 2002 2000 2001 2002Public 13,042 13,801 21,672 5,116 4,316 8,3012sector (1.46) (1.34) (1.88) (0.57) (0.42) (0.72)banksPrivate2,576 2,843 4,628 1,160 1,141 1,778sector(1.95) (1.74) (1.73) (0.88) (0.70) (0.66)banksForeign 2,687 5,739 8,719 967 2,221 3,449banks (3.24) (3.05) (3.13) (1.17) (0.93) (1.33)18,305 22,383 35,019 8,243 7,678 13,528Total(1.66) (1.53) (1.94) (0.66) (0.49 (0.75)*Figures given in parenthesis are operating profit and net profit as a percentage to total assetsAs compared to March 2000, the operating and net profit of banks had almost doubled byMarch, 2002.However, you will agree that there are still some factors/constraints, which affect profitabilitylevels in banks. One of them is NPAs, particularly in the public sector banks and old privatesector banks. Other factors are the large number of unremunerative branches, low staffproductivity and archaic methods of operations. With increasing competition, margins willcome under further pressure and therefore banks have to build long-term strategies forincreasing their profitability levels by:• rationalization of branch network• rationalization of manpower deployment• use of latest technology in banking for further reduction in cost of operations and• well concerted efforts to minimize the NPAs to the lowest possible levelNPA ManagementThe issue of NPA management continues to be the biggest challenge before the bankingsector. One of the major constraints of the competitive efficiency of banks is the tendency toaccumulate poor quality of assets. Nothing is more true indicator of the quality of assets thanthe incidence and quantum of NPAs in relation to the total portfolio.  The level of grossNPAs of all groups of banks for the last three years from the table below, is on the rise,though the rate of growth has decelerated.(Rs. Crore)Bank Group Gross NPAs *2000 2001 2002Public sector banks 53,033 54,773 56,507(14.0) (12.4) (11.1)Private sector banks 4,761 6,039 11,672(8.2) (8.4) (9.7)Foreign banks 2,614 3,071 2,726(7.0) (6.8) (5.4)60,408 63,883 70,905Total(12.7) (11.4) (10.4)*Figures given in parenthesis are gross NPAs as percentage of gross advances23While we appreciate the steps taken by banks in reducing the level of NPAs, it still continuesto be high by international standards. RBI / Government of India have taken several steps toarrest the NPA levels. The steps taken have been preventive, remedial and legal in nature.For instance, the Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism has been introduced whichis aimed at restructuring the debt of viable corporate entities outside the purview of BIFR,DRT, etc. Further, efforts are being made to make CDR mechanism more efficient.However, some banks have not joined the CDR mechanism and those who have joined havenot referred many cases to CDR Cell.Another major step in this direction has been the introduction of One Time SettlementSchemes (OTS). The success of the OTS has been modest. Under both the OTS schemes, i.e.upto Rs.5 crore and upto Rs.25,000 banks could recover only around Rs.3000 crore. I hopebanks would make effective use of the forthcoming OTS guidelines for NPAs upto Rs. 10crore.The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of SecurityInterest Ordinance, 2002 has been another major initiative from the legal side. Thislegislation would provide a comfort level to banks in tackling the problem of NPAs.While the steps taken by RBI / Government of India will go a long way in reducing the levelof NPAs, banks' Boards, on their part should also formulate clear cut guidelines formonitoring NPA level, refine their own appraisal systems and strengthen the loan reviewmechanism to prevent incidence of fresh NPAs.Capital AdequacyAbility of a bank to absorb unexpected shocks and losses is solely dependant upon its capitalbase. Basle Capital Accord of 1988 played a positive role in strengthening the soundness andstability of banks and enhanced the competitive equality among international banks. While onthe one hand ongoing refinement in the capital adequacy norms had increased the capitalrequirements of our banks, there was increased pressure on the bottom lines of banks in viewof the demand for setting aside profits for meeting the increased provisioning requirements.However, as indicated in the table below, the system as a whole has managed to maintaincapital adequacy ratio of more than 11% over the last few years. However, there are still afew banks in the system, which operate with a capital adequacy below the stipulated level.Year 98-99 99-00 2000-01 2001-02Nationalised Banks 10.63 10.11 10.2 10.91SBI Group 12.34 11.57 12.7 13.26Public Sector Banks 11.25 10.66 11.15 11.76Old Private Sector Banks 12.07 12.35 11.93 12.5211.76 13.44 11.51 11.69New Private Sector BanksForeign Banks 10.78 11.93 12.57 12.97All Banks 11.27 11.1 11.39 11.92The introduction of 90 days delinquency norm for recognition of loan impairment effectivefrom March 31, 2004, reduction in the transition period for migration of a sub-standard asset34into doubtful category from 18 months at present to 12 months effective from March 31,2005, making adequate provision to cover country risk, etc. would put increased pressure onthe capital adequacy and bottom lines of banks.Indian banking industry is playing a significant role in the financial intermediation processand as the pace of economic development is accelerated, the ratio of the bank credit to GDPis likely to be doubled from the existing ratio of about 25% to 50% within next 5 years whichimplies that the bank credit would increase two fold.  Added to this, the big thrust beingaccorded to infrastructure sector requires substantial support from the banking system in theform of long-term loans.  Hence, banks would be required to increasingly explore avenues toraise capital from the market.Banks have, in recent years, placed greater reliance on subordinated debt to meet theincreased capital requirements. However, scope for raising capital through subordinated debtis also limited in view of the prudential limit that subordinated debt cannot exceed 50% ofTier I capital.Added to this, there is a constraint for public sector banks to raise capital from the market. Asyou are aware, the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham)has high-lighted the fact that recapitalisation of public sector banks is costly and in the longrun, is not a sustainable option. The Committee has therefore, suggested that no furtherrecapitalisation of banks be undertaken from the Government budget and public sector banksshould be encouraged to go to the market. Sixteen public sector banks have accessed thecapital market so far, reducing the share of Government holding in these banks.  The headroom available to raise further capital by these banks is limited.  In this context, there is animperative need to expedite the proposed amendment to the Banking Companies (Acquisitionand Transfer of Undertakings) Acts, 1970/80, enabling the nationalised banks to bring downthe Government shareholding from 51% to 33%.The New Capital Accord (Basel II) has already generated wide debate among the varioussections of the banking industry. This shows that the Indian banking system is gearing itselfto study, analyse and adopt the New Accord. RBI has been actively involved in theinternational discussions and is bargaining for national discretion to promote recognition of afeasible approach which could be adopted by less complex banks without imposingsignificant costs.It was emphasised in the Monetary and Credit Policy of April 2002 that banks shouldconstitute an expert internal team to study the methodology of the new Basel Committeeproposals and its likely impact and the difficulties that would be experienced in implementingthe proposals on account of their complexity and costs.  Banks can share with us the results ofsuch a study as and when completed by them.A Quantitative Impact Study (QIS) has been conducted by the Reserve Bank of India inseven banks and the  impact assessment is being evaluated.  In the meanwhile,  the bankshave to refine their existing systems with a view to ensuring smooth transition to the NewAccord.ManagementRecent developments in the country have brought to the fore the need for banks’ managementto exercise proper vigilance and supervision over the functioning of their respective banks.45Corporate governance, which represents the value framework, the ethical framework and themoral framework under which business decisions are taken, calls for transparency indecision-making and  accountability to stakeholders.In the context of the Indian banking system, though much greater autonomy and powers havebeen entrusted to the Boards of banks and financial institutions to lay down effective internalguidelines and procedures for transparency, disclosure, risk management, etc.  Boards ofsome banks have not lived up to the expectation. You will appreciate that the role of banks'Boards becomes crucial in the deregulated regime.Reserve Bank of India had set-up a Consultative Group under the Chairmanship of Dr. A.S.Ganguly to review the supervisory role of Boards of banks and financial institutions andobtain feed back on the functioning of the Boards vis-à-vis compliance, transparency,disclosures, audit committees etc. and give recommendations for making the role of Board ofDirectors more effective with a view to minimising risks and over exposure. Therecommendations of the Group have been benchmarked with international best practices asenunciated by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, as well as of other committeesand advisory bodies, to the extent applicable to the Indian environment. I would urge uponthe banks to place the report and the list of recommendations before the Board of Directorsand based on the decisions taken by the Board, to adopt and implement them. Banks shouldimbibe in the bank the highest level of corporate governance in larger spheres in the bank indue course.Corporate Governance not only calls for greater responsibility of the Board. In fact, the roleof the CEO also becomes equally crucial in sensitising not only the Board but the institutionas a whole to appreciate the importance of corporate governance and supplement it. CEOsshould therefore pay importance to building a team of performers and motivate theorganisation as a whole.Systems and ControlIn recent years, size of operation of banks has increased manifold. Besides, banks areentering into various other activities in the financial services sector. Due to increasedexposure of banks to various activities, the risks associated with them have also increased.Here I would like to emphasise upon the importance of managing operational risk whicharises out of deficiencies in internal systems and controls, systems failures and non-adherenceto prescribed procedures.Operational risk covers a broad range of risks that are internal to the bank and have receivedless attention in the past than other kinds of risks. However, attention is increasingly beingfocused on the issue because of the scale of losses that banks have suffered as a result ofbreakdown in internal controls. Banks, particularly those operating in international markets,are beginning to apply the same quality of management attention to operational risk, whichhas traditionally been a back office concern as against the more well developed areas ofcredit and market risks.Internal control and internal audit are the primary means to mitigate operational risk. A wellestablished internal control system, which includes segregation of duties, clear managementreporting lines and operating procedure coupled with sound internal audit system mitigateoperational risk to a large extent.56Internationally, as well as in India, banks have not been able to evolve any scientific methodfor quantifying operational risk. This may be due to lack of historical data. Therefore, RBIhas advised banks in its guidelines on “Risk Management Systems in banks” to evolve simplebenchmark based on business activity such as gross revenue, fee income, operating costs etc.,in the absence of any sophisticated models. Banks should devote the necessary resources toquantify the level of operational risks and incorporate them into the assessment of theiroverall capital adequacy as envisaged in the New Capital Accord.FraudThe reason why I wish to stress upon bank frauds is that banks in recent times have notadhered to the laid down systems and procedures thus giving rise to incidence of fraud.Practices in some banks like release of funds by lower level functionaries on oral instructionsof the top management with no record maintained on such instructions, had contributed to theperpetration of frauds. In many cases the Board of Directors had in a routine manner  ratified,post facto, the credit decisions of CMDs or other functionaries taken in excess of theirdelegated authorities. In many such cases, the loans had turned into NPAs later on.We have been mentioning in all the interactions with the CMDs of banks that considerabledelay has been noticed in reporting of the frauds to RBI/CBI/CVC. In as many as 23 cases oflarge value frauds for Rs.10 crore and above, cases filed for more than 5 years ago are yet toreach their logical end. This is the reason for our urging the banks, particularly CEOs toensure that laid down systems and procedures are followed and there  should be quickdisposal of cases relating to large value frauds of say Rs. 1 crore and above within the timelimit of 4 months as prescribed by CVC.I agree that  there is justification in the demand being made by banks that appropriatelegislative amendment to Public Servants Act should be brought out to provide for dismissalof a public servant, through a focused enquiry lasting not more than a week in case of largefrauds. This would, besides serving as a deterrent, would also ensure that fraudulent officialsare not allowed to stay around to commit further mischief and tamper records.Customer serviceThe reform process has resulted in shift from highly regulated banking to deregulation andliberalisation of the banking sector.  The objective was to evolve a level of banking serviceswhich is efficient, effective and customer-oriented and which should seek to emulate the“best practices” in the industry the world over. Indian banking,  realizing the challengesthrown by global competition is undergoing significant developments and improvements inthe field of customer service. This has by and large been possible due to increased use oftechnology in banking resulting in branch computerization, growth of retail banking andautomation of banking processes.  Extension of reach of customer service and rationalisationof costs of operations were the by-products of this process.For instance, ATM has emerged as an alternative banking channel which facilitates low-costtransactions vis-a vis traditional branch banking. The increased use of modern technology byforeign banks and new private sector banks has helped them to increase their market sharevis-a-vis public sector banks. Modern clearing operations, electronic funds transfer systemand centralized  funds management system are some projects receiving priority of RBI toenhance customer service in the banking sector.67Banks should not be satisfied only with introducing latest technology towards providingbetter customer service. The level of service still needs improvement. Complaints about delayin crediting proceeds of outstation instruments by banks and fraudulent encashment ofinstruments by unscrupulous persons after opening deposit accounts in the name/s similar toalready established concern/s resulting in erroneous and unauthorised debit of drawers'accounts continue to be received. In such cases, there have been instances where banks havealso not restored funds promptly to customers even in bona-fide cases but deferred action tillcompletion of either departmental action or police interrogation. I would reiterate that oncebanks are convinced that an irregularity / fraud had been committed by its staff towards anyconstituent, it should at once acknowledge its liability and pay the just claim.There is a lot more to be done to enhance customer service in banks.  Best way to come up tothe customers' expectations would be to obtain regular feedback from them especially fromrural and non-metro branches, and filling the gaps wherever exist. Banks' Boards should, inparticular, review the policies regarding customer service at periodical intervals to fine tunethem in line with customer needs. Complaints redressal mechanism should be quick,responsive and prompt.Future road mapFor a diverse and vast banking system like the one in India, it is important to build a futureroad map for the banking system. The future of Indian banking system needs a long termstrategy which would broadly cover areas like structural aspects, business strategies,prudential standards, control systems, integration of markets, technology issues, creditdelivery mechanism, information sharing, etc.With increasing competition and globalisation the need for specialised one window serviceconcept will grow. Banks would, therefore  be required to draw business strategies keeping inview their risk bearing capacity and need for additional capital. Banks would also have toexplore new markets and strive to achieve consolidation of their operations taking intoaccount the client profile, business opportunities, etc.In recent times, RBI has taken a number of initiatives keeping in mind the future road map ofthe banking system.  Introduction of Prompt Corrective Action framework is one amongthem.Under the PCA framework, RBI can initiate certain structured actions in respect of bankswhich have hit the trigger points in terms of CRAR, net NPA and ROA.   RBI, at itsdiscretion, will resort to additional actions (discretionary actions) as indicated under each ofthe trigger points.  It would be better for banks to avoid coming under PCA framework.    TheCEO and the banks’ Board have to work together to ensure that banks business is notconducted in such a way that trigger points under PCA framework are attracted by it.  As thesaying goes, “prevention is better than cure”.RBI is in the process of evolving fair practices code on lenders liability. The same has beenput on the RBI website for comments from the public.  Under the proposed guidelines, bankswould be required  to follow proper procedures with respect to loan application, such asacknowledging receipt of all loan applications, conveying reasons for rejection of loans,timely disbursement of loans etc. Banks would be given the freedom to draft fair practices78code. However, it should be ensured that RBI guidelines are not diluted. For this, Board ofbanks should lay down clear policy on all loan sanction and loan disbursement matters.I conclude my address by thanking NIBM for giving me this opportunity to interact with youall.* Address by Shri G. P. Muniappan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at theNIBM Annual Day Celebrations January 6, 20038
