Transit Path For Indian Economy:  Six Steps For Transforming The Elephant1Into A TigerShri Prabhat Jain and other members of the Delhi Chapter of the Young PresidentsOrganisation! It is my pleasure to be here amidst some of the young captains of theIndian industry, who, I believe, would continue to guide their respective enterprisesfor a foreseeable future and make immense contributions in shaping the IndianEconomy going forward.   I have been asked to speak to you today on “transformingthe elephant into a tiger” and in this regard, I would suggest six steps that I think areessential for such a transformation. However, at the outset, I thank the Delhi Chapterof the Young Presidents Organisation (YPO) for inviting me to share my thoughts onthis important topic. YPO has really established itself as an extra-ordinary network ofyoung global business leaders and a think tank on issues that are critical toeconomy, businesses and society. I am told the network has hosted some illustriousspeakers in the past and therefore, I have to live up to high expectations. I believethe decades of my experience in commercial banks and in the Central Bank haveprovided me with insights into enterprise, governance, growth and society and theirimpact on nation-building, which, I would share with you today and hope you findthem interesting and worth emulating.Let us now focus on the topic for the evening. Transforming the elephant into a tigercan mean different things to different people. In reality, the state of the art in geneticengineering still cannot contemplate such a modification. An Ang Lee or a StevenSpielberg can, of course, use computer generated special effects to bring about sucha transformation. But it is time to get real - given that the metaphor of elephant isused to denote the Indian economy and deals with our lives and the future of ourchildren.In 2007, Dr. Shashi Tharoor wrote an enchanting book, ‘The Elephant, The Tiger andstThe Cellphone: Reflections on India: - The Emerging 21 Century Power’. The book,ingrained in history, culture and socio-economic change, criss-crosses the Indian lifefrom Ajanta-Ellora and cricket to cellphones and call centres and makes a simplepoint of Indian growth effecting change in daily lives and imparting confidence to the1 Address delivered by Dr. K. C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the interaction withmembers of Delhi Chapter of the Young Presidents Organization at New Delhi on December 7, 2012.Assistance provided by Dr. Mridul Saggar in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged.1Indian people. In December 2008, the Economist of London published a specialreport that India was elephant, not a tiger. It noted that for all its chaos, bureaucracyand occasional violence, India has had a remarkably successful past few years. But,it wondered how it will cope with an economic downturn and the general electionsthat were about to follow. It added that the democracy tax was rising and storm-clouds were gathering. The prognosis, however, were proven to be off beam by theevents that followed. The elections removed uncertainty and the Indian economystaged a V-shaped recovery clocking 8.4 per cent growth during 2009-10 and 2010-11. Yet, we lost steam and the chinks in the tiger skin that we tried wearing, gotexposed.In July 2011, Shri Swaminathan Anklesaria Aiyar, my journalist friend and a profoundobserver on the political economy of India, wrote a paper for the Cato Institute, “TheElephant that Became a Tiger”. In this paper he persuasively argued that 20 years ofeconomic reforms in India had transformed the Indian economy into a tiger. Later thesame year, the Reserve Bank Governor Dr. Subbarao, while delivering the HaksarMemorial Lecture, argued that India may be an elephant, but even elephant candance. The elephant dance was disrupted by the zoo party in the form of globalfinancial crisis. He then suggested ten steps to get back on course by re-jigging theelephant dance.Growth in India has clearly slowed down since then to 6.5 per cent in 2011-12 and alikely 5.8 per cent in 2012-13, with significant downside risks. The twin deficits –fiscal and balance of payments – have compounded our problems. This may set usthinking on whether we are an elephant or a tiger or a goat, about to be devoured byglobal forces and our domestic inaction? So should we at all pursue the tiger dream?If yes, what do we need to do to earn the tiger tag?The elephant and the tiger: Which one should we prefer?Before I touch upon what we need to do, the first step is to understand what thesemetaphors mean. So let me upfront visit the key attributes of elephants & tigers.There are four key attributes of an elephant – the size, the herbivores nature, itsperceived moderate pace and its anatomy that includes large ears, the trunk and thetusks. Tiger, on the other hand, is not as large as the elephant, but is largest of the2cat species. It is carnivore, and is known for its speed and agility. Its anatomyincludes the stripes, the powerful jaws and razor sharp teeth, sharp claws and aflexible backbone. But, what conclusively differentiates the two is the tiger’s killerinstinct.I think, in terms of size, the Indian economy is, of course, an elephant. It is alsoherbivores by habit given its democratic structure, unlike the carnivore habits oftigers and dragons. In terms of speed, many people have a misconception thatelephants can’t run or walk fast. The fact is that elephants can walk as fast as 25miles per hour (mph), while tigers can run only a shade faster. Bengal tigers can runat 35 mph, but for short spurts and they can’t keep this pace for long.So, in my view, it is not axiomatic that one should try transforming the elephant into atiger. Yes, we could do with an added bit of speed but what we should really aim at isdeveloping a tiger’s killer instinct. These, together with a better use of our anatomyor resources, both human and capital, would help us achieve what the dragons andthe tigers have achieved, perhaps, with a smaller downside. For this to happen, inmy view, we need to take the following six steps:1. Preserve Demographic Dividends by investing in human capitalIndia’s demographic dividend presents the country with a great opportunity toenhance its growth and seek convergence of per capita incomes with that in thedeveloped world. India’s birth rate has fallen from 45.6 per 1000 in 1951 to anestimated 21 currently, but still remains highly driven by a slowly falling infantmortality rate that remains high at about 46 per 1000. The death rate has fallendramatically from 37.2 per 1000 birth in 1951 to an estimated 7 currently, but has stillnot caused population ageing. Median age for India’s population is about 27 yearscompared with over 40 for most OECD economies. It will add significantly to its laborpool and, even as the median age bucket rises, it will still be at a relatively young 30-34 age bracket by 2026. India’s age-dependency ratio (ratio of dependents-peopleyounger than 15 or older than 64-to the working-age population) is currently about54. This is already lower than Japan and France.Most developed countries would see a rapid ageing of their population over the next2-3 decades putting severe pressure on their social security systems with the rise in3dependency ratio. The overall median age of these countries rose from 29.0 in 1950to 37.3 in 2000, and is forecast to rise to 45.5 by 2050.Many developing countries like China, Brazil and Thailand too face issues of ageingpopulation having passed through the demographic transition. Over the last 60years, China has experienced demographic change at a historic pace that had aprofound impact on its population structure. Baby boom began in the mid-1960s afterthe period of ‘Great Leap Forward’ saw famines and a sharp rise in death rate and afall in birth rate. China is now a 'post-transitional' society, where life expectancy hasreached new heights, fertility has declined to below-replacement level, and rapidpopulation ageing is expected over the next few decades. China’s population willstart to shrink after reaching a peak of about 1.4 billion by 2025 A.D. The medianage of its population could touch 50 years by then. India’s population would overtakethat of China at that point. Its population is expected to peak only at 1.7 billion by2060 A.D.Clearly, India has a potential advantage of demographic dividend over its emergingmarket peers. But, this demographic dividend could be a boon or a curse dependingupon how we exploit it, for, the time to reap these gains is finite. By the turn of thiscentury, India would be facing a demographic discount rather than dividend becauseIndia’s population would have aged and the developed countries’ population wouldbe much younger. So what do we need to do to reap the demographic dividend whilethey exist?The very first thing is to invest in the resources that are expected to give usadvantage. India invests much less than it should in its human capital. The combinedspend of central and state governments in education, is just about 3.3 per cent ofGDP, while that on health is another 1.3 per cent of GDP. In contrast, the EuropeanUnion (EU) countries spend from their general government account, 5.5 per cent oftheir GDP on education and 7.5 per cent of their GDP on health – i.e. nearly threetimes more of their GDP. Canada’s public spending on health alone is over 11 percent of their GDP and that on education is nearly 5 per cent. India needs to step upits public spending on education and health considerably over the next five years.However, spending alone does not guarantee high quality human capital. We also4need to focus on the quality of this spending and think whether we can achievebetter outcomes with less spending.The second step we need to take is for right skilling of our work force. There isshortage of trained manpower for the industry, both at the bottom of the pyramid andhigher up the ladder. India is often considered to be a source for skilled laboursupply to the rest of the world, given its sheer size of manpower. It is often notrecognized that over four-fifths of our rural population and over half of our urbanpopulation remains unskilled. Women participation rate in the labour market remainspoor. The biggest problem is the lack of focus on technical education that couldabsorb a large chunk of unskilled labour, if backed by greater push to primaryeducation. Less than 11 per cent of the job-seeking population in the age group of15-29 receives any form of vocational training in India and only one of every threewho do get vocational training receive it from specialized training institutes.Furthermore, even in the value added segment, where we have the largest pool ofskilled manpower i.e. in the area of information technology, real wages are rising at apace that may impact our competitiveness.The biggest challenge is to ensure jobs for additional supply of labour that comes into join the workforce. On a rough basis, about 10 million people would need a jobevery year for the next 15 years. Though disguised unemployment in agriculturesector has reduced over the years, it may not be possible for the sector to provideadditional jobs given the rising rural wages and the need to shift to a corporate, moremechanized and capital intensive model of farming. While the services sector hasled India’s growth and employment story for some time now, India’s growth pacemay not be sustained unless the manufacturing sector also becomes morecompetitive and creates lot more jobs. This poses a significant challenge inemployment generation and skilling our work force.2. Improve productivity and efficiencyProductivity is an important driver of growth. Productivity depends on the efficiencywith which scarce resources are allocated – be it your time, work effort, naturalresources, capital or any other inputs. A great deal of the growth for most countriescan be explained by productivity growth, especially total factor productivity growth(TFPG). Factor accumulation (such as increase in labour or capital) explains a5smaller part of the growth. Given this experience, if India were to become a tiger, itwould need to focus on technological developments to improve its rate of TFPG.Capital deepening may also help, but the key lies in overall productivityenhancements.In India, output per worker has increased at an impressive rate in the services sectorafter the reforms initiated in early 90s. In this period, TFPG growth has also beenimpressive for this sector, though I will eschew quoting precise numbers as thegrowth accounting research generally gives varied quantitative estimates. TFPGgrowth has also improved for the manufacturing sector since the 1980s. So,progress is being made. However, the rate of this technical change, still, has beenlower than that for the East Asian economies during the period in which they earnedthe tag of being East Asian tigers.I would rather focus on the issue of larger policy initiative that would be necessary inthe quest to transform India into a tiger. In this context, I would make foursuggestions. First, improving agriculture productivity is necessary as, clearly,increase in area under cultivation is just not practical and, therefore, increasingdemand for cereals, pulses, fruits and vegetables would need to be met by improvingyields. Substantial productivity enhancements are possible on the farm throughadoption of precision farming techniques, better cultivars and optimal watermanagement. Better adoption of modern technologies in the area of biotechnology,genomic tools, cost-effective and eco-friendly integrated pest managementtechnologies, seed-supply chains and systems, regionally adapted varieties andhybrids, would help.Second, we need to focus on issues confronting our Small and Medium Enterprise(SME). SME sector accounts for over a third of our industrial output and contributesan equal share of our total merchandise exports. In the current downturn, SMEs arefacing adverse business climate with rising receivables, inadequate credit and highcost of credit. SME sector does not enjoy the economies of scale and scope that alarge corporation enjoys. It also cannot fully reap the benefit of informationtechnology as it has high sunk cost and a high rate of obsolescence.  Though havingstrong links with large firms, institutional mechanisms for transfer of technology to6SMEs are lacking. If SMEs are to effectively integrate with supply chains, we need toensure that links of finance and technology with large firms work at all times.Third, as I mentioned a little earlier, India’s next growth push has to come frommanufacturing sector. We had a missed century of opportunities. India cannot boastof one big ‘home grown’ global brand while much smaller nations like South Korea,Taiwan, etc. have plenty of them. Our abundant human capital has not beeneffectively channelized for supporting the manufacturing growth. But what I wouldreally blame for this is a lack of ‘R & D’ culture that we suffer from. Globally, Indiafigures at near the bottom in terms of R&D intensity. It spends less than onepercentage of its GDP on R&D expenditure, Countries like Israel, Finland, Sweden,Korea, Japan, US and Germany have R&D intensities that are higher by three timesor more.Fourth, a key issue related to productivity is our attitude to work. It is strange thatIndia, that epitomised the dignity of labour in the Early Vedic period, has imbibed aculture that does not respect workers. We have forgotten Swami Vivekananda’scontribution in equating work to worship. No form of work, whether manual orintellectual is less inferior to the other. As a nation, we have been steadily neglectingour respect for dignity of labour. Since the manual labour does not receive the samerespect as an intellectual work in India, work efforts are lost. This results in lowerGDP and lower Welfare. Individuals idle away than take up a manual job. What elsewould explain the fact that labourers from poor states like Bihar, Orissa, UP, etc.migrate and work hard in the agricultural farms in Punjab and Haryana, whilerefusing to do the same in their own locality where the land is more fertile and sameamount of labour would be much more productive. We must emulate the westernsociety in this regard where no form of labour is discriminated against. If PresidentCleveland could accept dignity of labour in 1894, more than a century down the lineit is time that we give respect to casual labour that operates around us – be it ourmaids, our drivers or the workmen in our factories – a due recognition and respect. Ifwe do so, more women and men would join the workforce. Unemployment would bereduced and Indian industry would become more competitive globally.3. Revive infrastructure investments and harness natural resources better7Much has been said about India’s infrastructure deficit and rightly so. India does nothave sufficient roads, nor sufficient power. When I was growing up, I was taught thatIndia is a land of poor, but is rich in resources. Today we have made a giant leap inlowering poverty and still remain abundant in natural resources. Yet, we have notlearnt to optimally utilise them. Take for example coal, which accounts for India’s 55per cent of energy needs. We have hard coal reserves of around 246 billion tonnes,of which 92 billion tonnes are proven. Yet, we are able to produce only 530 milliontonnes of coal, leaving supply shortages of over 150 million tonnes. Coal shortagesare constraining our power generation and though about 55 GW of new capacity wasthcreated during the 11 Five Year Plan (FYP), a large part of it remains unutilised dueto coal shortages. Private sector has failed to develop most of the new coal blocksthat were allotted to them. We ended up with inadequate planning and poorexecution in this area. We are now planning to create even more thermal powerthcapacity during the 12 FYP, but remain unsure of coal supplies. At the same time,banks have heavily extended themselves into lending to power sector both ongeneration and distribution side. On the distribution side, the State distributioncompanies (discoms) are sitting on huge losses and bank debt that is threatening togo bad.  The end result is a loss of business confidence that has brought theinvestment boom to a premature halt.What is most important in this context is to revive the confidence for investing andlending to the infrastructure sector. The government, in recent period, has takenseveral steps to facilitate this. The broad contours of the New Fuel SupplyAgreements (FSAs) have been worked out, though some thorny issues such as pricepooling of imported and domestic coal are still to be resolved. These pending issuesmust be solved quickly. Similarly, a debt restructuring package for the discoms hasbeen worked out. The private sector must seize the initiative and rekindle theSchumpeterian spirit at this juncture. Banks also need to perform their core bankingbusiness while balancing risk assessment with the functional need to support growth.We also need to harness our natural resources much better. Take the simpleexample of water. We are a country blessed with water resources with a network ofperennial rivers and abundant rainfall. The rainfall provides four times the water thatwe use annually. Yet, water is a scarce resource in India. We haven’t harnessed our8resources enough and haven’t planned the storage and distribution of waterefficiently. India’s per capita storage capacity is significantly lower than that of othercountries. For example, the quantum of water that can be stored as a proportion ofaverage river runoff for India is just 50 days of average runoff  with wide variations—from 220 days in the Krishna to just two days in the Brahmaputra/Barak Basin. Thecomparable figures for the Colorado River Basin and Australia’s Murray-DarlingBasin are 900 days while for South Africa’s Orange River Basin it is 350 days. Betterwater management could radically alter the agriculture situation in India.India also needs to utilize its mining, spectrum and air resources better. Theimportance of clean air is often not recognized. We need to strike a right balancebetween our development needs and environmental commitments to ensure long-run growth sustainability. We are not among the world’s top polluters. It needs to berecognized that average per square kilometre carbon dioxide (CO ) pollution in2Japan is 7.5 times more than in India.  Similarly, per capita CO emission by India is2amongst the least globally. Nevertheless, we also need to note that air pollution hasserious health costs and India ranks fourth in the list of the largest CO pollutants2after China, US and Russia. As such, if we want to ensure not just fast growth butalso good quality growth sustainable for a fairly long period of time, we mustcontinue to make efforts to exploit natural resources in an environmentally friendlyway.4. Improve governance at every levelThe World Bank’s worldwide governance indicators 2006-11 place India belowaverage on key parameters of governance. It scores about 15 per cent on politicalstability and absence of violence, 40 per cent on control on corruption as well asregulatory quality, 55 per cent on rule of law as well as government effectiveness,while 60 per cent on vice and accountability. Clearly, there is lot of scope forimprovement on these parameters. Both, our overall governance and corporategovernance needs improvement. In fact, we need better governance at every level –from hospital and schools to polity, firms, non-profit institutions, sports, banking andfinance, regulation, land records and even in our daily lives.Our governance deficit, in some form, is reflected in our ranking on ease of doingbusiness. According to the IFC-World Bank Report 2013 released this year, India9ndranks 132 on the index measuring ‘ease of doing business’ amongst 185economies. Singapore and Hong Kong got the top and second spots overall. In itsrdsub-components, India stands at an impressive 23 on the criteria of ease of gettingth rdcredit and 49 in terms of protecting investors. However, it figures at 173 in termsnd thof starting a business, 182 in terms of dealing with construction permits and 184in contract enforcement.According to the same report, on an average, in India it requires 173 days to start abusiness, 196 days for obtaining a construction permit and 67 days to get electricity.In Singapore one needs just 3 days to start a business, 26 days for constructionpermit and 36 days for getting electricity. All other East Asian tigers also have a farsuperior record than India on these parameters.If we aspire to become a tiger we must become more business friendly, both fordomestic and foreign firms, traders and tourists. We, of course, have an enviablerecord of a democratic system, a responsive government, an active media and anindependent judiciary. However, the risk of dealing with India must come downfurther. We have to reach where the East Asian tigers reached. It is for this reasonthat we advocated the adoption of Singapore model in the last RBI Annual Report. Ina limited way, this is being attempted in the form of National Investment Board (NIB).A well-functioning NIB can go a long way in cutting project delays. However, in ourfederal structure, NIB would still have some limitations. It will not have jurisdictionover project clearances that are required at sub-national levels. The Singaporemodel is a step further. It requires all concerned agencies to sit together in a timebound manner to clear or reject projects, failing which the clearance is deemed to beautomatic. We must make doing business easy, to unleash entrepreneurship andventure capitalism in India.We also need to improve our record of corporate governance in both financial andnon-financial firms. Barriers to entry must collapse and a more competitiveenvironment needs to be generated. However, we must develop a framework andinculcate practices of arms length relationships that do not permit connected lendingand business relationships that may promote “looting” behaviour as described byAkerlof (awarded the Nobel Prize in 2001) and Romer. They argued that aneconomic underground can come to life if firms have an incentive to go broke for10profit at society’s expense (to loot) instead of to go for broke (to gamble on success).Bankruptcy for profit will occur if poor accounting, lax regulation, or low penalties forabuse give owners an incentive to pay themselves more than their firms are worthand then default on their debt obligations. There is still a large gap arising from ournominal compliance of good corporate governance in accordance with regulatoryprovisions and real compliance of practicing it in law and spirit. We need to bridgethis gap.5. Enforce Accountability in all walks of lifeAll the other five steps that I talk of in this address, including real compliance of goodgovernance cannot be achieved unless we enforce accountability. Just as we needbetter governance at every level, we also need to enforce accountability in all walksof life. Our accountability structures, especially in public sector, are weak. Inadministration, the civil servants are insufficiently incentivized for the risks they take,are seldom rewarded for successful completion of their goals and are, at best,merely transferred for poor implementation. Mangers in public sector enterprisesface similar problems in addition to bureaucratic interventions that delay decisions orrequire them to move away from policies which may be in the best interests of apublic sector unit. It is difficult to enforce accountability in this climate.On corporate accountability, the principal-agent relationship between themanagement or those who wrest ownership and control and the shareholders asactual owners is rather weak. We have seen asset stripping and bankruptcies in thisweak environment. This has been especially true where a complex web ofcompanies within business groups prevail. There is a strong case for simplifyingthese structures that are often developed to evade taxes, indulge in regulatoryarbitrage and to strip assets of the firm for personal use. In recent period, we havecome across instances where corporate debt restructuring is sought but ownershipcommitment of those who have control is rather left weak. We must enforceaccountability in such cases by forcing such business entities to bring in more oftheir capital. There are, sometimes, grave cases of businessmen launching newfirms, renaming firms or indulging in M&As to garner fresh public money after theymisused funds in the first instance. The concept of the modern firm based on limitedliability principle requires care to prevent such practices.11Our political process ensures a fair deal of accountability through our democraticinstitutions. Yet, there is debate on whether a right to recall should exist. A morefragmented polity and existence of coalitions and minority governments, sometimes,make matters worse. Accountability at the municipal levels is also lacking. This, inturn, impacts the upkeep of our infrastructure that gets built. Roads seldom last morethan a year. Drainage systems choke.What is, therefore, necessary in this climate is to do four things. First, stakeholderengagement must be intensified in all institutions – public or private. Furthermore,there should be a principle of inclusivity in stakeholder engagement so that any sortof regulatory capture by interest groups is avoided. Second, individuals, rather thancommittees or groups, should be made accountable even where a collegiateapproach is adopted. Such accountability should not be time barred by transfers ofjobs or retirements. Third, financial accountability must be enforced for all. Forenhancing fiscal transparency, the budgetary processes should be made tighter sothat slippages are eliminated. Similarly, financial accountability needs to bepromoted for firms and non-profit institutions. Fourth, accountability should becodified to the degree it can be done and a periodic evaluation must be done toassess achievement, failures and correctives.6. Make finance more responsive to real sector and promote inclusive growthLet me, at last, cover the role of finance in India’s transformation from elephant totiger. I have kept this for the end because this is where finance should belong to. Inrecent period, finance has become big and rather than responding to the real sectorneeds, it is leading the real sector. Too-big to fail syndrome, firms depending onother incomes to shore up their accounts, market herd behaviour driven by noiserather than fundamentals, are all examples of finance sector becoming too big for itsboots. Yet, the finance to support real activity is still inadequate. Firms andbusinesses still get crowded out by information asymmetry. Financial frictions andfinancial constraints come in the way of investment and growth in the economy. Forwant of collaterals, the poor cannot access even elementary banking services,resulting not only in some potential saving getting lost but leaving the society moreunequal and polarized with insufficient support for Pareto superior outcomes justbecause gainers can’t compensate the losers.12Finance must be regulated more tightly. This does not require more regulations butperhaps less and newer regulations with greater effectiveness. At the same time,those who engage in finance must have an obligation towards promoting financialinclusion, without which inclusive growth cannot be achieved. Banking should have ahuman face for it is the households who provide the base for all banking activities.They are the only ones with financial surpluses which can be intermediated tocorporate and public sectors that run financial deficits. It has been my endeavour topush policies on bank lending with a view to encourage credit flows to the vulnerablesection of the population that would otherwise get financially excluded.Over the years, this has been the ethos of the Reserve Bank. The branch licensingpolicy and the directed lending route have been the two pillars on which the effortsfor financial inclusion have rested for a long time. The bank licensing policy,mandating a certain ratio of rural bank branches for each license for urban branch,has often been criticised by banks as coming in the way of their business interests.However, there is strong research evidence to suggest that this social bankingexperiment in India has been successful in improving the credit flows to the ruralpopulation and even in lowering poverty as a result. The priority sector lending (PSL)stipulation has also improved the flow of credit to certain productive sectors of theeconomy that would otherwise have been crowded out of the bank credit market dueto information asymmetries. There are reasons to believe that with proper planningand use of technology-enabled efficient delivery channels, banks can pursuefinancial inclusion in a profitable way.Our approach should not be seen as being interventionist. In practice, Reserve Bankhas deftly balanced objectives of equity and efficiency so that financial inclusion isfurthered, but banks’ financial health is not impaired. In more recent period withwhich I have been associated, we have redoubled our efforts at financial inclusion.For instance, the prescription for PSL in respect of foreign banks has been raisedfrom 32 per cent to 40 per cent in case of those banks which have 20 or morebranches. We have also imparted a more human touch to basic banking for thosewho did not have bank accounts.13ConclusionLet me end by talking about something we need to learn from the East Asian tigersin our quest to become one. Growth acceleration in these tigers were supported byliberalization, export-led growth, high investment in education, large share ofeducated workforce, high public and private savings rate and macroeconomicdiscipline and governance.  We are pursuing some of these policies and can pursuesome more of them. However, these tigers also failed to maintain their spurt becauseof some mistakes they committed. Some of them maintained high interest rate toattract foreign investments, others pegged currency arrangements and many of themdeveloped a vulnerable financial system. An unanticipated shock from banking andcurrency side, therefore, resulted in growth collapse for them during the East Asiancrisis. Corporate failures added to the financial sector woes in some countries(especially Chaebols in Korea). While transforming the Indian economy into a tiger,we need to calibrate policies taking into account the lessons learnt during the EastAsian crisis.Thank you for your patient hearing. Downturns come and go away as businesscycles run their course. In our present predicaments with macro-economicstabilization, we must not lose sight of our larger goals, whether we walk at anelephant’s pace or run like a tiger. Let me assure you that as a society, if we caninculcate an aggressive and tenacious urge to attain a set goal- the killer instinct ofthe tiger- we would definitely earn our rightful place under the sun.***14BibliographyAiyar, Swaminathan Anklesaria (2011), “The Elephant That Became a Tiger: 20Years of Economic Reform in India"  Cato Institute, Development Policy Analysis, no.13, July 20, 2011.Akerlof, George A. and Paul M. Romer (1993), “Looting: The Economic Underworldof Bankruptcy for Profit”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1993, No. 2(1993), pp. 1-73Bosworth, Barry and Susan M. Collins (2007), “”Accounting for Growth: ComparingChina and India”, NBER Working Paper No.12943, February.Tharoor, Shashi (2007), The Elephant, The Tiger and the Cellphone: Reflections onstIndia: - The Emerging 21 Century Power, New York: Arcade PublishersSubbarao, Duvvuri (2011), “Rejigging the Elephant Dance”, Haksar MemorialLecture delivered by Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at theCentre for Research in Rural & Industrial Development, Chandigarh on November25, 2011, reprinted in RBI Bulletin, December 2011, p.2041-48.World Bank and IFC (2012), Doing Business 2013: Smarter Regulations for Smalland Medium Enterprises, Washington, The World Bank15
