Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure & Innovations in Retail Payment*Systems: Some PerspectivesIt is a pleasure to be here in New Delhi to inaugurate this International Seminaron Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure (PFMI) and Innovations in RetailPayment Systems in the midst of the guest speakers and distinguishedparticipants from  around the world. The spring season in New Delhi is verypleasant and its beauty is all pervasive. I am sure the participants will enjoy thebeauty of New Delhi and there would be a lot of takeaways from the seminar. Iunderstand that after completion of the seminar the participants will have anopportunity to see the splendour of Taj Mahal, a world heritage monument,known for its grandeur and magnificence. It touches the hearts of millions oftourists every year to remind them the power of love. Like Taj Mahal, thePayment Systems with its many innovations have charmed billions of populationacross the globe through its products, services, efficiency and convenience. Ithas assumed such a criticality that it has become necessary to regulate it withutmost care and diligence as any slippage could lead to instability in the financialsector.  The Payment Systems of the country touches millions every day throughdifferent delivery channels, instruments and institutions.  In India too, we havecreated such a mega Payment System infrastructure that is expected to cater to1.2 billion people. As you all are aware, the development of Payment Systems ina country, both Large Value and Retail, depends upon its banking and financialstructure and vision of regulators to modulate the developments. However, whileframing policies for orderly development of the Payment Systems, regulators doface newer challenges every day.1. .Challenges in Large Value Payment Systems2. Recent crisis has once again emphasized the need for an efficient and securefinancial structure. Large-Value Payment Systems that contribute significantly tofinancial stability is one of the critical components. Various initiatives of theCommittee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the TechnicalCommittee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO)have been the offshoots of the increasing risk and uncertainty in the financialmarkets, particularly visible during the recent financial crisis. Financial MarketInfrastructures (FMIs) have stood the test of  time by settling obligationswhenever they were due and provided market participants enormous confidenceto transact business without the risk of defaults and failures during periods ofuncertainty and volatility. Nevertheless, the need for sound risk management andgovernance with focus on areas like liquidity and credit risks has been realizedby all the stakeholders and this has acted as the driving force behind theinitiatives to review the existing standards as a part of crisis proofing exercise.* Inaugural address delivered by Shri Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor at the International Seminar on Principles for FinancialMarket Infrastructures and Innovations in Retail Payment Systems organized by Reserve Bank of India on February 14, 2013 atNew Delhi. The speaker acknowledges with thanks the contributions of Shri Simanchala Sahu and Shri. Surajit  Bose of the ReserveBank of India.Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some PerspectivesPrinciples for Financial Market Infrastructure (PFMI) are part of such initiatives.PFMI is meant for the Financial Market Infrastructure (FMIs)  like SystemicallyImportant Payment Systems (SIPS), Central Securities Depositories (CSDs),Securities Settlement Systems (SSSs), Central Counter Parties (CCPs) andTrade Repositories (TRs) (newly included) which facilitate the recording,checking and settlement of financial transactions. The CPSS and IOSCO havepublished new PFMI replacing their previous principles and standards viz. (i)Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment Systems (CPSIPS) (2001),(ii) Recommendations for Securities Settlement Systems (RSSS) (2001) and (iii)Recommendations for Central Counterparties (RCCP) (2004).3. These 24 principles (PFMI/2011) which have come in place of the existingstandards include new features like (i) default handling of clearing participants;(ii) addressing of operational risk; (iii) principles on segregation and portability;(iv) tired participation and (v) handling of business risk. The new principles inessence reflect the learnings from the recent financial crisis.  Alongwith theseprinciples five responsibilities have been assigned to the regulators.  They   are :i. FMIs should be subject to appropriate regulation, supervision andoversight by the central bank, market regulator or other relevant authority;ii. These authorities should have the powers and resources to carry out theirresponsibilities in regulating, supervising and overseeing FMIs;iii. Authorities should clearly define and disclose their regulations,supervisory & oversight policies with respect to FMIs;iv. Authorities should adopt the relevant internationally accepted principles forFMIs and apply them consistently; andv. Authorities should cooperate with each other, both domestically andinternationally in promoting the safety and efficiency of FMIs.As we observe, the focus of the new principles alongwith the aboveresponsibilities is to improve efficiency and safety by limiting systemic risk andenhancing transparency and stability in the financial systemAssessment Methodology   and Disclosure Framework under PFMI4. CPSS and IOSCO have also published the assessment methodology for thePFMIs and the disclosure framework for FMIs. The objective of the assessmentmethodology is to provide a framework for assessing an FMI’s observance ofeach of the 24 principles and the relevant authorities’ observance of each of thefive responsibilities. The assessment methodology is, therefore, a tool to promotethe implementation and ongoing observance of the principles and responsibilitiesand to help ensure objectivity and comparability across all relevant jurisdictions.The assessment methodology is primarily intended for external assessors at theinternational level and in particular, international financial institutions, such as,the World Bank and International Monetary Fund {e.g., assessment underFinancial Stability Assessment Programme (FSAP)}. It also provides a baselinePage2 of8Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some Perspectivesfor national authorities to assess FMIs under their oversight/supervision. Nationalauthorities should use the assessment methodology in its current format ordevelop an equally effective methodology for their national oversight/supervisionprocesses.5. The disclosure framework requires an FMI to publicly disclose sufficientinformation to participants and prospective participants so that they canunderstand the design and operations of the system, their rights and obligations,cost and risks from participating in the system. Information that should be publiclydisclosed extends beyond all relevant rules and key procedures and includesother explanatory material to help promote a better understanding of operationsof the FMI and their impact on participants and the market it serves. Thedisclosure framework thus aims at enhancing the transparency in operations &risk management systems and, in the process, facilitate comparison across FMIsin different jurisdictions.6. Implementing 24 principles and five responsibilities in their true spirit is achallenge before the FMIs and the regulators in terms of enabling legalprovisions, availability of infrastructure, management of risks, cost for putting inplace default handling mechanism and effective system of oversight of FMIs. Allthese responsibilities require resources, both financial and human, in the centralbanks, FMIs and other regulators. This Seminar is part of the initiatives of RBI forcapacity building in this critical area.Challenges in Retail Payment Systems7. The Retail Payment Systems today is dominated by continuous innovationsaided by breakthroughs in technology. It has brought immense benefits in termsof new products and delivery channels and at the same time, they haveengendered concerns for the regulators across the globe. Such innovations inthe retail payment landscape have thrown challenges to regulators in thefollowing key areas:i. Increased use of technologies like internet and mobile phones haveresulted in innovative  yet complex products and processes;ii. The lines of demarcation between products are getting blurred as multipleaccess channels and devices are being increasingly used interchangeably(e.g. both  mobile banking and internet payments through smart phones);iii. The entry of non-bank players into payment space has increasedresponsibilities of the regulators for continuous monitoring of theiractivities as they may pose threat to the payment systems in terms of costand assurance to the consumers;iv. The pricing related issue of payment services offered by non-banks hasbecome a major concern;v. The security issues often  threaten the confidence of users of thetechnology dominated retail payment system products;Page3 of8Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some Perspectivesvi. In the context of efforts being made for financial inclusion, trade-offbetween expanding the reach of financial services to unbanked and thesustainability of the business model has become a challenge;vii. Although the recent financial crisis did not show any strong evidence ofcorrelation between payment systems and financial stability, goingforward payment systems, both large value and retail could be the sourceof instability when the financial transactions moves largely to electronicmode that gives rise to several operational & financial risks; andviii. As often innovations are technology driven and developments in retailpayment system have been rapid, the expertise and competence of staffof central banks and others engaged in regulation and oversight hasbecome a major issue that needs to be addressed effectively.8. These challenges, therefore, need innovative solutions. However, taking thecapacity of the regulators to encourage or inhibit the innovations, it is important tocreate policy environment that meets the expectation of the consumers for a safeand sound payment systems and encourages participants of the payment systemto sustain their business interest.Reference of PFMI for the Retail payment Systems: 7’S Framework9. It is appropriate to ask the question whether and how the 24 new Principles forFinancial Market Infrastructure would be relevant for the Retail PaymentSystems. Although at the current juncture Retail Payment System may notthreaten the financial stability, the segment requires greater monitoring andoversight to keep the public confidence in the system. Any breach of trust willprove disastrous for the payment systems leading to macroeconomic concerns,particularly in emerging countries like India where several initiatives have beentaken or are on the anvil to further financial inclusion by leveraging developmentsin retail payment system. One could possibly suggest a “PFMI Light” frameworkthat could strike a balance between the need for a safe and sound retail paymentsystem & the requirements of accessible and affordable financial services for theunbanked/under-banked population. Here I would like to briefly flag the followingseven issues in the form of what could be called as 7’S Framework. Thecomponents of the 7’ S Framework are: Structure, Safety, Suitability, Standards,Settlements, Sustainability and Strategy.Structure10. The Retail Payment System plays an important role in the economy although thetotal amount of settlement is less than that of Large Value Payment System. Theretail payment differs from Large Value Payments as it has to be accessible andaffordable by a common man. There is a need to create payment systeminfrastructure that provide users the experience of the cash payment or near-cash payments to wean them away from cash usage. This would require a lot ofinvestment in Research & Development and understanding the need of thestakeholders to design the Retail Payment Systems. The trust in the RetailPage4 of8Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some PerspectivesPayment System would increase once the Retail Payment Service providers areauthorised by the regulators having legal backing to lay down rules andregulations (Principle 1 of the PFMI). Governance plays a key role in setting upcredible and robust retail payment systems that supports stability of the broaderfinancial system and works in public interest (Principle 2 of the PFMI). Like manycountries, the Payment & Settlement Systems Act, 2007 provides statutorypower to the Reserve Bank of India to regulate and supervise the paymentsystem entities. This has helped Reserve Bank to promote an orderly paymentsystem structure in the country.Safety11. Safety and soundness of the Retail Payment Systems is of prime importance.Safety boosts confidence in the system. One of the basic principles of safety isidentifying the risks and responsibilities of various stakeholders and managing iteffectively (Principle 3 of the PFMI). Risks like credit (Principle 4 of the PFMI),collateral (Principle 5 of the PFMI), margin (Principle 6), liquidity (Principle 7),operational (Principle 17) and business risks (Principle 15 of the PFMI) remain asmajor challenges before the system participants and system operators of theRetail Payment Systems. As a regulator, we are required to create a frameworkthat enables all the stakeholders to design and provide Retail Payment Systemsso as to address these risks, particularly in the context of introduction of newertechnologies and complex products. The continuous assessment of various risksshould be carried out using on-line/off-line methods and market intelligence toavoid any serious setback to the payment systems. The soundness of RetailPayment System remains the critical element of the regulatory framework andsupervisory policies of central banks and regulators. It is the responsibility of theregulators to ensure that the policies are aligned with the country’s economy andits emerging needs without sacrificing the sound principles of safe paymentsystem. Another aspect of safety would be the availability of robust BusinessContinuity Plan (BCP) and Disaster Recovery (DR) framework so that criticalpayment systems remain robust and are able to handle disruptions in efficientmanner.Suitability12. Although the urge for replicating the successful payment systems of othercountries in one’s own country is very high, it is necessary to customize theprocesses and products as per the suitability to the country keeping in viewparticularly the socio-economic and cultural distinctiveness and the regulatoryand institutional aspects Regulators need to assess effectiveness of differentpayment products in their jurisdictions by the authorized entities to ensure thatthey suit the needs of the common people, the complexities are understood bythem and they have inbuilt provision for consumer protection (Principles 21 and23 of the PFMI). There should be an institutional mechanism to assess andcertify the retail payment products that matches minimum laid down norms by theregulators. Regulators also need to keep a check on proliferation of products andsystems which are difficult to monitor. The suitability may be assessed from thePage5 of8Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some Perspectivespoint of view of the SMART principles, i.e., Simplicity, Manageability,Acceptability,Risk controls and Transparency.Standards13. It is very important to create standards and principles that create a level playingfield for the system participants, system providers and consumers. Standards likePFMI, Basel III and ISO help in creating best practices that act as benchmarksfor the players and the industry. Standards also reduce discretionary powersleading to fewer disputes and chances of favouritism. While setting standards,we need to be sensitive to the practicality of their implementation. Setting higherstandards that are not achievable by the stake holders will remain on paper.Further, standards need to be flexible to cater changing needs and should not actas barriers for the entry of new payment system players.  Standards should takeinto account cost of compliance as that is ultimately passed on to consumers.One example is policy of regulators on default handling and guaranteemechanism (Principle 13 of the PFMI) applicable for retail payment systems thathas cost implications for system participants. It is, therefore, necessary to take apractical view on such cases to prescribe the rules that are implementable andcost-effective taking into account the risks involved in retail payment systems.Further, there should be standard setting bodies that can continuouslybenchmark the products, systems and services for continuous improvements.Regulators need to play an active role in encouraging entities to put in placevarious standards and leveraging them for business growth and riskmanagement. There is also strong case for uniform security standards across thejurisdictions for minimizing frauds in electronic banking.  A case in point is fraudsrelating to misuse of international credit cards due to the absence of therequirement of second factor authentication for all the Card Not Present (CNP)transactions.Settlements14. As the retail payment being dominated by the deferred net settlement processes,there is a need for a guaranteed retail payment & settlement systems that willgive comfort and assurance to all the stakeholders. In describing the settlementcharacteristics of net settlement systems, the concept of certainty of settlement issometimes used. This concept refers to the certainty that the system will be ableto effect final settlement when the netting cycle and the associated settlementprocedures have been completed. Certainty of settlement relates to a multilateralnetting system's ability to ensure the timely completion of daily settlements in theevent of inability to settle by a participant with the largest single net debit positionor failure of more than one participant. The PFMI also emphasizes on settlementrisk. Principle 8 of the PFMI which talks about settlement finality addresses thefundamental issue of the finality of transactions processed by an FMI. Thisprinciple is equally applicable for the Retail Payment Systems as also Principle 9of the PFMI which encourages settlements using central bank money and wherea commercial bank is used for settlement there has to be strict control credit andliquidity risks.Page6 of8Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some PerspectivesSustainability15. The sustainability depends a lot on efficiency and effectiveness (Principles 21 &22 of the PFMI) of the system that meets the goals and objectives laid down bythe payment system participants. Efficiency can be measured on threeparameters, i.e., Cost, Time and Assurance. Cost effective does not necessarilymean providing services at lower cost to consumers; it has to be cost effective forthe system and the service providers too. It has always been a debate whoshould set the price, i.e., regulators or market. Although it sounds good to leavethe cost aspect to markets, it is not always true, particularly in developingcountries with high rate of financial illiteracy and where payment systems are stillevolving. In the Indian context, it is the regulator that often takes variousinitiatives to develop the payment systems and sometime even the products.Hence, they, at times, put a cap on the price of services to ensure thatconsumers use the payment services offered through various delivery channelsto the maximum extent. For example recently in India Reserve Bank of India hasreduced merchant discount rate for use of debit cards to promote card basedtransactions which have not taken off in a big way although the number of cardsissued is significant. Regulators have also to ensure that service providers,particularly non-banks, remain healthy and robust so that they can deepen thepayment system infrastructure. Consumers expect access to the paymentsystems that provides timely services to them (Principle 18 of the PFMI).Therefore, a balance has to be achieved between timely service and feescharged by the service provider. Technologies and shared infrastructure are tobe encouraged to minimize cost and ensure timely services due to economy ofscale. The third factor of efficiency is assurance. All the stakeholders shouldhave assurance in using the retail payments system. The retail payment systemshould have inbuilt capability to protect consumers’ interest, particularly in theelectronic payment environment. The endeavors should be towards designingfraud proof systems and reliable compensation mechanisms that will boostconfidence of all the stakeholders.Strategy16. Regulators of retail payment systems should put in place a short, medium and along term strategy with a transparent manner (Principles 23 & 24 of the PFMI). Ithelps all the stake holders to prepare themselves in advance without anysurprise. Reserve Bank of India, for example, has to come out with a strategypaper in the form of Payment Systems Vision Document for 2012-15 describingall its plans for the next three years. A major focus area of the Vision Documentis Retail Payments. The thrust of the vision is to proactively encourage electronicpayment systems for ushering in a less-cash society in India and ensurepayment and settlement systems in the country are safe, efficient, interoperable,authorised, accessible, inclusive and compliant with international standards.Reserve Bank of India had consulted all stake holders before finalizing the VisionDocument so that they are on board during the critical phase of implementation. Iam happy to share with you that such a strategy has enabled us to take manyPage7 of8Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure &Innovations in Retail Payment Systems: Some Perspectivesinitiatives alongwith all the stakeholders. The strategy should include sensitizingall stakeholders like bank staff, system providers, service providers andconsumers on the risk and responsibilities of using the payment services.Mediums like TV, social media, newspaper, outreach programmes and town hallmeetings are best way to achieve the objectives. The school and collegestudents particularly need to be sensitized through their curriculum or throughfamiliarization programmes as they are the future users of the retail paymentsystems. Pensioners, housewives and unbanked people are vulnerable groupswho need to be treated on a special footing in usage of retail payment products.Reserve Bank of India has, for instance, started an initiative called e-BAAT(Electronic Banking Awareness And Training) for creating awareness on use ofdifferent retail electronic payment products for different target groups.Conclusion17. To conclude, let me reiterate that implementation of the new PFMI  is going to bea big challenge before all of us. There is a need to assess the relevance ofPFMIs for the Retail Payment Systems which are characterized by expandingvolumes arising out of Person to Person (P 2 P), Government of Person (G 2 P)and e-commerce transactions, continuous innovations and increasingcomplexities, particularly in the context of technology driven products andprocesses. Possibly a “PFMI Light” approach for the Retail Payment Systemscould be appropriate keeping in view the need for a safe, efficient and robustretail payment systems that would serve the cause of accessible, appropriateand affordable financial services for the consumers, particularly those who haveremained financially excluded. I am sure this two day seminar would furtherenrich our understanding of the Principles of Financial Market Infrastructure andthe innovations emerging in the retail payment system space through thepresentations of eminent experts and lively interactions among the participants. Iam confident the views/suggestions that would emerge from this seminar wouldin some way help all the stakeholders to promote safe and sound paymentsystems in our respective jurisdictions. I wish all the participants a pleasant stayin India and wish the seminar all success.Thank you all for patient hearing.Page8 of8
