Governor’s Speech on the Occasion of Release ofHistory of RBI (Volume III) on March 18, 2006Respected Prime Minister, distinguished guests and friends,On behalf of all the Reserve Bank employees - retired and serving; onbehalf of the Central Board of the Bank and on my own behalf, I have thehonour and privilege of extending a hearty welcome to our esteemed PrimeMinister, Dr. Manmohan Singh; Governor of Maharashtra Shri S.M. Krishnaji;Chief Minister of Maharashtra State Shri Deshmukhji; Union Finance MinisterShri Chidambaramji and other distinguished guests.  The Bank had the privilegeof a visit by the President, Dr. Abdul Kalam in November 2004 when heinaugurated the Bank's Monetary Museum.  Today we have the unprecedentedprivilege of a visit to the Reserve Bank by the Prime Minister of India, and Sir,we are grateful to you for the very kind gesture.  Reserve Bank, established 70years ago, can be proud of its achievements. The history volumes beingreleased today provide a testimony.More importantly, the Reserve Bank is committed to maintainingexcellence and the globally best standards. The inauguration of the Centre forAdvanced Financial Learning symbolises this commitment.  It also signifies theintended evolution of Bankers' Training College, started in 1955, into a Centredevoted to advancing efficiency and stability in the financial sector as a whole.The idea of institutionalising the advanced learning process has been inspiredby the initiative of setting up the Indira Gandhi Institute of Development andResearch (IGIDR).Sir, the Reserve Bank is proud of its professional acumen and someevidence of it is found in our publications.  One of them is the latest Report onCurrency and Finance. This Report captures the evolution of the Bank,particularly, how it has maintained and enhanced its reputation as a credible aswell as respected public institution in our country.  It is only appropriate that theHon'ble Finance Minister Shri Chidambaram, who played a part ten years agoas Finance Minister and is again playing a role now in the Bank's evolution, isreleasing it today.Government of Maharashtra has been generous in extending theirvaluable support to our functioning in all respects; and we are grateful for it.  Itrust, we are satisfactorily serving the State in various capacities such as itsbanker, its debt manager, etc.  We warmly welcome the Governor and the ChiefMinister of our State, Maharashtra.Finally, I extend a hearty welcome to all the distinguished guestsassembled here for kindly responding to our invitation.Now, I have pleasure in requesting the Hon'ble Finance Minister torelease the latest Report on Currency and Finance.x x x x x x x xVolume I of RBI’s history is essentially work of Shri S.L.N. Simha, SeniorEconomist of RBI and this has been reprinted. Volume II was authored by Dr.Balachandran under the overall guidance of a Committee headed by Dr.C.Rangarajan.  Volume III, completed now, is the work of Late Dr. Ambirajan; Ms.Chandi Batliwala; Dr. A. Vasudevan and Shri T. C. A. Srinivasa Raghavanunder the overall guidance of a Committee headed by Dr. C. Rangarajan andDr. Bimal Jalan as Governor.Now, I request Hon’ble Prime Minister to release the history volume.x x x x x x x x xMay I request Hon’ble Prime Minister to launch Centre for AdvancedFinancial Learning.x x x x x x x x xMay I request Hon’ble Prime Minister to address the gathering.********
