Reviving Confidence in the Indian EconomyRespected Vice-Chancellor, Professor Rama Rao, distinguished academics andfriends,At the outset, I would like to express my grateful thanks to Professor Rama Rao garufor giving me the privilege and honour of delivering the first Dr. S. Radhakrishnan MemorialLecture sponsored by the University Grants Commission and being organised by theUniversity of Hyderabad on the occasion of the Teachers’ Days this year. So much has beenwritten and said about Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, that any narration by me would do littlejustice to one of the greatest philosopher-statesman of independent India. An eminentacademician, a versatile writer, a brilliant orator, a renowned philosopher, a respecteddiplomat and a remarkable President of India, Dr. Radhakrishnan had a reputation of weavinga spell on those who heard him. In fact, Bertrand Russell remarked that he had never heardphilosophy better expounded than by Dr. Radhakrishnan. Of particular relevance today is notonly that Professor Radhakrishnan was a great teacher but also the fact that he served in avast number of Universities. He had his apprenticeship in Madras and Mysore, went toCalcutta and well before he was forty lectured on invitation at American universities and alsoat Oxford. He set up Andhra University and was also Vice-Chancellor of Benaras HinduUniversity. The enormity of respect that he commanded is evident from the fact that theBritish Government gave him a knighthood; he was nominated to the League of NationsCommittee on Intellectual Cooperation; was called to serve on the Constituent Assembly andhad a memorable stint as Ambassador to Moscow. I had been lucky as a student to hearSarvepalli Radhakrishnan in 1954, on a high school sponsored excursion to Delhi; and I stillpossess the photograph taken with him. Later, as sub-collector, Ongole, I made elaboratearrangements at Chinaganjam railway station for him when he was proceeding to Madras in1967 after laying down his responsibilities as President. In brief, my personal contact waslimited but he remains one of the greatest men I ever met in my life, especially since I startedmy career as a teacher and once again, yearn to be a teacher.Speaking of teachers, let me confess that I am here because of an invitation fromsomeone, who like Dr. Radhakrishnan has not only been a teacher but many more things –Professor Rama Rao. An eminent and internationally renowned scientist, a respected head ofa regulatory body, a Secretary to Government remembered even after a decade, a builder ofinstitutions, a great contributor to advancement of professional bodies and publications, andone of the finest human beings I have come across. There is lot in common between Prof.Radhakrishnan and Prof. Rama Rao, though one is from the field of philosophy and the otherfrom the realm of science.Moving from teachers to teaching, the University and Reserve Bank of India (RBI)have assigned me the pleasant task of inaugurating the Master of Technology course inInformation Technology, devoted to Banking Technology and Information Security - the firstof its kind in India, and perhaps in the world. The pogramme is being jointly launched by theUniversity of Hyderabad (UoH) and Institute for Development and Research in BankingTechnology (IDRBT). As per the continuing collaborative activities between the twoinstitutions, a 2 Mbps leased line connectivity has been established between the UoH and theIDRBT with a view to facilitating better and easy communication between UoH and IDRBT,sharing library and other resources at UoH and IDRBT and also providing an avenue forvideo conferencing. This programme, fully-funded by IDRBT, and open to both direct andsponsored candidates from the banking and financial sectors is a multi-disciplinaryprogramme that seeks to merge the new and emerging technologies in InformationTechnology with the domain expertise in the ever-changing field of banking and financialservices. Providing absolute Information Security and IS Audit systems is a challenge, and isof immediate relevance and concern to banks, especially in the context of current as well aschanging business environments in banking, like electronic payment systems, e-commerce,mobile banking, and Internet banking. Deploying of modern and evolving technologieswould require the banks to get equipped with requisite skills on a continuous basis. Thus,M.Tech. provides an excellent and right mix of the various aspects of Computer andInformation Security that is essential for banking technology to succeed and survive. TheReserve Bank of India, as a sponsor of IDRBT, is happy to be associated with the pioneeringand path breaking collaboration between academia and practitioners and assures full supportin its future endeavours for mutual benefit.In fact, IDRBT has already established a Corpus Fund with a seed amount of Rs. 50lakh to promote Higher Education and Research in Banking Technology and Management asa core area. Banks and other financial institutions are expected to contribute significantly tothe growth of this Fund.It is customary to devote a Memorial Lecture to a theme, which has fundamentalsignificance and contextual relevance. After consulting with the organisers and keeping inview the interests of the RBI, the subject chosen for this occasion is:”Reviving Confidence inthe Indian Economy”. It is necessary to recognise that India remains one of the bestperforming economies in the world, in spite of the current indications provoking a debate onthe need for revival of the economy. It can be gathered from the analysis that it is importantto revive confidence in the economy in any attempt to improve the performance. An approachin this regard can be discerned from the latest Annual Report of the RBI. In the true spirit ofphilosophical explorations and interpretations propounded by Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan,the concluding part of the lecture will be devoted to select structural issues critical torestoration of confidence in the Indian economy.Performance of Indian EconomyIndia today is rated as the fifth largest economy in the world, measured in PurchasingPower Parity terms. Only the U.S., Chinese, Japanese, and German economies are larger thanours. In terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth rates, India was one of the tenfastest growing economies in the world during the ‘eighties, and moved up to the eighthfastest during the period 1980 to 1998. In regard to growth of GDP in per capita terms also,India's performance during the period is among the top ten.Furthermore, on the basis of data on income or consumption distribution (WorldDevelopment Report 1998-99) for about 80 countries, and using both the ‘Gini’ coefficientand the share of the poorest 20 per cent as a measure of distribution, there are only 15countries in the world, which have a better consumption/income distribution than India.While growth is considered to be a key measure of macroeconomic performance,economic stability is indicated by inflation. In the ‘eighties, India’s average inflation rate wasclose to Asian developing countries, above developed ones and lower than the average for alldeveloping countries. In the ‘nineties, inflation has been relatively low in the second half ofthe decade.2In the external sector, India, along with China, has been described as “an island ofstability amidst seas of turbulence” in international currency markets in the recent years.The ratio of debt to GNP in 1999 was 21.3, the only other developing country with amore favourable ratio being China. India had the lowest proportion of short-term debt to totaldebt at 4.3, while for China, it was 11.5.In regard to fiscal position, however, India’s fiscal deficit is currently among thehighest out of 74 major countries with population more than 10 million. And of these onlytwo are higher than India. Furthermore, public savings in the ‘nineties in India, whichreached its peak of 2.0 per cent of GDP in 1995-96, became negative 1.2 per cent of GDP by1990-2000. The average rate of financial saving of the household sector and of privatecorporate sector generally moved up during ‘eighties and ‘nineties. There is also evidence ofdecline in the incremental capital output ratio (ICOR) from 4.2 in the 1980s to 3.9 in 1993-2000.There has also been an appreciable decline in poverty. The all-India poverty ratio fellto 27.09 per cent in rural areas, 23.62 per cent in urban areas and 26.10 per cent at the all-India level in 1999-2000 from 53.1 per cent, 45.2 per cent and 51.3 per cent recorded during1977-78.Life expectancy has also moved up from 50.4 years in 1980-81 to above 61 years inthe 1990s. There has been an improvement in the life expectancy at birth for males from 50.9years to 60.4 years and for females from 50 years to 61.8 years.The overall literacy has increased from 43.7 per cent in 1980-81 to 63.1 per cent in1998-99.Moreover, for the first time in four decades, population growth has decelerated tobelow 2 per cent and this has been accompanied by a decline in the mortality rate from 12.5per 1000 in 1980-81 to 8.7 per 1000 in the 1998-99.Yet, there is a sense of impatience if not despondency at our economic policies. Thereasons are fairly obvious. We start from a low base of GDP from which impressive rates ofgrowth are noticeable. India still accounts for a very large concentration of poverty and ofilliteracy, and hence fruits of development either may not reach or are inadequate. Whileemployment in organized sectors has virtually stagnated, in recent times, insecurity inemployment has crept in. Skill-irrelevance of most of the manpower to the emerging needshas a depressing influence, especially when coupled with downsizing. Moreover, significantand accelerating expectations have been created. There is widespread awareness of thecapacity of the economy to grow rapidly and they see no apparent reason for slower thanpossible growth.There are, thus, discernible reasons for the current debate on revival of the economy,centering around the recent deceleration in the rate of growth, and certainly going beyond thesimple exhaustion of animal spirits of the business community in the country.Why the Current Debate on Revival of Indian EconomyFirst, the deceleration of economic activity for the second year in succession hasraised some concerns about the feasibility of rapidly moving the economy to a higher growth3path in the medium term. Added to this is the public perception that India is not immune tothe slowdown phase of the global business cycle.Second, the agricultural sector has exhibited considerable volatility and recordedabsolute declines in the last two quarters of 1999-00 and again in the first quarter of 2000-01.Agricultural production registered a negative growth on top of a decline in the previous year.Third, the growth of industrial production decelerated during 2000-01and further to2.1 per cent in the first three months of 2001-02 from 6.1 per cent in April-June 2001.Fourth, services sector, which accounted for a major share of GDP, exhibited a lowergrowth of 7.5 per cent in 2000-01 as against 9.4 per cent in 1999-00.Fifth, there has been lower off-take of nonfood credit from the banking system,especially since January 2001.Sixth, imports declined by 0.2 per cent in 2000-01 as against an increase of 17.3 percent during 1999-00. Non-oil imports declined by 8.5 per cent as compared with the increaseof 3.2 per cent in 1999-00.Seventh, export growth decelerated sharply to 1.7 per cent in April-June 2001-02from 26.6 per cent in the three months of 2000-01.Eighth, considerable uncertainty, arising from turbulence in stock exchanges andapprehensions of liquidity/payments problems, the problems in some cooperative institutionsand the largest mutual fund, the downgrading of the rating of a major development financialinstitution and the repayment problems faced by another financial institution, has affectedinvestor sentiment.There are, however, some favourable developments in the economy that need to behighlighted to get across the major thrust of the argument viz., the current issue issignificantly one of confidence, especially on the prospects.First, real GDP growth when viewed in the context of the growth of other countries, isstill one of the highest in the world.Second, inflation has remained stable and low.Third, the financial sector has experienced declining interest rate environment.Fourth, despite turbulence in the stock markets, the other segments of the financialmarkets have remained stable and there have been no serious threats to systemic risks.Fifth, the external sector is clearly sustainable with the current account deficitcontinuing to be less than 1 per cent of GDP.Sixth, foreign investment sentiment does not seem to have been affected with FIIinflows recording about $750 million during April-July 2001 as compared with $ 150 millionduring April-July 2000.4Seventh, the record level of foreign exchange reserves at nearly $ 45 billion onAugust 24, 2001, stable exchange rate and money market rates provide less risky businessenvironment.Eighth, foodstocks have reached an all-time high, improving food security andimmunising the economy from transient supply shocks.An Approach to Revival of ConfidenceIt is customary for the Reserve Bank of India to present an Annual Report each yearand that Report for 2000-01, was approved by its Board of Directors on August 16. TheChapter on Assessment and Prospects sets out a carefully constructed statement of the RBIBoard’s perspective and this provides a useful starting point to debate what needs to be doneto revive confidence in the economy.While noting the comfortable position of external sector and the possible moderateimpact of global developments, the need for addressing the predominantly domestic factors isflagged.The present state of the economy reflects a combination of cyclical and structuralfactors with different weights assignable.The implication is that any solution should address both the cyclical and structuralissues, though the relevant importance and sequencing of the various components will have tobe well crafted.In regard to structural factors, a particular mention is made of the operation of theinstitutional constraints on growth. The suggestion is that the legal framework andinstitutional arrangements would have to be accorded priority in the structural component.As regards the relative role of macro economic and micro economic considerations, itis made clear that both require to be addressed, but the Report focuses on importance ofmicro economic aspects in as much as they are closely linked to institutional factors.The balancing of the reform in financial and non-financial sectors is also highlightedand the importance of accelerating the reform in real sector, particularly agriculture, isstressed.More specifically, recognising that a large segment of the population is dependent onagriculture and its performance in the recent past has been of considerable concern, theimportance of augmenting public investment in agriculture is emphasised.In particular, the advantage of shifting public expenditures from subsidies toinvestment as a means of efficiency, equity and regional balance is pointed out. Furthermore,desirable measures for the creation of an efficient system of market intermediaries, quality-enhancement, perhaps through certification, introducing insurance mechanisms, developingnation-wide multi commodity exchanges, etc., are listed out. In a sense, therefore, theemphasis is on attaining a quantum jump in the agricultural sector to meet global standards asa means of withstanding global competition and taking advantage of emerging opportunitiesin international trade.5With regard to industry, the fact that public sector enterprises still dominate theeconomy is noted and a strong plea is made to end uncertainties in regard to the future ofpublic sector enterprises. In particular, the complementarities in public and private sector areemphasised.The thrust is that enhanced resources should be made available to select publicenterprises, which have strategic significance or strong public purpose, while clearly andpromptly disinvesting Government's equity in the other enterprises. At the same time, thecreation of a conducive environment for industrial revival warrants an appropriate regulatoryframework to improve infrastructure. By implication, one of the approaches advocated is thatif labour has to be compensated, it should be done directly rather than incurring open-endednon transparent expenses in the name of revival, through tax concessions, sacrifices byfinancial institutions and incentives to induce sickness.Finally, in the context of the new economy, the emphasis is on removal of proceduraland institutional constraints, thus warning against bureaucratization in the name of creatingenabling environment.In the external sector, there is considerable cause for comfort emanating fromreasonable level of reserves, low current account deficit and adequate level of capital flows,but the need for continued caution and vigil is rightly noted. Above all, in the currentaccount, improving the export performance and in the capital account, attracting FDI arehighlighted as necessary for medium-term sustainability. By all accounts, the majorconstraints in regard to both these appear to be the institutional framework and uncertaintiesin regard to the policy framework, both of which need to be tackled urgently as part ofconfidence boosting measures.On fiscal policy, the major thrust is towards fiscal empowerment in contrast to fiscalenfeeblement to realise the objective of durable fiscal consolidation. This would call forseveral steps to increase the tax revenues, abolish tax exemptions, enhance the non-taxrevenues by ensuring cost recovery, etc. A case is thus made out for either obtaining adequatereturn on investments in public sector enterprise or for disinvestment, unless a specificpurpose in the interest of the public at large is served better by public ownership.In regard to public debt, a point is made that the size of government borrowings,though most visible, is not the only one element in public debt management. Keeping in viewthe fact that only 80 per cent of the central government’s liabilities are covered by assets evenas per the government accounting system which is cash based, the health of public finances islinked to the both formal guarantees, and implicit guarantees. In other words, wherever thegovernment is owner, directly or indirectly, there is an inevitable obligation on the part of thegovernment to the discharge of liabilities in order to avoid reputational risk while declaring agovernment owned enterprise as insolvent. In brief, a holistic view of assets and liabilities aswell as incomes and expenditures of the public sector as a whole is canvassed in the report,which would warrant significant importance to accounting practices, disclosure standards,and a degree of transparency in public sector as a whole.In the matter of interest burden, the Annual Report makes a reference to severalproposals under consideration to focus on instruments that currently result in very higheffective cost to the Government. Another area of concern, though not elaborated in theReport is the element of a Ponzi scheme in small savings at high cost to the Government witha tendency to finance the ballooning fiscal needs of State Governments, while imposingserious mismatches in the asset-liability maturity profile of the Central Government.6The concept of fiscal impairment is clearly of special significance for States since thebedrocks of socio-economic welfare viz. law and order and social services are in the statesector. The actions needed would, therefore, be in terms of expanding public goods and socialservices including anti-poverty programmes with concomitant roll-back of fiscal activism incommercial activities.In regard to monetary policy, the major emphasis is on flexibility of interest rates inthe financial system as a whole. The global developments in terms of oil prices and thedomestic developments in terms of inflation emerge as important areas to monitor in theconduct of monetary policy. While a number of instruments have been devised and operatingprocedures have undergone significant changes, it is very clear that considerablesophistication and skill are essential in successful conduct of monetary policy.As regards financial sector, several problems warranting attention are brought out.These relate to perception of implicit sovereign guarantee in regard to all financialintermediaries, and lack of arms length relationships and lack of clear demarcation betweenownership and regulation. In particular, there is a reference to complexities arising out ofexistence of various types of financial intermediaries with differing charters owing theirorigins to prereform strategies, which virtually calls for a thorough revamping of the interfaceof government and Reserve Bank with financial intermediaries that they own. Above all, theinadequacies in the present banking system, particularly in the cooperative sector, in meetingthe credit needs of agriculture as well as small and medium industries necessitate afundamental change in the systems of their governance and functioning.Exploration of Some MeasuresThere is a strong consensus among international observers that there is a weak reformprocess in India, which expresses itself in the form of relatively slow implementation ofpolicies. Another view is that the “tyranny of ten per cent”, namely the workforce of theorganised sector, continues to resist any change. Yet another view is that in any democracy,reform is generally a slow process since the sacrifices of the vociferous minority comeupfront while the benefits to the vast but relatively silent majority accrue with a time lag.Perhaps, there are elements of truth in each of these views, but without doubt, the relevantissues are essentially in the nature of political economy and not merely matters for technicalanalysis. Yet, there is merit in exploring some drastic measures, which could demonstrablyimprove the current sentiment.Reviving the economy requires boosting of confidence by combining both structuraland other cyclically relevant measures. While the latter are desirable, such measures must becombined on a credible basis with structural measures. In this address, it is not proposed toelaborate on either cyclically relevant measures or the process of integrating them withstructural measures, but confine to structural issues.It is possible to be illustrative and certainly not exhaustive even in regard to thestructural measures. The intention is to express purely exploratory technical views in five ofthe areas that are critical, namely, financial sector, regulatory framework, public enterprises,delivery of public services, and overhang issues. These do not in any way constitute theofficial position of RBI.7Advisory on Financial Sector RestructuringIt is useful to understand some features of the financial system in India. Most of thefinancial savings still comprise deposits to the banking sector, with some perceptible flow tolife insurance, mutual funds, government small savings and Provident Funds. About threequarters of the banking deposits go to government owned banks that currently have investedover one-third of the assets in government securities and a perceptible amount in PSU bonds,development financial institutions cooperatives and government guaranteed enterprises. Thisgives place to a criticism that government owned banks are operating as instruments tofinance high public sector deficits. Similar arguments can be advanced in respect of thelargest mutual fund, viz., the Unit Trust of India and the insurance giant Life InsuranceCorporation of India not to mention the General Insurance Corporation. While IndustrialDevelopment Bank of India is a public sector statutory corporation, Industrial FinanceCorporation of India’s major shareholding is by government owned Institutions. IndustrialCredit and Investment Corporation of India is a public financial institution and hence has aspecial status accorded by Government.While public tend to repose confidence in these institutions by virtue of their status asGovernment-owned or backed entities, there is corresponding implicit direct obligation on thepart of the Government to protect the interests of depositors/investors. In other words, anyvulnerability in regard to these institutions has an impact on government’s finances. Such areasonable expectation is not only justified on the consideration of the concept of "holdingout" a backing, but also by the obligations discharged in the past by Government of India inseveral cases including the case of CanFina through Canara Bank.The regulators of financial sector have some additional complexities in relation topublic sector entities. First, in the case of statutory bodies including public sector banks, thereare certain regulatory constraints. For instance, both for reasons of legality and reputationalrisk, the regulator cannot cancel a licence, say to a public sector bank, even if it fails to meetcapital adequacy norms. The recourse open to the regulator in the case of owner’sunwillingness to inject capital to meet capital adequacy standards is unclear and this oftenleads to regulatory forbearance. Second, as in the case of UTI and Development FinancialInstitutions, the legal basis of jurisdiction of regulators is somewhat ill-defined. Thirdly,Government tends to be closely involved in some operations of many of these institutions'and overlapping of accountability is plausible. Fourthly, as long as these institutions functionwithout reference to sound principles of corporate governance though consistent with theirindividual statutes, inherent weaknesses persist. In fact, where there has been disinvestmentand consequently some shares are held by the public, minority shareholder interests are notseriously factored in. Fifthly, the Government expects the regulator to often function as anagent of owner (Government), which further complicates accountability. Finally, theregulatory focus in respect of these institutions as set out by Government itself is not welldefined and diffused. The issue is whether defining the respective roles and making theirtransactions more transparent would improve confidence in the financial sector by avoidingthe criticism that they often take recourse to lending, investment, rescheduling and bailouts,and extending guarantees as behest operations. It is against the above background thatinstitutions tend to be somewhat less than responsive to regulatory regime as well as marketdiscipline.Furthermore, the non-performing assets (NPAs) arising out of priority sector lending,which is in the nature of directed lending and those covered by the Bureau of Industrial and8Financial Restructuring (BIFR) together account for well over fifty per cent of total non-performing assets of the banking system. The number of companies referred to the BIFR bythree major Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) stood at 694 with a total loanoutstanding of about Rs.6,275 crore as at end-March 2000. Above all, in view of their closeinterrelationships, the risks of contagion are high and hence the need to overhaul them toinspire confidence.It is essential to recognize the constraints under which these entities are operating in ahighly competitive environment induced by the reform process. Apart from the issues ofdiffused accountability to the Government and regulator and multiple objectives to bepursued in order to justify public sector nature, their management style is occasionallycramped by extraneous interventions. As a consequence of all these factors, at operatinglevels of these entities, there may be a strong incentive to inaction than action.It would be totally inappropriate to conclude that these institutions are morevulnerable now than before. In fact, their vulnerabilities were neither defined nor measured inthe past and the pressure built on them by the financial regulators in the recent past hasenabled them to improve their functioning and disclose their real status. The dimension of theproblem which were concealed is being revealed and there is perhaps a strong case foradmitting and assessing the real status, and take corrective actions to meet the overhangissues and design strategies to make the future operations efficient, stable and accountable.In regard to private sector banks including cooperatives, vulnerability of some ofthem is no longer an impossible contingency. Hence, an interesting question that can arise isthe appropriate response that is justifiable in case there is a run on such a bank. The primaryresponsibility of the regulator is two-fold, viz., protection of small depositors and avoidanceof contagion resulting in systemic risk. In case of such problem, the regulator should attemptto identify whether it is due to illiquidity or an insolvency problem. In case it is assessed asan illiquidity problem, the regulator may in exceptional cases act as a Lender of Last Resortand consider infusing temporary liquidity to such a bank to tide over the problem ofmismatch. In case it is assessed by the regulator that a bank is insolvent or the bank itselfcloses its branches for banking operations, the logical requirement would be liquidationunless a serious contagion resulting in systemic risk is anticipated. A prompt liquidationoperation, whenever warranted by these considerations would ensure two aspects. First, retailor small depositors upto Rs. 1 lakh would be able to recover their deposits quickly (perhapsin matter of days) and secondly, depositors with over Rs. 1 lakh deposits would need to booklosses. In particular, corporates or institutions that have placed deposits in banks may havevested interest in prolonging the matter even at the cost of small depositors in order to avoiddisclosure of losses in their balance sheets. Under these circumstances, the regulator has tomake difficult decisions/judgments at short notice, often with incomplete information.Sometimes, liquidity and solvency issues get intermingled with discomfort to the respectiveregulatory arms.In India, very often, in case of such banks, for a variety of reasons, a softer approachis taken and sometimes legal hurdles are faced. It is possible to argue that this soft approachhas resulted in a typical situation of moral hazard when the management tends to becomeinefficient and depositors do not exercise adequate prudence. The depositors in banks shouldbe encouraged to exercise at least as much caution, attention and time when they placedeposits as they do when they purchase vegetables. Thus, a clearer enunciation of effectivepolicy in regard to vulnerable banks would enable swift action by the regulator and exercise9of more caution by depositors. In this context, insistence on greater disclosure and the regimeof Prompt Corrective Action would be relevant.To put it differently, the current priority for policy should be to clarify therelationships between the regulator, regulated, owner and government as well as a well-defined regulatory focus to enable healthy development of financial markets. Perhaps, thisneeds even more urgent attention than a debate on single versus multiple regulators. Myexperience as Chairman of Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes hasprovided a clue for this purpose in the form of Advisory Groups. On the same analogy, thehighest level in the country say the Prime Minister or the National Development Councilcould constitute an independent Advisory Group on Financial Sector Restructuring witheminent non-officials as members and the officials should be available only to facilitate thework of such bodies. Such an advisory body should be able to produce a blue print within fewmonths since substantial international experience and domestic research are already availablein this direction.Zero RegulationAs mentioned, one of our major achievements in this decade has been the strength andsuccessful management of the external sector. There are some lessons to be learnt from theexperience. First, there was initially a fear that liberalisation of imports and delinkingfinancing of imports with import licensing would result in a surge in imports, but a fewargued that such fears were unfounded and, in fact, the import bill would be down. Theresults vindicated the views of the few liberalisers viz., inventories went down asuncertainties in administration of import-regime were removed; moreover, users of importscould try out and experiment with domestic supplies without diluting their rights to import(since import permit was both on entitlement and on commitment). Second, import of goldwas virtually prohibited on the ground that gold is unproductive and hence precious foreignexchange should not be wasted on it. A few argued that there is a strong sentiment in favourof gold in India (for mangala-sutra, for streedhan, as both a consumption and investmentgood) and hence was imported in any case through unofficial channels resulting in significanttrade and currency transactions beyond the pale of policy and law. The argument of the fewthat allowing of import of gold liberally will eliminate such unofficial transactions both onreceipts and payments side of the current account, reduce the outflow of forex for transactioncosts and improve the effectiveness of policy of exchange rate management has been fullyvindicated. At the same time, the caution expressed by the very same few in regard to capitalflows has also helped India in withstanding the volatility of international flows. It is not thecase that there are no anomalies left in the management of the external sector. For example,while an Indian resident has the option of spending a generous amount of foreign exchangeon a holiday abroad or liberally send gifts, a resident is not permitted to use the sameentitlement to acquire a foreign financial asset. It must be relevant to recognise that the liberalregime for individual residents on current account has not revealed any major abuse of thefacilities or any major drain in terms of foreign exchange outgo. Similarly, a tourist in Indiatoo is discriminated in airlines and hotels to the extent payment has to be higher and inforeign currency, thus giving a signal that the Rupee is not a valid currency for sometransactions within India. The thrust of the argument is that appropriate deregulation and wellcrafted restrictions are key to successful policy, and in India such an approach is feasiblewhen policy makers and bureaucracy recognise that they are dealing with people with theirpreferences, prejudices, responses, etc., and that every regulation needs to be justified that itsdemonstrable benefits exceed the costs of administering regulation and overall costs ofcompliance with regulation.10It is heartening to note that the Prime Minister has recognised the enormity of theissue of institutional impediments in the revival of economy when he declared before themeeting of National Development Council on September 1, 2001 : “We must quickly identifyand eliminate all perverse laws, regulations and procedures which lead to unproductiveactivities, cost increases and sap the energies of the entrepreneurs".In order to operationalise the suggestion, Parliament or Government may considerestablishing “Zero Regulation Advisory”, a person or a Committee of eminent non-officialswho would take on board any questioning of any regulation or Law as excessively intrusiveor costly or unnecessary. It can also accept suggestions for modifications or alternatives. Theregulator concerned would have to justify continuance of such a regulation to the satisfactionof the Committee. The advise of the ZRA, which should be made public should be bindingunless countermanded by a public speaking order by the authority appointing the ZRA. Theexperience of Reserve Bank with Regulations Review Authority, though somewhatcircumscribed, is very instructive in this respect. For example, ZRA could designateRegulation Review Outpost in each regulatory organisation, somewhat on the lines of theChief Vigilance Commissioner designating vigilance officers in various Ministries andorganisations, though the reporting and work methods would have to differ. No doubt, theZRA would have jurisdiction over the regulatory organisations also. Such a system needs tobe applied for legislation also since most of the enactments do not contain what are known as“sunset clauses”. While advocating zero regulation as a process at this juncture as part ofgeneral review, it is essential to devise and strengthen appropriate and credible regulatoryframework wherever essential, such as in regard to physical infrastructure.Portfolio Management ApproachAs explained in the current Annual Report of RBI, the public enterprises are uncertainabout their future and are starved of capital due to fiscal stress, both factors seriouslyaffecting their morale. The uncertainties in regard to the policy intentions as well as marketresponse to disinvestment add to lack of capital formation and sub-optimal performance.Moreover, experience indicates that Ministries lack the incentive to divest, and even whenthey do, lack the expertise to see through the process. While budgetary compulsion appear togive a push to disinvestments, in the process, several distortions may take place such asselling shares with assurances of monopoly, selling minority share-holding, intra-publicsector transactions giving an erroneous impression of disinvestments, etc. Unfortunately, allthese tendencies, especially delayed processes could lead to loss of output in publicenterprises, reduced income to Government, adverse impact on workers, contagion tofinancial sector, especially public sector banks and erosion of share holder value culminatingin possible deterioration of family silver into family junk.It must be noted that the functioning of the public enterprises impacts the fiscalsituation both on a continuing and contingent basis. The relationship between Governmentand Public enterprises as also among the enterprises has followed and are still following whathas been described as the joint family approach, which undermines transparency andaccountability. The examples of input-output relationship between coal production, railways,steel making, power generation, public sector banks and insurance companies are enough toindicate the potential for operations at the behest of non-commercial considerations, many ofwhich are not even properly accounted for in their respective balance sheets, profit & lossaccount etc. in a mutually consistent manner. Such linkages may have persisted in the longprocess of disinvestment that has been undertaken. Considerable progress has been made in11imparting transparency and accounting for transactions on commercial considerations, but theprocess is far from complete.It is possible to enunciate some ground rules for defining the future of publicenterprises (both financial and non-financial) on the basis of what may be termed as PortfolioManagement approach. First, whenever a private operator is permitted to enter an activity andcompete with an existing public enterprise, the unique rationale for continued publicownership is eroded as such enterprises form part of commercial investment portfolio ofgovernment.Secondly, the Government should have the prerogative and obligation to elaborateand define considerations that determine non-commercial characteristics warranting publicownership on a subsisting basis.Thirdly, all enterprises in commercial investment portfolio have to be operated oncommercial considerations and shareholding may be continued, reduced or expanded oncommercial (which includes financial) considerations alone. To ensure this, ownership of allsuch enterprises need to be transferred to what may be termed as Portfolio ManagementCompany of India (PMCI). No doubt, the organisational forms of all such enterprises wouldbe companies under Company Law totally on par with other competing entities. Thisprocedure recognises that while Government or Ministry has the responsibility to decide onpublic purpose of an entity, disinvestment or operations of a commercial entity requiredifferent set of expertise and processes.Fourthly, PMCI would assess the expected cash flow over the years with continuedtotal or majority or minority ownership vis-à-vis the capital receipts expected fromdisinvestment, from time to time. Naturally, the cost of funds for Government and byextension to PMCI will be a consideration. In other words, the PMCI will replace the presentadvisory Disinvestment Commission and will operate as an independent portfolio manager.Fifthly, public interest considerations such as strategic presence and protection ofinterests of labour in respect of each enterprise will have to be specified and mandated byGovernment while transferring enterprises to the PMCI.Sixthly, PMCI will have the flexibility to provide financial resources to thoseenterprises which can perform well or those which have the potential to increase shareholdervalue.Clearly, while the decision as to whether any enterprise should be in public or privatesector is a policy decision to be made by Government at higher level, in respect of thoseenterprises which are purely in a commercial but competitive environment, the process ofexpansion, strengthening or disinvestment are essentially operational matters and hence bestcarried out by professionals with due regard to dynamics of the market and securitiesregulation. This should ensure that the total investment portfolio of the commercialenterprises of the government is managed efficiently reconciling commercial objectives andsound fiscal management. This in brief is the logic behind the proposed PMCI.Bypass and Delivery of ServicesThe importance of fiscal adjustment at State Level in enhancing the output and qualityof services has been recognised. The popular perception of effect of reform and thus12confidence in the economy appears to have been undermined by the deterioration in thequality of public services be it education or health or even drinking water. While a generationago, most of these facilities were sought and provided in the government sector, today, alarge part of some of these facilities is available only on commercial basis. Consequently,many, especially the poor are deprived of reasonable or in any case equitable access to theseservices. In fact, even security of buildings is getting increasingly privatised in urban areas.In other words, there is a phenomenon of “bypass" of these public services since the mainarteries appear choked, on which enormous sums are spent by Government. There issometimes a tendency to spend energies in regulating the bypass activities for ostensiblepublic purpose than on improving the quality of services in public domain. While superfluousregulatory aspects would be considered by the proposed ZRA, there is a need for assessing,on a continuous basis, the cost of inputs and the quantity as well as quality of output in regardto delivery of these public services. Perhaps, it is possible to devise mechanisms under theaegis of the Comptroller and Auditor General to make such assessments on a continuing andscientific basis, by outsourcing as is being done in respect of commercial audit of publicenterprises. Indeed, the audit of delivery of such public services deserve far greater energiesand attention than many other sectors.It is hoped that media and academia would join in such efforts to assess these sectors,which are critical to the nation’s well being.Overhang IssuesIt is necessary to make a distinction between what may be termed as “flow” issuesand overhang issues. There is merit in insulating the overhang problem from flow issues anddemonstrably solve the flow problem upfront. For example, in regard to food stocks there isaddition to buffer stocks virtually on a continuous basis and a policy needs to be evolved totackle this flow. Any attempt to sort out the overhang accumulated excess stocks on an adhoc basis would obviously have limited success. Any solution to the overhang problem oflarge magnitude is bound to be operational over the medium-term and may involve admissionof the magnitude of possible losses to be incurred. Yet another example relates to the powersector, where addition to capacities to generate without ensuring cost recovery adds to theproblem of accumulated losses. Prima facie, the other major areas with considerableoverhang problems are financial sector, public enterprises, pension and provident liabilitiesand the cooperative sector. Since many of these issues require well crafted medium- to long-term actions, it may be necessary to define the goals specifically and negotiate the processrather than move forward in an ad hoc manner. In other words, disjoined incrementalism maynot be mistaken for sequencing of reforms and there is merit in coming clean, definingdestination and negotiating as part of political process, the arduous but rewarding journeytowards the sustainable and credible progress towards a modern, humane, prosperous andegalitarian society.Perhaps, Dr. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, the philosopher – Statesman – teacher wouldhave endorsed such a transparent but consensus based approach.Thank you !? First Dr.S.Radhakrishnan Memorial Lecture sponsored by University Grants Commission and organized by theUniversity of Hyderabad, delivered by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Hyderabadon September 5, 2001.13
