1Human Resource Challenges in Indian banks: ‘Foolproof’ing the employeesSmt. Meena Hemchandra, Principal, College of Agricultural Banking (CAB), Pune; ShriR.K.Gupta, Executive Director, Bank of Maharashtra; delegates to the Conference;ladies and gentlemen! I thank the Principal, CAB for inviting me to inaugurate thisconference of HR heads of banks and financial institutions. I feel the choice of theme forthe Conference i.e. “Future Proofing of Banking Personnel” is quite interesting. Giventhat this Conference is now in its 7th year, I wonder whether hitherto you have onlybeen deliberating about ‘present proofing’ of employees. Given the enormouschallenges that the banking profession has countered over the last few years, I can’tfault you for doing so. The larger question is whether our banks have now reached astage where they can feel secure about their existence in future? I will leave that debatefor another day and for another forum. Irrespective of the outcome of that debate, thereis little doubt that the employees of banks will have a big role to play in whatever futurecourse banks chart for themselves. Hence, the relevance of this brainstorming sessionon HR function is easily appreciated.2. So, let me now turn to the theme for the Conference. What do we want to achievewhen we say that we are working towards “Future Proofing of Banking Personnel?”  TheCollins English Dictionary describes a future-proof system as something which isguaranteed not to be superseded by future versions, developments, etc. Moregenerally, a future proof system would be expected to have the following characteristics:· Not easily destructible· Flexible and adaptable· Ability to weather extreme challenges· Non- obsolescence3. On an individual bank level, “Proofing” could also mean insulating their human capitalfrom being poached by the rival banks and also planning their man power requirementsfor meeting the future needs of the business. Thus, the purpose of ‘Future Proofing’ is toprepare the employees against adverse developments in future. Undoubtedly, the1Keynote address by Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Conference of HR Heads ofBanks and Financial Institutions held at College of Agricultural Banking, Pune on February 6, 2014.1rapidly changing business environment and the impending entry of new banks areposing new challenges for the banks in terms of recruiting skilled personnel andretaining the existing talent, but the larger issue is whether the existing crop of humanresources are geared to perform optimally in the existing environment. With thisconsideration, I would like to give the theme of this Conference a wider sweep. Youwould agree that even in a benign economic environment with good economic growthas also with most banks having adopted technology, the productivity and efficiency inour system continues to be at extremely low levels. Also, this period has witnessedsignificant increase in employee compensation across all cadres in the banking sector.So, the need is to not only prepare our banking personnel to face the adversedevelopments of future, but also to ensure that they perform optimally and take fulladvantage of a perfectly favourable environment. Hence, rather than attempting to“Future-Proof” the banking personnel, I would like the banks to attempt “Foolproofing”their employees. By “Foolproofing”, I mean preparing the employees to deliver what isexpected of them. In that sense, the employees need to be proofed against sub-optimalperformance under all circumstances, whether favourable or adverse. In my addresstoday, I intend to highlight the key challenges that the HR function in banks in Indiafaces and the measures that are needed for foolproofing the banking personnel not onlyagainst the adverse developments but also adequately equip them to perform to theiroptimal potential in the ‘Business as Usual’ conditions.Human Resource Management (HRM) in Indian banks4. HRM can essentially be summarized as a function that entails “planning, organizing,directing and controlling of activities relating to the development of employees in termsof enabling them to acquire competencies needed to perform their present and futurejobs with ease and enthusiasm”. The HR function in banks is no different from that inother organizations. It is a continuous process that seeks to ensure the development ofemployee competencies, dynamism, motivation and effectiveness, in a systematic andplanned manner. It also deals with bringing about improvements in physical capacities,relationships, attitudes, values, knowledge and skills of the employees for achieving theobjectives for which the bank stands. If you ask me how the HR function has faredagainst the expectations, my unqualified answer would be that they have failed2miserably. Part of it, especially in the case of Public Sector Banks (PSBs), can beblamed on the quality and competence of people that manage the HR function in theseinstitutions.  Quite often, the officials in HR departments virtually have no expertise ortraining in HR management and they land there more as a matter of providence than bydesign. The failure of the HR personnel in the banks and its impact on theirperformance has also got partly masked due to lack of competition in the bankingsegment.5. In fact, until the opening of the economy in the early 90s, the banks in India generallyneglected the human resource function. As I mentioned earlier, this apathy may largelybe attributed to lack of competition and abundance of available opportunities which keptthe banking sector profitable without breaking much sweat. Even after opening up of thesector, the Government control initially kept the wages under control. As availability ofnew jobs in other sectors in the post-liberalized economy improved, the banking sectorstarted feeling the pinch. Further, with the entry of new players in the banking sectorarmed with innovative products, the system as a whole and the older banks in particularstarted to face a widening gap in skill sets of human resource. The new Private SectorBanks and Foreign Banks had a head start over their PSB peers as on the back of amarket related compensation structure, coupled with technology-supported deliveryprocesses; they were able to acquire younger and more talented staff with newer skillsand competencies. The older banks, on the contrary, had to compete with the newerplayers with a huge baggage of disadvantages. The PSBs also lost trained man powerto the newer banks due to attractive compensation structure and better careerprogression opportunities. It is against this backdrop that HR function in banking sectorhas not only assumed utmost significance but is also faced with myriad challenges thatwe would discuss.Foolproofing Employees: HR ChallengesDefining Job Roles6. Having set the broader context, let me now turn to specifics. What are the HRchallenges in the banking sector and how can we ‘foolproof’ our employees?   In all myinteraction with HR professionals in banks, I am told that lack of people is the biggest3challenge.  Obviously, finding enough people in one of the most populous nations in theworld cannot be a challenge.   So, what they actually mean is that they are saddled withtoo many non-performers.7. This brings me to the first step that I would suggest the banks to initiate towardsmaking their employees “Foolproof” and I begin by asking a few fundamental questions:“Do you know how many people you need for carrying out all activities in your bank?Have you done a detailed analysis of roles and responsibilities of each individual in yourrespective banks? More crucially, do all desks have a job profile? ” At least in the banksthat I have worked I have not seen a detailed job role of each individual or a job profileof each desk. Unless you do that, I am not sure how you can be sure of the number ofpeople that you need. Defining job role of each desk would also enable an assessmentof the skill sets required to man that desk.   Thus, it would also help the HR in mappingeach desk function to the available manpower by imparting training to the existing staffor by recruiting appropriate people with the desirable skill sets. Also, unless you have adetailed job role for each individual how can you make a fair assessment of whetheryour people are performing or not? I will return to the subject of employee performancemeasurement in a little while. So, the first task for all of you is to define the job prolife foreach desk. Believe me, the exercise could throw up some surprising outcomes as itmight highlight the redundancies you have in certain job profiles.Performance Measurement System8. Let me now come to the second area which needs a thorough overhaul in most, if notall banks- the employees’ performance measurement system. Incentivizing talent withfairness and transparency is a key objective of HR managers and the goal of thepromotion policy of every organization. A transparent performance managementprocess enhances the abilities and morale of the human resource. As a part of the TopManagement in all banks, wherever I have worked, I have faced a typical situation atthe conclusion of every promotion exercise. Invariably, I hear from my HR department,that few people are “promotable” but not “postable” and then there are certain otherswho are “postable” but not getting promoted. The reason for emergence of such asituation is the faulty Performance Management System (PMS) that we have in the4banks. The PMS is highly subjective or impressionistic and quite often determined byfactors other than actual performance at the work place.  In fact, I observe thatperformance rating of a big majority of the employees falls in the top quartile. But theHR continues to complain about not having adequate number of good people. Thisdichotomy highlights the failures of the existing PMS in banks.9. So, as I mentioned before, the way to make the PMS work, is to make it as objectivean assessment as possible.   We need to identify upfront the performance benchmarksfor each individual and their performance and rating should follow from there.  Theobjectivity in the PMS system would instill more discipline in the way performance isjudged across banking system today and enable the banks to devise their reward andmotivations schemes accordingly.   A related question is how do you deal with the non-performers?  I have seen banks with list of top performers but I haven’t seen any bankhaving a list of top non-performers.  There could be major potential gains fromimproving the performance of the top non-performers.  An objective PMS will enableyou to design your training and development programme based on the individual’sstrength and weakness. The point I am trying to make is unless you put in place anobjective performance management system, you would not be able to improve peopleand bring in a system of accountability.10. In the context of promotions, I have a question. Why do you need a grade/scaleconcept? Why people should move up vertically in the banks? Why can’t they seekemployment elsewhere if they need promotion and then come back to the same bank ata higher level? It is quite common in the private sector, why can’t we have the same inpublic sector as well.Training and Development11. Let me now turn to third challenge that the banks need to overcome for Fool-proofing their employees which is training & development. In fact, training anddevelopment remains one of the most maligned aspects of HR management in banks. Ihave observed utter disregard in the way employees are sent for training. Neither thereis an earnest attempt made to assess the utility of training for the employee nor is thereany exercise to map the training needs of the individuals on the basis of their core5competencies or their placement. This, again is partly on account of lack of a definitivejob profile for each functional area.12. Another important area pertaining to training is behavioral i.e. the attitude part.Behavioral training focuses on exploring the unknown and hidden potential of ourhuman resource, which we call as human capital. With most banks now adoptingmodern technology, including new delivery channels; technology no longer remains amajor differentiator among banks. You must remember that the key differentiatoramongst the banks in the decade ahead will be the ability to harness the human capitaland building a competitive advantage on the strength of their human resources. Whilewith the implementation of Basel III, banks’ return of equity is likely to go down, thesame can be recouped by improving the return on their human capital by enabling theordinary people to produce extraordinary results so as to prop up their sinking bottomlines.13. I would also like to utilize this opportunity of interacting with the Heads of HRfunction in the banking sector to share my views on some of the other HR issues whichwould have a bearing on “Fool Proofing of the banking personnel” going forward. a) Employees Compensation14. Finding skilled, experienced, responsible employees is a challenge for humanresource departments in any industry, more so in a service-oriented industry likebanking. The main task of the HR policy of banks is to create a favourable atmospherewhere people get the opportunity to showcase their potential and receive adequatecompensation. Inadequacy of compensation is made out as an issue in the PSBs, whichencourages attrition. Let me set the record straight here. I have done comparativeanalysis of the staff compensation in the public sector and private sector banks and myfinding is that the average compensation of the public sector bank employees is morethan that of the private sector bank employees in this country. Add to that, the jobsecurity in a public sector and the scale tilts decisively in favour of the public sector. Ithink the challenge for the HR heads of PSBs is to percolate this message down to thelower levels. It will help in tackling the challenge of staff attrition and improve employeemorale.615. A related issue that I want to raise is why do public sector banks still concludeindustry level  wage settlements rather at individual bank level. Some of the banks haveprecarious financial conditions and if forced to give a raise at par with other banks, thatwould severely constrain their ability to do business going forward. Therefore, in thelong term interest of the banks, it is necessary that each bank revises the wages of itsemployees as per its ability to pay. Further, why the PSBs cannot even do employeewise negotiations on salary hike as in the private sector? This would be a motivatingfactor for the performers.b) Differential Salary Structure16. The recruitment policy of the banks should be oriented towards having a right-sizedand right-skilled workforce in tune with their medium to long term business plans. Forinstance, in line with the national emphasis on financial inclusion and spreading bankingservices to unbanked remote areas, it may be necessary to bring in specialists whohave knowledge of rural operations, agricultural finance, etc. and are willing to work inrural areas. In this context, I wish to raise a debatable issue. Should the PSB Boardsnot consider appointing employees who would be willing to serve in the rural areas atlower wages? I think it is high time the PSB banks created a differential wage structurefor the employees serving in various areas. The spin off benefit of this would be in termsof increased viability of their rural business and increased financial inclusion.c) Role of the Top Management17. In a service-oriented industry like banking, the quality of human resources has to bethe central plank. Unless the organizations leverage the strength of their humanresource to the maximum, they would fail miserably in attaining a competitive edge inthe global banking arena. This makes the role of the CMD and Board very crucial. TheHR policy needs to be strategically aligned and connected with business.  Given thecriticality of HR issues, they need to be debated at Board level. Boards of banks need tospend quality time on formulation and deliberation of strategies involving leadershipdevelopment, succession planning for critical levels and specialized areas, performancestandards, compensation and rewards management, redesign of organization structure,7etc. The banks need to have a policy which clearly spells out the short term and longterm HR agenda. The CMDs of the banks should spearhead and champion the HRfunctions to reduce people’s anxieties and simultaneously seek higher levels ofproductivity and performance. They should also frame policies which helps themmanage the expectations of their staff, whether at the lower level or at the middlemanagement level.Road Ahead18. The current decade is already proving to be a challenging one for the HRprofessionals in banks, particularly for those in the public sector banks.  This is becauseof the significant number of employees retiring during this decade. This not only posesunique challenges but also presents opportunities for HR managers across the industry.At stake is a chance to transform HR practices and create a workforce that can provideindividual banks with a strategic edge in an environment that is likely to becomeincreasingly competitive in the days ahead.  The ‘retirement decade’ provides anopportunity, especially for the PSBs, to transform their work force by hiring the righttalent, right-sizing and right-skilling them and thereby bringing about a culturaltransformation in the functioning of these banks.  As the crop of the 70s bid good bye,the banks have moved on to a fast paced recruitment spree to welcome the gen next.The banks cannot afford to be complacent while recruiting new set of employees astheir recruitment decisions today would determine the performance of their respectiveorganizations over the coming decades. They must use more statistical tools to foreseetheir manpower needs over the medium to long term and prepare themselves by betterplanning. Sound MIS should form the basis of all manpower planning decisionsincluding recruitment, placement, performance management, etc. The gap in knowledgeand work experience between the outgoing and incoming groups is, however, significantand the impact of this transition could be potentially disruptive. This gap needs to befilled by ‘mentoring and coaching’ the new incumbents by senior executives. Thetransfer of knowledge from mentor to mentee should be fast. Moreover, the mentorneed not be physically present with the mentees; they can be together with the help oftechnology, sitting at two different places.819. Although the banks in India have come a long way, they still have a lot of catchingup to do to reach international standards. The gap in service delivery standards,innovations in products and services, corporate governance standards, creation ofstructured financial solutions, etc. is still quite wide. Our efficiency and productivitylevels do not compare well, even with Asian standards. Our Risk Management systemsalso need to be strengthened to match global standards.  The HR function has a verysignificant part to play if our banks have to improve on these measures and reach globalstandards.20. We all know that banking in the future is going to be quite different from what wehave seen and experienced in the past. Hence, we must be willing to shed the methods,structures, policies and technologies that succeeded in the past while retaining theuseful elements. Most importantly, our employees’ must get away from yesterday’smindsets and you as the HR chiefs; have a very critical role in ensuring this transition.Technology is also compelling us to reinvent ourselves, our methods and our way ofdoing business. As Peter Drucker, the American Management Consultant has said“we’re in one of those great historical periods that occur every 200 to 300 years whenpeople don't understand the world anymore, when the past is not sufficient to explainthe future”.Conclusion21. Going forward, the human resources function in banks would be a key differentiatingfactor. HR can be a powerful asset or a debilitating liability depending upon how well itis harnessed. It is one of the most important challenges, rather a risk, which needs to beappropriately managed. For the bank employees to be “Foolproof”, the HR personnelwould have to review their existing policies and practices and reorient them, wherevernecessary.22. My purpose in putting forth the future challenges facing the banking sector is toenable you to ideate and deliberate on them during the course of the Conference andcome out with actionable ideas for reforming the HR in your respective banks. I wouldlike to stress that the “People” factor will be at the centre stage and play a critical role in9the transformation of the Indian Banking sector. We need to improve their skill set,mould their mindsets towards providing customer service and convert our human capitalinto high value factors of production. As future is always difficult to predict, we need notbe too disheartened even if employees are not fully “Future-Proof”, but we must at leastensure that our employees develop a sense of empathy for the customers and do theirbest to serve the objectives towards which their banks are committed.  Importantly, theinherent unpredictability in the business environment makes it imperative for HRprocesses to be flexible and to imbibe this flexibility and adaptability in theorganization’s ethos. As heads of HR in your respective banks, it is your duty tooptimally harness the potential of your human resources both in the present and in thefuture. As Thomas Edison said “there is always a better way”. We cannot becomplacent even with our employees becoming “Foolproof” under the existingenvironment. We would need to remain alive to the changing business scenario andkeep re-visiting our policies and procedures to ensure that the employees stay preparedto face new challenges. The transformation of the HR function has to, necessarily, betop driven and I am sure that the HR heads assembled here would don the role ofchange agents in their respective organization.I wish the Conference all success and wish you successful and purposefuldeliberations.Thank you!10
