“India’s Economy in the I am grateful to Dr. Kapila Vatsayayan and Shri N.N. Vohra for inviting me todeliver the Dr. C.D.Deshmukh Memorial Lecture today. This annual Lecture in memoryof one of India’s most distinguished thinkers and policy makers is a highly prestigiousoccasion, and one of the highlights of the India International Centre (IIC) calendar ofevents.  When I was first asked, I must confess that I was reluctant as I was not surewhether matters which dominate my professional life these days – monetary policy andfinance – would be of interest to the occupationally diversified and enlightenedmembership of the IIC.  This is, however, too important an occasion to miss. As a partialcompensation to you, I have decided not to talk about “money and finance” at all –except in very general terms. Rather, I propose to do some loud thinking on some issuespertaining to India’s post-independence development strategy, and new strategic choices.*2. A long time ago, when I first took up an economic advisory position in theGovernment of India, a senior and wiser friend, who is also a brilliant economist, told methat the opposite of whatever one thinks is right about India’s economy is also likely to betrue, and vice versa! So, his advice was that, in considering policy or strategic options,we must always consider the opposite view and make a choice based on probabilisticassessment of alternatives. The inspiration for the title of today’s talk is precisely this – aswe look around, it is possible to take a most optimistic view of India’s economy orexactly the opposite, as reflected in a recent piece by a well-known and thoughtful senior1journalist with the title, “Quit the pretence, the economy is on the wrong track On the one hand, we see India’s economy clocking one of the highest rates of growth inthe world, India’s new technology entrepreneurs being celebrated as amongst the mostinnovative and successful, and India’s managers occupying the highest positions in theworld of finance and business consultancies. On the other hand, India’s public and socialservices are reputed to be among the worst in the world, India’s infrastructure – be itroads or power – are full of potholes, and many of India’s largest enterprises, particularlyin the public sector, are uncompetitive and losing money. Instances on both sides – thebest and the worst of India –could be multiplied. What is the truth and where are weheading? In answering this question, it is necessary to do a bit of dispassionateintrospection about the reasons behind our successes and failures. It is also necessarythat, while looking ahead to the future, we prepare ourselves to abandon or modifystrategies that have not worked, and move decisively in the directions which India’s comparative advantage in the world of today and tomorrow.I.3. As we reflect on the history of human civilization in the millennium that has justended, it is surprising to recall just how recent is the story of economic growth. As PaulKrugman has noted in a recent book, “economic growth, at least economic growth thatraises living standards, is a modern invention. From the dawn of history to the Eighteenthcentury, the world was essentially Malthusian. Improvements in technology and capitalinvestments were always overtaken by population growth; the number of people slowlyDawn?”The Post-Independence Development Record, 1950-1990maximise. ........”Twentry-first Century for us at the beginning of the Twenty-First Century: A New Beginning or A False2increased, but their average standards of living did not.”  Up to about the end of theNineteenth century, the only countries where per capita incomes were increasing on asustained basis for any length of time were the Western countries, particularly, England,Germany, France and the United States. During this entire period, the then so-calledunder-developed or Third World countries continued to be exporters of primary productsand importers of industrial products with stagnant, and in some cases, declining percapita incomes. A large number of them were also colonies of the Western powers, andthe connection between these two situations- the colonial state and income stagnation –4. The development strategies of the newly independent and developing countries,including India, in mid-Twentieth century were framed against this background.  Thecentral and the leading role for breaking away from the colonial legacy and for speedingup the process of industrialisation was assigned to the State. The need for theGovernment to occupy the commanding heights and to lead from the top received furthersupport from the astounding success of the Soviet Union in emerging as a rival centre ofpolitical and industrial power within a very short period. India, at that time, played apioneering role in giving expression to the aspirations of the newly independent ThirdWorld countries in the economic field. Thus, in 1956, India’s Second Five Year Plan“The pattern of development and the structure of socio-economic relations should beso planned that they result not only in appreciable increases in national income andemployment but also in greater equality in incomes and wealth. Major decisionsregarding production, distribution, consumption and investment – and in fact allsignificant socio-economic relationships – must be made by agencies informed by5. In practice, it meant, that all allocation decisions were to be made by theGovernment or its agencies. The need of raising resources for development was, ofcourse, considered important. However, the primary emphasis was to be on increasing thedomestic savings rate by suppressing consumption, high taxation, and appropriatingprofits through ownership of commercial enterprises.  Accelerated capital accumulationthrough these means was considered to be the key to development. In a celebratedobservation which guided many a planner and policy maker in developing countries,Professor W. Arthur Lewis observed that:“The central problem in the theory of economic development is to understand theprocess by which a community which was previously saving and investing 4 to 5 percent of its national income or less, converts itself to an economy where voluntarysaving is running at about 12 to 15 per cent of national income and more. This is thecentral problem because the central fact of economic development is rapid capital3.6. In the process of capital accumulation, the role of financial system was essentiallylimited, as allocation decisions were to be made by the central planning authorities andnot by the financial markets. To a large extent, financial system also had a limited role inproviding incentives for savings and capital accumulation as interest rates werecontrolled, and generally “repressed”, and household savings were pre-empted throughaccumulation (including knowledge and skills with capital)”social purpose.”outlined the goals of development strategy in the following terms:was not missed by their leaders and intellectuals.high levels of statutory reserve and liquidity ratio. New banks and financial institutionswere set up, and old ones were taken over, in order to act primarily as deposit takingagencies and providers of credit and finance for designated and centrally determinedpurposes.7. While the reasons for adopting a centrally directed strategy of development wereunderstandable against the background of the colonial rule, it, however, soon becameclear that actual results of this strategy were far below expectations. Instead of showinghigh growth, high public savings and a high degree of self-reliance, India was actuallyshowing one of the lowest rates of growth in the developing world with rising publicdeficits and periodic balance of payments crises. According to one calculation, in 30 outof 35 years between 1956 and 1991, India had balance of payment problems of varyingintensity. Thankfully, public memories are short! However, looking back, it is hard tobelieve that for as long as 40 years between 1950 and 1990, India’s growth rate averagedless than 4 per cent per annum, and per capita income growth was less than 2 per cent perannum. This was at a time when the developing world, including the Sub-Saharan Africa8. In my view, however, the most striking failure was not in terms of growth, oreven in the precarious situation of the balance of payments. Although the argument is notconvincing, it could still be argued by some that the low growth outcome was due to anumber of factors beyond India’s control, such as, the border wars, severe droughts,periodic oil shocks, and – finally – inhospitable global environment! The balance ofpayments difficulties could also – with some imagination – be attributed to the globalwoes of primary producers, and the struggle of a poor developing country like India toindustrialise and become self-reliant in heavy industry (which hitherto was the monopolyof the rich industrialised countries). The most conspicuous failure, in my view, for whichthere is no alibi , and the responsibility for which lies squarely and indisputably at ourdoors, is the erosion in public savings and the inability of the public sector to generate9. It will be recalled that an important assumption in the choice of post-independence development strategy was the generation of public savings, which could beused for higher and higher levels of investment. However, this did not happen, and thepublic sector- instead of being a generator of savings for the community’s good –became, over time, a consumer of community’s savings. This reversal in roles hadbecome evident by the early Seventies, and the process reached its culmination by theearly, Eighties. By then, the Government began to borrow not only to meet its ownrevenue expenditure but also to finance public sector deficits and investments. During theperiod 1960-1975, total public sector borrowings (including Government) averaged 4.4per cent of GDP. These increased to 6 per cent of GDP by 1980- 81, and further to 9 percent by 1989-90. Thus, the public sector, which was supposed to generate resources forthe growth of the rest of the economy, gradually became a net drain on the society as awhole.  It is interesting to note that the Central Government’s total internal public debt bythe year 1994-95 was close to Rs.5 ,00,000 crore, and nearly one-third of it was accountedfor by assets held in the public sector. The interest payments on public debt amounted tonearly Rs.40 ,000 crore, which was financed by new net borrowings, and representednearly 70 per cent of the Centre’s fiscal deficit. In effect, by 1994-95, one-third of theresources for investment or provision of public services.and other least developed countries, showed a growth rate of 5.2 per cent per annum.interest payments was on account of the Government’s past investment in the publicsector. In the last five years since then, the Centre’s internal debt has almost doubled to,70,000 crore in 1999-2000. This sharp increase in internal debt is partly accountedfor by the need to borrow higher and higher amounts to service the past debt.10. A large part of the cherished “family silver” has thus been financed out of4borrowings, and kept polished with further borrowings by an impoverished family. Inthe annals of development history, it is hard to find another example of a perfectlysensible idea – the need for higher public investment for greater public good – leading toexactly the opposite result,  higher public consumption with diminishing returns for11. The State-dominated development paradigm has shifted rather sharply in recentyears. Almost all developing countries have moved towards a more market-determinedstrategy of development. There were several factors which contributed to this change inperception. First and the foremost reason for questioning the earlier strategy, asmentioned above, was the simple fact that actual results in terms of growth of incomes orindustrial development were well below expectations. While saving rates were rising, asper the Arthur Lewis model, so were capital-output ratios because of inefficiencies in theallocation and use of resources. Paradoxically, a strategy which was expected to reducedependency on foreign aid and foreign trade, also resulted in greater dependence on aidand emergency assistance from abroad.12. An equally important factor contributing to the change in perceptions was theastonishing success of Japan and the East Asian countries in accelerating their rates ofgrowth by relying on market - oriented pattern of industrialisation (with, of course,varying degrees of “guidance” by the State). Japan’s per capita rate of growth of 8 percent per annum during 1953 – 1973 was unprecedented in the history of economicdevelopment. No economy had ever grown at that rate before, and Japan emerged fromthe ruins of war to become the world’s second largest economy.  Similar was the recordof industrialisation in East Asia particularly in countries like Hong Kong, Singapore,Taiwan and South Korea. In the Fifties, their per capita incomes or the degree ofindustrialisation was no different from those of the rest of Asia. However, within a periodof 30 years, they were able to catch up with the industrialised countries of the West.  Afinal and decisive development leading to the demise of the old strategy was the collapseof the Soviet Union and the acceptance of market-led development strategies by allcountries of Eastern Europe.13. Beginning in 1991, when India was in the midst of an acute economic crisis, theGovernment of India also introduced a number of measures to improve the working ofthe economy. These measures, spread over a number of years, had two broad objectives.One was the reorientation of the economy from a statist, centrally directed and highlycontrolled economy to what is referred to in the current jargon as a ‘market-friendlyeconomy’. A reduction in direct controls and physical planning was expected to improvethe efficiency of the economy. It was to be made more ‘open’ to external trade andexternal flows through a reduction in trade barriers and liberalisation of foreigninvestment policies. A second objective of the reform measures was macro-economic–The Shift in the Development Paradigm The 1990s II.the public!i.e.Rs.9stabilisation. This was to be achieved by substantially reducing fiscal deficits and the14. Compared with the historical trend, the impact of these policies has been positiveand significant. The growth rate of the economy during 1992-93 to 1999-2000 was closeto 6.5 per cent per annum. The balance of payments position has also substantiallyimproved. Despite several unfavourable external developments, including the impositionof sanctions in 1998 and sharp rise in oil prices more recently, foreign exchange reservesare at a record level. Exports have done well, current account deficits have beenmoderate, and India’s external debt (as a percentage of GDP) and the debt servicingburden have actually come down since the early Nineties. There is also evidence ofconsiderable restructuring in the corporate sector with attention being given to cost-competitiveness and financial viability. Industrial growth increased sharply during theperiod 1993 to 1996 to over 9 per cent per annum. The industrial growth rate came downto 5.5 per cent per annum in the next two years, but increased again to 8 per cent upto theend of 1999-2000.  The rate of inflation also came down sharply – from 10.3 per cent in1990-91 to a modest 3.3 per cent in 1999-2000.  Fiscal deficit has also come downsomewhat - from 8.3 per cent in 1990-91 to 5.6 per cent in 1999-2000.15. There has been considerable debate in the country about the content, the pace andthe results of the reform process. I do not propose to enter this particular debate, except tothe  first 40 years of development, there is very littledoubt that India’s economy – by any standard of measurement – is stronger and moreresilient today than was the case a decade ago. I leave you to judge whether this outcomeis due to the reform process, astute short-term economic management, external circumstances, or just plain old good luck! There is also little doubt that India’s“potential” for growth combined with external and domestic financial stability is greatertoday – at the beginning of the Twenty-First century than was the case 20, 50 or 100years ago.16. A most remarkable  feature of the so-called “New Economy” is the role of theservices sector (of which the IT or Information Technology sector is a part) in generatinggrowth of income and employment. It will be recalled  that the focus of attention inconventional economics, including development economics, was on production of goods–manufactured products and agricultural commodities. It was, of course, recognised thatthe services sector (which includes transport, communication, trade, banking,construction and public administration, etc.) was an important source of income andemployment in most economies.  However, overall, the growth of services was perceivedat best as a byproduct of developments in the primary and secondary sectors, and at worstas a drag on the prospects for long-term economic growth. Services were believed to bemainly non-tradable activities with slow productivity growth and low employmentpotential. In developing countries, the conventional view of the growth of the servicessector was even worse.  It was seen to divert scarce resources away from production of17. In the last few years, there has been a phenomenal change in the conventionalview of services and their role in the economy. The development of certain services isgoods, and contribute to accentuation of income inequalities.III. India in the New Global Economyfavourablesay that compared with the record of government’s draft on society’s savings.now regarded as one of the preconditions of economic growth, and not as one of itsconsequences. The boundary between goods and services is also disappearing, as servicesof various kinds are delinked from the manufacturing process and become essentialelements of the productive structure. Many industrial products are not only manufactured– they are also designed, marketed, advertised, distributed, leased and serviced. A18. The change in the image and role of services has been brought about byunprecedented and unforeseen advances in computer and communication technology inthe last two decades.  An important aspect of the “services revolution” is that geographyand levels of industrialisation are no longer the primary determinants of the location offacilities for production of services.  As a result, the traditional role of developingcountries is also changing – from mere recipients to important providers of long-distance19. From India’s point of view, some of the recent global developments, which• The fastest growing segment of services is the rapid expansion of knowledge-basedservices, such as, professional and technical services. India has a tremendousadvantage of the supply of such services because of a developed structure oftechnological and educational institutions, and lower labour costs.• Progress in information technology is making it increasingly possible to unbundle theproduction and consumption of information-intensive service activities. Theseactivities – research and development, computing, inventory management, qualitycontrol, accounting, personnel administration, secretarial, marketing, advertising,distribution, and legal services – are performed in all economic sectors.• Unlike most other prices, world prices of transport and communication services havefallen dramatically. By 1960, sea transport costs were less than a third of their 1920level, and they have continued to fall.  The cost of a telephone call fell more than ten-fold between 1970 and 2000. Moreover, the cost of communication is also becomingindependent of distance. The most dramatic example in this area is, of course,provided by the ‘Internet’. India’s geographical distance from several importantindustrial markets (for instance, North America) is no longer an important element in• Further, India does not necessarily have to be a low-cost producer of certain types ofgoods (e.g., computers or discs) before it can become an efficient supplier of servicesembodied in them (e.g., software or music). It is possible now to provide value addedservices without waiting to ‘catch up’ in technology for production of sophisticatedequipment or products.• The decline in the share of manufacturing in the output of rich countries implies arelative decline in their demand for industrial raw materials and fuels. This means thatgrowth in exports of developing countries in the future will depend less on naturalresource endowments and more on efficiency in providing services and service-intensive goods.20. As a result of the above developments, t he sources of comparative advantage ofthe cost structure of skill-based services.provide opportunities for substantial growth, are the following:services.significant and rising part of the value added by manufacturers now consists of services.nations are vastly different today from what they were 50 or even 20 years ago. And,there are very few developing countries which are as well placed as India to takeadvantage of the phenomenal changes that have occurred in production technologies,international trade, capital movement, and deployment of skilled manpower. India todayhas the knowledge and the skills to produce and process a wide variety of industrial andconsumer products and services. Another important factor in India’s favour isinternational capital mobility and integration of global financial markets. Domesticsavings continue to be important for development. However, scarcity of domestic capitalis no longer a binding constraint. Increased mobility of capital has ensured that globalresources would flow to countries which can show high growth and high returns. It ispossible now for India to take advantage of a virtuous circle of higher growth, higherexternal capital inflows, and higher domestic incomes and savings, which in turn can leadto further growth.21. At the same time, it must be recognised that the “death of distance” and thegrowing integration of global product, services and financial markets in recent years hasalso presented new challenges for management of the national economy – not only inIndia but all over the world. The trend towards integration of markets, particularlyfinancial markets, is by no means an unmixed blessing. Unlike the old days, a heavy pricemay have to be paid by national economies for somnolence , sloth and non-conformity togenerally accepted international norms and standards of macro-economic management,disclosure, transparency and financial accountability. If a country does not put itsfinancial house in order, fresh investments, trade and technology are likely to pass it by.Faced with this situation, only a few countries, with certain special advantages andresource endowments, may still manage to grow at an acceptable rate. Other which need capital and external flows to meet their trade or current account deficits, arelikely to find it increasingly difficult to meet their import requirements of essential22. Another consequence of recent glob al trends is the greater vulnerability ofnational economies to developments outside their own borders. In addition to the directeffects (which are currently most visible in the volatile stock markets), the indirect effectsdue to “contagion” can be quite serious. A crisis in any one or a group of countries, canbe transmitted to other countries – including countries which may not have any strongeconomic linkages with crisis-affected countries. Thus, the Nineties have been marked bya large number of currency crises (for example, in Mexico, Russia, Asia and Brazil);substantial swings in exchange rates (including the exchange rate of three leadingcurrencies –the dollar, the Euro and the Yen); and run ups in asset prices followed bysharp collapse (for example, in Japan and East Asia). While the crises initially occurred23. The lessons of recent developments are clear. Advances in IT, the increasing roleof services, the integration of financial and capital markets, and the diminished role ofdistance provide tremendous new opportunities for countries like India. At the same time,like other countries, we are also likely to be subject to greater vulnerability and new risks.Thus, at the beginning of the new century, the challenge before us is in two directions –how to seize the new opportunities, while at the same time, protecting ourselves againstunanticipated risks?  Insularity or isolation is not the answer, as such an approach wouldin one or two specific countries, their adverse effects were felt across the world.commodities (such as, oil), raw materials and machines.countries24. India has to move vigorously to take advantage of expanding opportunities intrade and become a location of choice for IT and other industries and services so that,  are substantially enhanced. It must also keep somesafety nets handy by building a diversified and efficient financial system which can aidand protect the development process at all times – good and bad. Can these objectives beIndia’s Tryst with Destiny?25. There has been a fair amount of debate in the country on the implications of thenew directions in India’s economic policy.  As far as I can see, there is no  majordisagreement with the ends or objectives of new economic policies.  Most, though not all,commentators seem to agree that efficiency in the use of resources and growthperformance of the economy need to be improved. There is also broad agreement that theGovernment’s fiscal deficits should be reduced, that exports should be increased, and thatmore should be done for improving the health and education of the poor. There is,however, a substantial difference of views on the instruments that should be used toachieve these objectives, and whether current policies will succeed in raising the growthrate of the economy in the long run. Concern has also been expressed on certain politicaland social implications of the new policies, particularly whether they will make thecountry more amenable to external pressures and hurt the development of the country’sdomestic resources. These issues are important, and deserve to be fully considered in the26. In considering these is sues, it is not possible to escape from the responsibility ofpaying attention to the nature and character of our State apparatus, and to our previousrecord. We cannot decry the widespread corruption and ‘ criminalisation of politics’ – aphrase which has figured prominently in Parliament in recent years – on the one hand,and ask for more discretionary powers for the State on the other.  To do so is to sufferfrom a form of ‘cognitive dissonance’.  It is also important to remember that, as pointedout in the earlier part of this talk, the results of India’s old policies in promoting growthor reducing poverty were highly unsatisfactory, and in any case, far worse than thoseregistered by more open and competitive economies.  As for external pressures, there ishardly any doubt that an aid-dependent economy with persistent balance of paymentscrises (as was the case in India from 1956 to 1991) is likely to be much more vulnerable27. In my judgement, keeping in view the actual economic and non-economic resultsof the old strategy, the phenomenal changes that have taken place in the world economy,and India’s present comparative advantage, the present direction of policies to make Indiamore open and more competitive is right and deserves to be accelerated.  Without a majortransformation of our economic policies and effort to align them with contemporaryrealities of global trade, investment and technology, it is not feasible for India to occupyrealise its full potential for growth and development.28. A decisive move towards more and deeper economic reforms is the first strategicpriority for the future.  However, it will be a grave mistake to misconstrue the need foreconomic reforms with a call for less role for Government or public policy in wideningthe high ground and than a country which is not so dependent on aid or emergency assistance from abroad.Twenty-First century. evolution of India’s economic policy in the IV.met? This is the real question to ponder for the future.growth rates, along with employmentpromote neither growth nor stability.opportunities and creating a positive environment for equitable development. Indeveloping countries, such as India, with massive illiteracy and underdevelopment ofinfrastructure, Government must continue to have an important and crucial role increating the necessary conditions for growth through investments in areas, such as,education, health, water supply, irrigation, infrastructure, etc. These tasks cannot be takenover by the market. Successful economic reforms must result in strengthening the abilityof Governments to do what they need to do by helping to generate higher growth, higherrevenue and higher productivity. As the recent experience of several transitional andemerging market economies shows, economic reforms are necessary but by no means asufficient condition for growth and development.29. In this connection, a core issue, with multiple dimensions, which would need tobe resolved in years to come is what can perhaps be described as growing “public-private” dichotomy in our economic life. It is a striking fact of our present situation thateconomic renewal and positive growth impulses are now occurring largely outside thepublic sector – at the level of private corporations ( e.g . software companies), autonomousinstitutions ( e.g .  or ), or individuals at the top of their professions in India andabroad. In the Governmental or public sector, on the other hand, we see a markeddeterioration at all levels – not only in terms of output, profits and public savings (towhich I made a reference earlier), but also in the provision of vital public services in thefields of education, health, water and transport. These two elements – fiscal deteriorationand inability to provide essential services – are, of course, intimately connected.  Most ofour public resources are now dissipated in payment of salaries or interest on past debtwith little or no resources available for expansion of public or publicly supported servicesin vital sectors.30. In considering the reasons for the decay and deterioration that is taking place inour public services, I am reminded of an observation by A.H.Hanson nearly 40 years agoon the reasons for the then prevailing crisis of Indian Planning. He was an admirer ofIndian planners, but after seeing the results on the ground, he was compelled to ask:“The men are able, the organization is adequate, the procedures are intelligently“For various reasons, Indian Planners have never treated the ‘objective function’ withsufficient respect. Their tendency is to give themselves the fullest benefit of everypossible doubt ... Too many of their aims are contingent upon the adoption, byvarious sections of the Indian community ,  of attitudes they are exceedingly unlikely5to adopt ...... ”31. That was 1963! Today, in 2001, and after more than 50 y ears of experience ofindependent administration, we still seem to be giving ourselves the benefit of the doubt.Over time, our problems in the management of public resources at different levels haveonly become more and more intractable. Let us look at some of the problems that now• We can be justifiably proud of the fact that the “rule of law” prevails in our country,and that even the mightiest are not above the law. The delays in the judicial processbedevil our public delivery systems:Hanson’s answer to this question is also revealing:devised. Why, then, have the Plans, since 1956, so persistently run into crisis?”IITs IIMsmay be legendary, but there is a widespread respect for the “rule of law”.  However,for historical reasons, it is also a fact that our legal system provides full protection tothe private interests of the so-called “public servant”, often at the expense of thepublic that he or she is supposed to serve. In addition to complete job security, anyorganisation can go on strike – hospitals,universities, schools, banks, buses, post offices ,  railways, municipalities -  in searchof higher wages, promotions and bonuses for themselves irrespective of the costs andinconvenience to the public (in whose name they have been appointed in the firstplace).  Problems have only become worse over time and there is little or no• The “authority” of Governments at, both Centre and States, to enforce their decisionshas eroded over time. Governments can pass orders, for example, for relocation ofunauthorised industrial units or other structures, but implementation can be delayed ifthey run counter to the private interests of some (at the expense of the general publicinterest). Similarly, Governments may decide to restructure public utilities to cutdown waste or output losses, but these decisions do not necessarily have to beimplemented if they adversely affect the interests of public servants employed in• Governments at different levels may announce plans and programmes to providesocial services (such as, expand literacy), but these initiatives are unlikely to beimplemented on the ground because of fiscal stringency. For example, in 1994, theTenth Finance Commission projected a rate of growth in real terms of 2.5 per cent forexpenditure on elementary education upto the end of the century in respect of fourStates where the incidence of poverty and illiteracy was among the highest in thecountry. This projected rate of growth in expenditure was lower than the growth ofpopulation in the relevant age group, and grossly insufficient to cover  newprogrammes  of adult literates.  In the five years since the Tenth FinanceCommission’s report, it is interesting to note that the real expenditure on elementaryeducation, outside of salaries of Government teachers, in these four States has• The process and procedures for conducting business in Government and publicservice organisations, over time have become non-functional. There are multiplicityof Departments involved in the simplest of decisions, and administrative rulesgenerally concentrate on the process rather than results. There is very littledecentralisation of decision-making powers, particularly financial powers. Thus,while local authorities have been given significant authority in some States forimplementing national programmes, their financial authority is limited. Transfers tolocal authorities for health spending, for example, average less than 15 per cent ofState Government budgets.• The multiplicity of functions and responsibilities placed  upon ill-equipped and ill-trained staff in public offices and local institutions make it almost impossible todeliver services with any degree of efficiency, particularly in rural areas. Forexample, a “multi-purpose” female health worker is required to perform as many asforty-seven tasks to be undertaken on a regular basis!actually been negative!organisations. these accountability of the public servant to perform the public duty.group of public servants in any public sector 32. Let us also ponder, for a moment, who suffers the most from fiscal stringency andthe atrophy of the public delivery systems. It is certainly not the affluent classes, orpersons elected or appointed by the people to serve them. They can always go to privatehospitals, private schools, autonomous universities or institutes of higher education, andhave similar alternative means of meeting their other requirements. The worst affectedare likely to be the poor, the unemployed, and the illiterate who are dependent on publicservices, public investment and public programmes.  It is useful to keep this perspectivein mind as a fair amount of defence of the “status quo ” in respect of the public sector is33. In addition to economic reforms, which already figure prominently in the nationaldiscourse, it is now important to embark on an urgent programme to revitalise thegovernance and public delivery systems at all levels of Government – centre, state anddistricts. Without strengthening the ability of the Government to do what it alone can do,and narrowing the focus of its activities to what matters most for the future developmentof the country – education, health, clean environment, and a functioning infrastructure –34. In my view, this is really the harder part of the so-called second generationreforms. The non-governmental sector now has a dynamism and momentum of its own.While there will be problems, and there will be arguments for and against a particularpolicy to liberalise, to open up, or to introduce more competition, I am confident thatprogress in the desired direction is unavoidable and irreversible.  At the same time, it isalso clear that unless we put our fiscal house in order and improve our public deliverysystems, no amount of macro-policy reforms by themselves will be sustainable or yieldpermanent results. If  of primary schools run by Government agencies, thousands ofprimary health centres set up by district authorities, and hundreds of Central and StateUniversities continue to under-perform or decline, two or three hi-tech cities and one ortwo new business schools and technical institutes cannot make up for the gigantic loss ofhuman resources. It is simply a question of relative proportions, and inextricable linkages35. In order to overcome some of the problems that I mentioned a little while ago, weneed to move on a number of fronts. We need legal reform to focus sharply on theinterests of the public, and not those of the public servant, in the functioning of thegovernmental and public delivery systems. Clear mechanisms for establishingaccountability for performance are essential, and all forms of special protection forpersons working for Government or public sector agencies (except for armed forces oragencies engaged in maintenance of law and order) deserve to be eliminated. We needinstitutional reform. All public monopolies should be eliminated, and there should be nopurchase preference for public sector enterprises or agencies. Government should be freeto engage the services of non-governmental organisations or private service providers atcompetitive costs to ensure effective delivery of essential services.  We need freedom ofinformation and full disclosure of all financial decisions made by Governments and itsmultifarious agencies on a daily rather than quarterly or annual basis. We need a new“political-bureaucratic” compact based on well-defined division of responsibility andaccountability. The public system cannot function without respect for conventions andmutual trust and harmony among different agencies of the state.  Above all, we needbetween public good and private progress.lakhsIndia cannot adequately seize the opportunities that lie ahead.done in the name of the weaker sections of the society.fiscal empowerment as, without financial resources, it is not feasible to lay a road orbuild a school. The last is a most difficult task in view of the deadweight of the past ,  but36. Let me end with two prognostications about India’s potential for long-termgrowth that I came across recently. The first is by a well known Indian economist with adistinguished record of forecasting. He has observed that, “it is possible for India to havea per capita income of US $ 30,000 by the year 2047. If the Indian economy does as well6as some of the world’s fast-growing economies have done ,  it could be even higher.”7The second projection is by a Professor in business management in the United States. Heestimates that, by the year 2025, India’s GDP would exceed that of Japan and India37. Both forecasts, independently arrived at in two different parts of the world, are, ofcourse, contingent on a number of factors. There is, however, no doubt that, if we havethe will, and we are able to realise even half our potential in the next 20 or 25 years,Thank you. 1   in  23  1954.4  It may be mentioned that some parts of the public sector, particularly oil and telecommunications havebeen quite profitable. This partly reflects their erstwhile monopoly position  and the administered price56 Kirit Parikh, “Economy” in India Briefing – A Transformative Fifty Years, published by M.E.Sharp Inc.,New York, 1999, for Asia Society. Parikh’s per capita income forecasts assume a dollar-rupee exchange7 J.A., are also on purchasing power parity basis.Rosensweig’s forecasts The Free Press, New York, 1998. Winning the Global Game, Rosensweig rate based on purchasing power parity.Kegan Paul, 1969. Routledge and London: Planning and Politicians, Hanson A.H., , October-December 1963, reprinted in Political Quarterly  Hanson A.H., “The Crisis of Indian Planning”, regimes. These profitable sectors have been largely self-financing without the need for budget transfers. Vol.22, Manchester School, Labour”, W.A. Lewis, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of  The Penguin Press, London, 1999. The Return of Depression Economics, Krugman,  Paul , November 11, 2000. Mumbai Indian Express, Gupta Shekhar,1999) of India, Hyderabad (Administrative Staff College Finance and Development: Which Way Now? (Viking/Penguin, 1996); and  Century, Economic Policy: Preparing for the 21 India’s (Oxford University Press, 1991); The Way Ahead,stIndia’s Economic Crisis: * Parts of this Lecture draw on some of my previous publications, particularlyIndia’s poverty would have become a distant memory.would then be the third largest economy in the world (behind US and China).it can no longer be avoided.
