Transcript of First Suresh Tendulkar Memorial Oration by Prof. Abhijit BanerjeeThank you very much Governor Subbarao for this generous introduction andthank you very much for inviting me to give this oration.I am a great fan of Professor Suresh Tendulkar. He was a one of a kind, verystraight forward, very direct. When I said something he would disagree with, hewould listen and come out and say that it does not make any sense and I had todefend myself there. It was always an honour defending myself against him. Hehad perceptive things to say and he was always unfailingly interested in what thediscussion was on which I think is often not the case.We worked in different areas. His one big area was measurement of poverty, mywork on the most part has been more on how to do something about poverty,what are effective and ineffective interventions. So the places where I thoughtour parts crossed little more are how to find the poor per say, how to set thepoverty line. Suppose you set the poverty line and you don’t know who is outthere. Potentially, several hundred million poor people live in several hundredthousand villages. I mean how to find them is the question.I am going to spend all the time talking about how do we go about the view thatwe need to do something about the poor. For example, we need to provide themwith bank accounts then how do you go from there to actually giving the bankaccounts if you don’t know where they live or who are they. That’s the questionwe will look at.I think it is a hard question for several reasons. If you want to go and find the poorit’s not enough to just survey them. A sample survey like NSS is an excellentsurvey which gives you in which state or which district more poor people live. Butit does not tell you who those poor people are. So you  really need a census if youreally want to implement a NSS method of identifying the poorYou want to go to every single person or maybe you leave out the rich areas ofthe city and just go to the places where the poor live. You need to go a lot ofplaces, interview household by household, collect data about all thosehouseholds. That’s an amazingly elaborate task, especially if they want to do itfrequently because after all poor people become rich and rich people becomepoor. So you have to do it often. So no country does that.What they so is proxy means testing or PMT. It is a kind of a survey, a censusbased methodology. It does not require actually a survey. It is basically to identifythat if you own a car you are not poor, so we can check that. If you have a bigbrick house, you are not poor. So basically you identify a set of durables easy toobserve and if you own any of them or any 5 of them, then you are not poor. Thatis the rule that lots of countries use and it is called a proxy means testing. Astandard way of identifying the poor is by using any version of this. Anybody whohas a motor cycle is not poor, anybody who has gas cooker is not poor.The second way of identifying is what we in India have used - community basedtargeting. The idea would be that you go to a local community and ask them whothe poor in this area are. They give you a list of people and there would be somepolitical process you might go through there, might be some review and thepanchayat might say that this might include these people.rdThe 3 method is what we have implemented in NREGA. It is essentially directtargeting ; let people just go and be there. If you want a job digging ditches in themiddle of the summer, you can always have it. That is the philosophy of MNREGA.We don’t need to know who is poor, we will just offer them a job. If they take thejob of digging ditches in the middle of the summer, then they are poor because noone else would want that job.Worldwide these are 3 different models. What lot of countries do is, first, theyhave community based targeting, then somebody goes and does the PMT onthem and checks whether though the community says Mr. X is poor they go andfind that he actually has 3 cars, then he is less poor. So there is some way of doingit by combining the methods. So I want to spend the entire lecture talking aboutwhich of these works best.It is not an easy question. There are programmes in India like the PDS which istargeted, through more of community-based targeting, and the MNREGA which isself-targeting. The quality of targeting in PDS and the quality of targeting inMNREGA is different for many other reasons. They are implemented differently,they have different history, the people who run them are different. So you can’ttell whether they work better. If the same identification method wasimplemented by the same people which one would work better cannot beanswered by comparing the different programmes as they are run differently.That’s the challenge.Then I will also spend a little bit of time talking about the second question.Imagine that I decide that community-based targeting is the best in that there arestill many different ways of doing it when you do community-based targeting. Youget the entire community into a meeting, it is a very difficult thing to do becausepeople are busy. You have to work pretty hard to get them in to a room, then youask them to identify the poor or you could just take the village leadership and youcould ask them. You might think it is worse because leadership might promotetheir friends and but on the other hand they are cheaper because there are 10people rather than 400 people. So you have a trade-off - getting 400 people ororganizing 10 people which is easier to organize or MNREGA which is a case ofself-targeting. Every day you go and self target yourself.But you could do something different. You could say come every month and putyour finger print but you get paid for the whole month. You don’t need to cometo work every day. That is also going to generate self selection. You will makeselection more straightforward, by having people coming and signing up once amonth rather than once a day. If you transfer money to people then it might beeasier to do. So it is a trade-off between these models.What I want to talk about is among these models which one you know is the best.I am going to talk about experiments, large-scale field experiments. The villagesare largely randomly chosen so that when they are chosen, there is no systematicdifference between them. Some of them get self-targeted and then you see whathappens, where you get better targeting. I will give you an example of India. Thisis the only example I have of our work in India but an interesting one.This is a programme for targeting the hardcore poor. It is a programme run by anMFI called BANDHAN in West Bengal. This is a programme which uses acommunity route. The whole community is brought together by drawing mapsand physically identifying where poor live. They check this with the census. So thisprogramme was generating what kind of selection? This was asking who was thepoorest of the poor and not the poor. So this is a different question and thesepeople were poorer than the average poor person in the village. That is importantto remember.In this case we thought there is little evidence that there will be inclusion error inthe sense that the people who are not poor would be called poor. Those peoplewere going to get about Rs. 8,000/- worth of free goods – they were being givenfree cow or money. So the giveaway was significant and the village community asa whole did not include rich people. What happened was there were lots ofinclusion errors. Basically the people who got excluded were the people who livedon the boundary of the village. So people who are from tribal communities andother people who lived on the margins of the village were excluded.The village community got whom they recognized to be their own member. Theywere relatively good in identifying people but not when it came to people whomthey did not count in the community. Some of the poorest people were left out.This may just set up the vocabulary.What I now want to talk about is 2 large experiments that we carried out inIndonesia. The reason why we did it there was that the Indonesian governmentasked us to do it. The government there is very technocratic. If you are beingworking with them for a while they will ask you that we want to move away fromthis PMT, which is that you go on collecting this asset data method on to adifferent method, so how well will that work. So the question asked was howdoes the PMT compare with the community data method.The Government of Indonesia occasionally decides that every poor person will getcertain amount of money. This was one of those one time programmes. It was nota huge transfer. The idea was that this would be given to people who had percapita consumption below, at purchasing power parity, 2 dollars per day. This wasrandomized across 640 hamlets. Indonesian villages are like Indian villagesespecially the ones in Rajasthan. So the PMT methods that the government thereuses have 49 indicators. You go to a household, you make a list of how manythings it has, is it a brick wall or a mud wall, is it a thatch trash roof or a tin roof,do they have a TV, a motorbike, etc. They calculate that and based on that theythen decide that, say, if a household has motorbike and tin roof then they are  notpoor.So there are some rules and they use that. They go to every household, collectthis data and then they use these rules. The government sends numerators tocollect this asset data. Basically it is the predicted score that comes from this data,they say if you have this characteristic, you have this and if your score is lowenough you get your money. So that is one way to do it. This was done in aboutone-third of the villages. The alternative was to use the community method.There were two ways of doing the community method - one was based on allhouseholds being invited and they were encouraged to come. Every household isindicated as a card. If you ask them I want to rank this household, so I put a stringacross the room and I hang cards. This is the way they do it - if I am poorer thansome other household, then I am put to the left of that household, if I am richer Iam put to the right. Every household is then ranked in this way.The other way is by inviting only the elites. There were three groups - 640 peoplewere divided into 3 groups. One group go the PMT way, the other went thecommunity way. Then there is what I would call a hybrid – they were firstidentified by the community people and then the government went and verifiedwho they had picked and checked whether they had picked the right people. Sothe government had an exclusion role, they could remove people they thoughtwere not poor. So this is a mixture of the two. This was done in 2008-09.Distribution of Per Capita Cons. PMT centered to the leftof community methods—better performing onaverage However, communitymethods select slightly ofthe very poor (thosebelow PPP$1 per day) On net, beneficiarieshave similar averageconsumptionNow here is the basic result. The distribution of consumption in the 2 methodsthe hybrid and the community method look the same. The red dotted curve andthe blue curve look exactly the same. The PMT is significantly different and on anaverage is the better one. The government method is better then the communitymethod. If you ask the community to get slightly less poor people on average, ifyou see, the green curve is peaked to the left of blue and red curve meaning thatthe government method is picking poor people better. Not big difference, though.Basically if you look at the measure of mistargeting that is how many people whoare not poor got added and how many poor got included in non poor, then youfind there is a 3% difference. So the proportion of mistargeted people went downby 3% when you move to the government method. So you can say community didslightly worse on identifying the poor.Actually, in terms of identifying the very poorest, people who are really below thepoverty line, the community method does better. On the whole, however, it doesnot do better. This was what the government there was really interested in. Wealso asked them are you happy with the outcome. After the targeting was done,the money was distributed. Six months after all this was done, we went and askedthem that which did you think was a good process. The community by farpreferred its own method. We then went to every household and privately askedthem which method did they like and which they didn’t. We asked them on ascale of 1 to 10 where will you put the outcome and people were willing to putthe community outcome at an higher level than the government outcome. Peoplethought community outcome was fair even though as you can see it is worse inpicking the poor people.So why did the government do better or differently? The first possibility is thatthe community is captured by the elite. The elite just take a decision and thenthey implement it. I said I will the look at two different versions - one is by askingthe whole community to come and the other is by inviting just the top 10 villageofficials to come. It actually makes no difference whom you invite. Either youinvite only the village officials or rest of the people, they pick the same people. Itis not because of elite capturing it, somehow the elite just add their friends to itand so you get a different outcome.The other thing we did is to randomize the order in which people were ranked.There are 400 people and you have to rank them one by one. So how did you do?We chose randomly who gets first rank and at the end it turns out that the peoplein the community does very well for the first half an hour and then they get tiredand the errors keep going up. Towards the end, they were just saying put himanywhere. The community just got extremely tired of this thing. So we were justmaking demands of them for ranking this people we thought they must know.Who is poor would be easy for them to tell but they found it difficult as werandomized the order.We could see exactly what was happening there. One way to look at that is tolook at the correlation between how the village rank this people and they rankthemselves. If they ask are you very poor, people say yes some say no. But it turnsout that the community is much more sensitive to people’s self description thanthe government. The latter method actually pretty much ignores this information.We correlated that with what people say.The community’s goals seem to be somewhat different than what thegovernment method was doing. Interestingly the community seems to beidentifying qualities of household that are not picked up by the governmentmethods. It basically picks up per capita consumption but other things matter too.It matters whether you are lazy or not. The community is against lazy people.Those people who have a high level of education but at the same time live offothers, the community thinks those people should not be treated as poor. Thecommunity thus has its own views on who deserves to be called poor.If one has a high school education and the other has no education and they areearning the same amount, then the community’s view is the guy who has hadhigh school education is lazy, that’s why he is not making the money that heshould. So he is not poor. In a way they are not targeting consumption, they aretaking a moral judgement on who is poor. On the other hand, anyone, even if youhave the same consumption level, like a widow must be working very hard tohave this consumption level. Then they reward those people, like if you aredisabled, even with the same consumption level of somebody who is fully able,you are likely to be counted as poor.So they are looking beyond consumption. This is a very interesting fact as thereason why the community does badly or does not meet up with thegovernment’s aims, is not only, as I said, they get tired but the important part isthey also have a different view of who is poor. There is moral judgement in that.We may agree or disagree with the moral judgement. The community is not tryingto do what the government is asking them to do. So that is an important result tokeep in mind.If you look at somebody’s consumption rank, if the community says this guy ispoor does it contain information above or beyond the information contained inthe PMT. We know the answer is yes, so the community is able to say that thisperson, even though he owns a motorbike, he is really not rich. He is actuallypoor. On that assumption, the community is doing better. They seem to havebetter information. They are using the information the way we want them to useit.The first set of conclusion is that the community is happy when they do thepicking. I think their view is we know who the poor are you don’t. So if you letthem do it they are much happier. You could say it is not easy for them to do theranking. They tend to be petty, they start making mistakes. So both models haveproblem. Even if you let the elites decide, they take the same decision as the restof the community. That suggests the community does not do a bad job and theyare happy doing it.Now the next question is how well the government selection, the PMT method,compares with self selection as in MNREGA. The idea of self selection implies amechanism that somebody who is richer, standing in the line and digging ditchesis not worth their time. They must be doing something more productive andprefer more leisure. For those few rupees, they are not going to stand in line inthe sun or dig a ditch, they can earn doing something else. If they don’t want toearn they can watch TV. There is no reason to do it. In self selection that is thebasic theory. That’s the reason why we think this scheme should work.This is not always the case. If I tell you today you have to go and stand in line toget money in the future, well if you are very poor, you will not have that time asyou don’t have food today. So you may worry that you may miss the poor. Thesecond worry is that the poorest are often people who tend to have otherproblems. It may include a single woman with multiple children or a woman withmultiple children who has a husband who is alcoholic. What do they do with thechildren? Now some of the MNREGA programmes have crèche facility but most ofthem don’t. So self targeting would impose higher cost on the poor.As for the non poor, they have good social network and connection. There may besome relative who can take care of their children. The poor often are isolatedsocially, so they cannot find someone to help them. So self selection might hurtthe poor. There are also worries that it is not sure you are going to get the rightkind of self selection. So after we delivered the results of the previousprogramme, we did this experiment in 400 villages in 3 prominences in Indonesiaagain.This generous programme gives people 11% of their annual consumption as a freegift for 6 years, basically up to 150 dollars a year for 6 years. It is a substantialamount for the poor. The question was how do we do it if we just have selfselection. Villages are randomly chosen for self selection. This is however verydifferent from MNREGA that is in this case you have to go every day to collect themoney. In the beginning, the Indonesian government was not agreeing to creatework sites. What we did was to set up an office where people can come and signup. So people have to pay the cost as one might have to stand in the line for 3 to 4hours.Once you sign in, someone will come to your home and check whether you areactually eligible or not. If  you don’t think you are going to get it, then don’tbother signing up. There is no point signing up because we will come and check.As you have to stand in line for 3 to 4 hours, you need very strong incentive toshow up.  Someone interviews you and enters the data in the computer and atsome places you have to go 2 to 3 kms away from your home. So  there is somecost, it may not be huge but it is also not zero. So the first question is who selfselects.The other way of doing this is the information that I have about myself no oneelse knows it. May be I own a motor bike and I have a decent house, but  I justlost my job. That’s not going to be anywhere in that government checklist. So oneadvantage of self targeting is to be flexible if I need I will come if I don’t need I willnot come. The government does not have to figure  out every day that I lost myjob or not. So there is flexibility.Observable CharacteristicsThe green line shows you the probability of your PMT score, your asset score thatthe government uses to include you or not. So if I measure you PMT score and itgoes from 12 to 14, the answer is the probability goes down a lot. While 60% ofpeople show up, roughly 0% show up by the time you get to the PMT score of 14.Here you are selecting the people with worst assets. Even though this is a verylucrative programme, only 60 % show up. That is something to keep in mind. Ifyou run the regression of the actual consumption, your PMT score there will beerror score which says that this person is poor and this person is richer.So imagine I take the list of the assets  and predict consumption, there will be aprediction error which says the model is not perfect. A person who owns a motorbike is poorer than other people who don’t own a motor bike. Is this errorpredicting whether you would show up or not? The answer is yes. If you are richerthan you look, based on your asset, then you don’t show up. If you are poorerthan you look, based on your asset, then you show up. This is what happens whenyou compare self targeting with PMT. The orange-ish yellow line is PMT and blackline is self targeting and this is per capita consumption so the distribution isstraight to the left. The distribution of people who are under that level probablyare under 13. If you draw a vertical at 13, you hit the point at curve 6.60%. Peoplewho show up for self targeting are below 13.55%, those people who show up forthe PMT are below 13.So in other words it targets strictly poor people. Let us say the people who aretargeted by self targeting are strictly poor, at all points of distribution are poorpeople, so everywhere in the district we are getting better targeting. So selftargeting strictly better targets, this is what this curve says. It is better to use thegovernment methods. Remember we impose very little cost on them, justimagine one afternoon spent in the office. For that we get much better targeting,so that’s a good news and both inclusion and exclusion error goes down.I don’t want to spend time explaining but, so inclusion error goes down meansrich don’t apply much in self targeting and poor apply more. So distribution shiftsto left for both reasons, rich goes and poor comes in, so that is all good news.We try to estimate that cost by thinking of average wage of someone that isshowing up, that is the cost somebody pays for spending 4 hours in the line. Inthose 4 hours he could have done something more productive. The cost of thatwe calculate is higher than the cost for the PMT. Basically in that case governmentpays that cost. The enumerator comes and interviews you for say 50 minutes, thatis the only time you waste. The cost is in that respect higher in the governmentsystem. So if you add them up, it is clear that the net cost is low for self targeting.In that sense, self targeting is more efficient as it imposes more cost on thebeneficiary but the cost to government is much lower and so the overall total costis lower.Now one last question, as I said, would self targeting improve if we increase thecost. So one thing we did is that we randomly allocated some villages to havelower cost because they could sign up by locating right next to their housewhereas in some places they had to go 3 kms away to sign up. Theory for doingMNREGA-kind of effort says bigger cost improves selection, small cost anybodycan take. When the cost is higher, only those who are really desperate would bewilling to pay that cost. But the answer that experience comes up with is that justabout everyone drops out when you increase the distance. The poorer drops outmore, the richest also drops out. So you don’t get any selection, just less peopleshowing up. Thus it is strictly worst thing to increase the distance. Small cost thusworks well and adding cost to it doesn’t help, it just gets worst selection.To summarise, community targeting did the same as government methods,slightly worse probably because government is ignoring lot of local information.Consumption indicator is not the right method necessarily. Self targeting doesbetter than both. So if I add both these factors together, that does impose somemore cost on applicants. As even in that very lucrative programme, only 60% ofpoorest showed up, so there is something about these programmes which ismissing large part of the poorest. The open problem we have not solved not isthat everyone is signing up, and if you leave on people to sign up, they don’t seemto sign up even when incentives are there.This is not an argument for moving on to NREGA type of programme, theargument is to somehow make it easier for the poorest households to sign up.How to do that is what we are working on now, how to design a programme forexcluding about 40% poorest. How to bring them in is the question. This gives youa reasonable idea that self targeting is pretty effective and you can get prettygood self targeting by imposing small cost. You don’t need to show up every day>For the direct cash transfer that the government is talking about, my guess is theycan do and experiment like this where you have to sign up once a month orsomething, just come and put in your finger print once a month and get moneyfor whole month. I think that might be more efficient to the NREGA method ofself-targeting by imposing much lower cost on people and avoiding the possibilityof the poorest people also dropping out.This sort of give you a sense where this research is very much complementary tothe research Professor Suresh Tendulkar was doing. Just trying the other side of itin the sense how do I design the poverty line in a way so that when you identifypeople below it you identify the right people.These are very complementary approaches and I am very happy to be here andspeaking on this.Thank you
