Economic Development of the North East Region:Some Reflections*RAKESH MOHANIt is a matter of great pleasure to be here with you to deliver the keynote address on thisoccasion of the 8th anniversary of the North Eastern Development Finance Corporation(NEDFi). As a financial institution NEDFi is unique, given the challenging domain of theNorth Eastern Region (NER) that it endeavours to promote. Like many of you, I haveoften wondered why the growth and developmentperformance of this richly endowed Region has been well below its potential; indeeddisappointing in many ways. While the reasons could be many - some of which we aregoing to discuss today, I am a firm believer in what Robert Frost once said, “The onlyway around is through!” I am truly delighted, therefore, to have this opportunity of joiningyou in collective introspection and to do some loud thinking on the future course ofaction.1. The Role of North Eastern Development Finance Corporation Ltd.(NEDFi) inthe Economic Development of the North Eastern RegionThe setting up of the NEDFi is an important element in the development strategy for theNER. In the early 1990s, it became evident that traditional development banking wasfalling short of meeting the requirements of the NER. The all-India financial institutions(AIFIs) were too large and diversified to focus upon the specific needs of the Region,which, in any case, is a long way from Mumbai. On the other hand, fragmentation of theNER into many States had rendered the State-level financial institutions too small tomeet adequately the requirements of the NER. A secular decline in the financialassistance to the NER by all types of financial institutions and widespread failure ofindustrial projects in the NER were also becoming more evident. It was obvious that anew approach was needed to promote economic activity in the region.Many of you would recall that the then Finance Minister, Dr.Manmohan Singh, took theinitiative of setting up “The Group on Industrial Development of the North EasternRegion” chaired by Dr.I.K. Barathakur, a figure who has served the NER with distinctionand dedication all through her life. I had the privilege of working in that Group asEconomic Adviser to the Ministry of Industry. Among the important recommendation ofthe Group was to set up an “Industrial and Infrastructure Bank for the North EasternRegion (IIBNER)”. Thus, NEDFi came into being.The Group observed that conditions in the North East are substantially different from therest of the country. It was, therefore,• Keynote address delivered by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, ReserveBank of India on the occasion of 8th anniversary of North East Development FinanceCorporation (NEDFi) at Guwhati on September 19, 2003. Dr. Rakesh Mohan isgrateful to many members of the staff of the Department of Economic Analysis andPolicy (DEAP) who have contributed to the preparation of this lecture. He isparticularly indebted to Dr. Narendra Jadhav, Shri Somnath Chatterjee and ShriSanjay Hansda.necessary to create a special institution to serve the needs of the region. The Group hadsaid that this institution must be professionally managed and should be structured insuch a way that it is free from the political and bureaucratic influences that had sobedeviled many other state level financial institutions. It was proposed that such aninstitution, once it is set up, must employ professional staff of the highest calibre, whoare particularly qualified in appraisal techniques so that many viable projects could befunded.It was also suggested that the new bank would be instrumental in conducting technicaland economic studies in the region in order to advise on the industries that areparticularly suited to the region. Such studies would provide guidance to the bank to fundthe development of facilities such as industrial parks, ancillary facilities for industriessuch as food processing, horticulture, floriculture, silviculture, aquaculture, sericultureand the like. Such a strategy would enable the bank to promote region specific industriesthat are likely to be profitable.The Report of this Group was presented in February 1995 and the Finance Ministerimplemented it immediately in the 1995-96 budget; and your institution was born withinthat year. The consequent setting up of the NEDFi in 1995 thus, reflected the adoption ofa completely new institutional framework dedicated for the Region for the techno-economic appraisal, identification and financing of projects.I am, therefore, delighted to note that within the short span of time since its initiation, anddespite daunting constraints, the NEDFi has emerged as the premier financial institutionof the NER. It is on the way to fulfilling the vision of its progenitors. Moreover, theCorporation has been able to meet the target of a minimum disbursement of Rs 50 croreper annum in 2000-01 and 2001-02 as was visualised in the Prime Minister’sannouncement of a Special Package for the NER in 2000. There are several otheractivities and achievements of the NEDFi that I would like to highlight.First, as a leader and think tank in innovative financing, NEDFi has already made itsmark by way of a slew of proactive initiatives. Its mandate i.e., the Articles of Associationwas amended to include agriculture and allied services keeping in view the profile of theNER. A micro credit scheme as also an equity fund scheme for small local entrepreneurshas been successfully launched. Further, NEDFi’s innovative initiatives such as Caneand Bamboo Technology Centre with UNDP sponsorship, and Design Centre forHandloom and Handicrafts, are expected to help the rural artisans by way of exports.The R&D Centre for Patchouli at Guwahati is extending marketing, technical andfinancial support for production of medicinal and aromatic oil.Second, with respect to the ‘new economy’ initiatives, NEDFi’s IT Park at Guwahati hasmotivated other States for setting up of similar ventures, although I understand that ithas encountered various problems particularly related to adequate connectivity. Iunderstand that the Corporation has devised an appropriate scheme forfinancing of IT industries in the NER. It has also made some successful headway in thearea of bio-technology financing.Third, in view of the great potential for tourism, the Corporation has initiated a multi-pronged strategy – preparing a master plan and embarking on a big private sectorproject mainly for adventure tourism followed by several others. In addition, theCorporation has sponsored a number of techno-economic feasibility studies under theTechno Economic Development Fund for national and international funding.A great need in this region is the promotion of entrepreneurship. With the lack ofadequate development in the past, most promoters in the NER are first generationentrepreneurs. I am glad to note that close to 90 per cent of cumulative disbursement byNEDFi has been allocated to new ventures. Food products, services, infrastructure,cement, basic metals and chemicals have turned out to be the major destination for thedeployment of funds. The State-wise profile of NEDFi’s cumulative disbursementindicates the dominance of Assam (63 per cent) followed by Meghalaya (16 per cent)with Mizoram at the bottom (2 per cent).However, I find that there are some disquieting features in the financial performance ofthe Corporation. These include its growing Non-Performing Assets(NPA): NEDFi’s grossNPA as per cent of loan assets are placed at 27 per cent. The earning per share (EPS)for NEDFi has remained below Rs.2 since its inception as against that of Rs.6.5 for IDBIin 2001-02, the lowest since 1997-98. Moreover, operating expenses as per cent of totalexpenses (excluding interest expenses) were placed at 67 per cent for NEDFi as against55 per cent for the representative institution in 2001-02.For the institution to be successful in promoting healthy development of the region, it isessential that its own health be preserved. We must strive for excellence in all ourendeavours: that is what NEDFi should stand for and that is the message it mustpropagate.II. Government Policy Initiatives in the NER: An OverviewDevelopment of the NER has remained high on the agenda of both the Central and therespective State Governments. The North Eastern Council (NEC) which was set up in1972 has been playing a major role. As a regional planning body it has taken up a seriesof projects for the balanced development of the Region. To provide further focus todevelopment initiatives in the North East, the Government has also set up theDepartment of North Eastern Region (DONER) in 2001.In line with the priority given to this region, per capita levels of Central assistance toState Plans in the NER are among the highest in the country; the average per capitaCentral assistance for State Plans in the NER was placed at Rs.1,546 in 2001-02 ascompared with Rs.356 at the all-India level. The Government of India has also beenproviding special Central assistance in respect of some of the States in the NER forspecial area programmes such as the Hill Area Development Programme (HADP) andthe Border Area Development Programme(BADP). The main objectives of eco-preservation and eco-restoration are the focus of HADP with an emphasis onsustainable use of bio-diversity while keeping in view local needs and aspirations. TheBADP is designed to take care of special needs of people living in remote andinaccessible areas situated near international borders.The other recent policy initiatives have included announcement of a new industrial policyfor the NER (December 1997) which encompassed a comprehensive incentive packageto stimulate industrial development; creation of a non-lapsable Central Resources pool(1998-99) to ensure speedy development of infrastructure in the NER; the PrimeMinister’s Special Package of over Rs.10,000 crore for the socio-economic developmentof the North-East (January 2000). Thus the Region has not been lacking in policyattention and programmes.I understand that reasonable progress is taking place under these initiatives. The totalamount released from the non-lapsable Central pool as on April 1, 2003 amounted toRs.1,869 crore as against the approved projects cost of Rs.3,104 crore. The PM’sSpecial package covers 28 programmes/ schemes relating mainly to the development ofthe power sector, border trade, horticulture, rural infrastructure, road and air-links,medical education and industrial training institutes. As on January 1, 2003, 7 schemeshave been completed and 17 are under implementation. A sum of Rs.3,864 crore hasbeen released out of the sanctioned amount of around Rs 10,000 crore under thisSpecial package.The total annual outflow of funds from the Centre to this region is estimated to be aboutRs.12,000 crore, about US$ 2.7 billion. This is higher than the disbursementsreceived by India as a whole from multilateral institutions like the World Bank and AsianDevelopment Bank. It is also higher than the total aid received by Bangladesh. Thus, tomy understanding, the flow of funds to this region is not the problem. They need to beused in such a way that the seeds of sustainable development are sown so that thegrowth of the Region becomes self propagating.III. A Profile of the North-Eastern Region (NER)Let us review the existing strengths and weaknesses of the Region in order to identifythe challenges and opportunities that exist.There are at least five striking areas of strength. These include:• Relatively high literacy rates and human development levels as compared to therest of the country;• High skill levels in certain areas;• An abundant natural resource endowment;• Potential for the development of the tourism industry; and• Potential for exports and scope for regional cooperation.Let’s take a closer look.Literacy rates for 2001 were quite high in the NER ranging from 64.3 per cent (Assam) to88.5 per cent (Mizoram) as compared with the country’s average of 65.4 per cent. OnlyArunachal Pradesh at 54.7 per cent falls well short of the national average though it isfast catching up too. Most importantly, female literacy in all the NER States, exceptArunachal Pradesh (44.2 per cent), is substantially higher than the national average(54.2 per cent). According to the Planning Commission’s National Human DevelopmentReport 2001, the Human Development Index (HDI) – which captures economic,educational and health attainments – in respect of Manipur and Mizoram in particular, asalso for Nagaland and Tripura, was placed higher than the national average in 1991. TheGender Disparity Index, which captures the proportion of female attainments to that ofmales for a common set of variables, was also placed higher than the national averagein respect of these four States. Studies have shown that while the NER as a whole,ranks low in respect of economic development, and to some extent, in the case of healthattainment, the rankings in terms of educational development are quite high. Mostinterestingly, the rankings in terms of rural infrastructure are also high, contrary to thegeneral impression.The NER is also endowed with rich natural resources such as oil and natural gas andagro and forest-based products. The Region is a major producer of tea, and possessesone-third of the country’s hydro-power potential. The scenic surroundings also providean ideal setting for the promotion of the tourism industry.The Region has great potential for exports and there is also considerable scope forregional co-operation. In this context, a major issue confronting the NER is therevalence of ‘informal’ border trade. This assumes special significance because of thelength of its international borders with Myanmar, China, Bhutan and Bangladesh. India’sofficial foreign trade with neighbouring countries in the North-East (barring Bhutan)hovers around only 4 per cent of India’s total foreign trade. On the other hand, availableestimates show that the volume of informal trade is quite substantial. Several factorshave been identified which compel traders to use the informal channel. These include:lack of infrastructure and banking facilities for official trade at borders, shortages ofessential commodities at borders, inclusion of limited items in the bilateral/Free TradeAgreements between bordering countries, quantitative restrictions, higher tariffs andhigher transaction costs (e.g. delay in realisation of payments, procedural delays, etc.)and exchange rate or price differentials.Strict Rules of Origin requirements also restrictformal trade flows and encourage informal trade. Each of these issues need to beaddressed and solved. Harnessing of such exports lost through the informal channelprovides an important opportunity to step-up the development of the Region. At thesame time, building bridges with neighbouring countries under the aegis of regionalcooperative frameworks can also provide a further boost to the exports from the Region.I have had the privilege, over the last twelve months, of being associated with newinitiatives to promote trade between our country and other countries in the region suchas Singapore and Sri Lanka. I am hopeful that similar initiatives with Bangladesh andother countries bordering the North East Region will also begin to bear fruit shortly.South East Asia is among the most dynamic regions in the world in terms of economicgrowth and development. Progress is being made in furthering trade agreements withThailand and with ASEAN as a whole. Progress towards opening the trade borders ofthe region would, therefore, act as an important catalysts for the development of theNorth Eastern Region.As against these strengths and opportunities, there are weaknesses and threats to besure, emanating to a large extent from the difficult terrain of the Region — 70 per cent ofthe NER is hilly, with forests covering between 42 and 76 per cent of the area of each ofthe States. This poses one of the greatest constraints to rapid economic development.Let me now review some of the other problems that beset the Region.Economic GrowthThe average real rate of growth of NDP of the NER is estimated at 6.0 per cent during1996-97 to 2000-01. Although this is slightly higher than that of 5.7 per cent for thecountry as a whole, it masks marked fluctuations in the growth rates over time indifferent States as well as the sharp disparities in growth rates across the States.Moreover, except in the case of Nagaland, the average per capita incomes of otherStates in the NER were below the all-India average (Rs.9,643) over the period 1995-96to 2000-01.EmploymentThe growth rate of employment for all the States in the NER (except Assam) declinedover the period 1993-94 to 1999-2000 as compared with the period 1983-84 to 1993-94.The incidence of unemployment was also higher than the all-India average of 2.3 percent during 1999-2000 in respect of Assam (4.6 per cent), Manipur (3.5 per cent) andNagaland (3.5 per cent).PovertyEven though the incidence of poverty in the NER has exhibited a downward trend overthe years, the poverty ratio was placed lower than the all-India average (26.1 per cent)only in respect of one State i.e., Mizoram (19.5 per cent) in 1999-2000. This is an issueof concern, since in 1983 the poverty ratio was placed lower than that of the all-Indiaposition (44.5 per cent) in respect of all the States in the NER, indicating that there hasbeen a sharper decline in the incidence of poverty over the years outside the Region.AgricultureAgricultural performance of the Region remains sluggish on account of a number offactors. For one, the ratio of irrigated area to total area under all crops in the NER asgenerally remained much lower than the all-India figure of 39 per cent (in 1998-99).Moreover, the total area in the NER covered under HYV seeds formed only around 0.25per cent of the all-India total in 1996-97. Availability of fertilisers is another acuteproblem; cultivators have to bear large costs for obtaining fertilisers Nationalised banksseem to have shown a lukewarm response towards financing crop loans particularlyin view of the paucity of updated land records. The State level Cooperative Bankwhich provides credit to Primary Agricultural Credit Societies is also experiencingresource constraints.IndustryThe industrial scenario is also not very encouraging as the number of factories aswell as the shares of fixed capital, invested capital, net value-added and the numberof workers in the industrial sector of the NER vis-à-vis the all-India position, havedeclined over the period 1995-96 to 1999-2000. The power situation in the NERwhich had improved to a surplus during 1999-2000 and 2000-01, has deterioratedsubsequently to a deficit of 2.4 per cent during 2002-03. The Plant Load Factor(PLF) in Assam is the lowest in the country.Financial SectorThe financial sector scenario of the NER indicates that much more remains to bedone.Outstanding deposits of SCBs in the NER as at end-March 2003 formed only1.5 per cent of the all-India level. The share of bank credit to industry showed amodest rise in some states but there were noticeable declines in Mizoram andMeghalaya. The share of bank credit to small scale industries also declinedgradually in most states in the NER. The share of bank credit to agriculture declinedin all states except Manipur. Strikingly, the C-D ratios of SCBs (excluding RegionalRural Banks) in the NER varied between 14 per cent (Arunachal Pradesh) and 29per cent (Meghalaya), much lower than the all-India level of around 60 per cent as atend-March 2003. The assistance provided by AFIs to the NER has been anexceedingly small proportion of total assistance to all States. The system of co-operative credit dispensation remains limited in the NE with only 27 offices of urbanco-operative banks and 18 branches of district central co-operative banks as at end-March 2001. However, NER has the largest network (215 branches) of State co-operative banks next only to the Northern Region. On the whole, deposits mobilisedby all co-operative banks in the Region accounted for less than 1 per cent of the all-India level mobilised by co-operative banks. The number of NBFCs accepting publicdeposits has also dwindled steadily in recent years in the Region. While the NBFCsector has undergone a shake-up in the recent past at the all India level, no publicdeposit-taking NBFCs were in operation in the Region as at end-March 2001.Fiscal ScenarioThe fiscal position of the States in the NER has been under strain in recent yearsThe Gross Fiscal Deficit of the NER increased to Rs.4,897 crore in 2002-03 and isbudgeted to rise further to Rs.5,026 crore in 2003-04, mainly reflecting the sharpincrease in expenditures (particularly non-developmental expenditures such assalaries, pensions, interest payments, etc ). Low and declining buoyancies of bothtax and non-tax revenues and losses of State PSUs have added to the financialstrain. Notably, the revenue account of many of these States which were in surplusin 1997-98 turned into a deficit in 2001-02. I am, however, happy to note that severalStates in NER have initiated measures towards revenue augmentation, expenditurecontainment, restructuring of PSUs and investment in growth enhancing sectorsSome of the States have already prepared a Mid-Term Fiscal Reform Programme inconsultation with the Government of India while others are in the process ofpreparing/ finalising the same. Some States have also emphasised the need forinstitutional reform. For example, Assam has constituted a Committee on FiscalReforms (COFR) and has engaged the NIPFP to undertake a study on the prevailingfiscal scenario. Meghalaya has proposed to strengthen power transmission and ruralelectrification. Arunachal Pradesh and Manipur have emphasised/initiated economymeasures. Such measures need to be strengthened in order to make a credibledifference to the fiscal situation.Whereas the list of infirmities and difficulties affecting this region is long, what weneed to do is to look for solutions to problems, and not (hunt) for problems thatdeter solutions.IV. The Way Ahead: Some Elements of a New ApproachAs we have seen, many efforts have been made in the past to give special attentionto the region for promoting its development. Very clearly, a new approach is neededso that the national resources available in the region are utilised to their fullest alongwith other resources that come into the region from outside. I cannot pretend to haveany special expertise on the Region. I can, therefore, only provide some straythoughts that may generate further discussion and debate. But, I do feel that aftermore than 50 years of independence, the time has come for this Region to takeadvantage of its own strengths and to turn some perceived weaknesses into assets.The history of economic development across the world suggests that there are noconstraints to growth: the limitations are only those of vision and action.The former minister for the North Eastern Region, Dr. Arun Shourie, had begun theprocess of giving a new direction to the development of North East. Among otherinitiatives, he had also convened a meeting in Mumbai to court investors directly. Iunderstand that he received a very warm response in the two-day long meeting thatwas conducted. I believe that such a process of outreach must be continued so thatnew investments are made in the region. It must be made sure, however, that suchinvestments are made in a viable fashion.Prospecting for investment is not productive if done on a general basis. Suchprospecting must be purposive after the identification of specific viable projects. It ishere that NEDFi can make an important contribution to the development of theRegion through its on-going techno-economic studies followed by financing of viableprojects. It can also act as a catalyst to bring other financing sources to the Regionthrough credit enhancement activities that provide greater confidence to outsidefinancers and investors. One of the problems in the approaches made in the pasthas been that investment has invariably been sought for large projects. I wouldpropose that attempts to promote investment in the region would be much moresuccessful if it is sought for viable much smaller projects that are suitable to theregion and are based on the resources available in terms of both physical andhuman resources. Much has been made of the many infrastructure disabilities thatexist in the region. It is found, however, that in many areas the infrastructureendowment of the region is actually better than that in the rest of the country. Forexample:• The density of national highways in the region is higher than the nationalaverage /in terms of route kilometers per unit area;• Most villages in the region are now connected with link roads despite the hillyterrain;• Almost all villages in the region now have access to portable drinking water.Thus, the lack of basic infrastructure is not as bad as is generally felt. In order toutilise the available infrastructure to its utmost potential, there must be an explicitpolicy to locate new investments in close proximity to already available infrastructuresuch as airports, road heads, railway stations, power lines, water sources and thelike.Guwahati airport has now received international status. This must be fully utilised, forexample, by locating light industries such as food processing, floriculture, sericultureand the like in its proximity, or striking distance. The existence of an airport has beenused in many places to generate economic activity. Schiphol Airport at Amsterdam isa case in point. If flowers can be supplied to Europe from Latin America through theflower markets of the Netherlands, there is no reason why the flower potential of thisregion cannot be utilised for the development of exports to South-East Asia. In fact,the whole region to  the East of India remains the fastest growing region in the world.The North East region is the one closest to this prosperous neighborhood in Asia. Asthe on-going effort of conducting trade pacts with neighbouring countries proceeds,this potential would have much greater probability of being realised. Discussions arealready underway for the enhancement of regional cooperation in the BIMST-EC(Bangladesh, India, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Thailand - Economic Cooperationframework). In fact, the six sectors of cooperation identified in the arrangement are:trade and investment, energy, fisheries, tourism, technology and communication &transport. Of these, the first four sectors are among those where the region can havea good competitive advantage.NEDFi has already initiated an IT park at Guwahati. It can explore thepossibilities of setting up other industrial parks, within 3-4 hours driving distanceof Guwahati Airport, as incubators for industries that produce products that aremarketable internationally. Indeed, the existence of airports in other parts of theRegion can be used to similar advantage: they can then serve as feeder points forinternational cargo that can be lifted out of Guwahati.The agro climate of the region is characterised by unique diversities. With such anagro climate, there is great potential for propagating horticulture crops includingvegetables and fruits, along with flowers. However, these products need processingto avoid decay. I am given to believe that a variety of fruits such as pineapples,mandarins, papaya, litchi, lemons, mangoes, guavas, jackfruits and the like all thrivein the kind of agro climate that exists in this region.The region is also hospitable tothe growth of spices like ginger, turmeric, black pepper,large cardamoms, cinnamonand the like. To obtain benefit from all of these activities, there is clearly great needfor food processing industries in each case. Apart from direct usage in foodpreparation, spices like ginger can be used to produce ginger oil, which canthen be used in the production of soft drinks whose consumption is now growing fastin the country. Similarly, turmeric is also widely used in cosmetic industries. Imention these products only to illustrate that there is indeed great potential for thedevelopment of the food processing industry in the region. But, success in promotingthese industries will not happen unless purposive action is taken to locate foodprocessing units, near infrastructure heads so that they can be easily exported out ofthe region to the rest of India or to other destinations in the rest of Asia.Corresponding initiatives will have to be taken to ensure marketing and access to therelevant markets. Once again, it is here that NEDFi can make a contribution throughits technical work and funding activities.Another great asset of the region is its tradition in handloom weaving. In my capacityas the Director General of the National Council of Applied Economic Research(NCAER) I was associated with the census of handloom weavers in the mid to late1990s.I recall, amasingly, that in our census we found almost 30 per cent of the totalpopulation in the North East Region practicesome form of handloom weaving. Mostof this production of course is for domestic consumption at the household level. It issurprising to me that this vast skill base has not been put to better use forcommercial production. Any visitor to any part of this region is greatly attracted bythe impressive design capacity that exists among common people of the region.Once again, purposive efforts can be made to utilise this latent capacity for textiledesigning and weaving for commercial production which would then enhance theearning capacity of people on a widespread basis. In fact, there can be an innovativemarriage of new information technology and traditional designing to standardiseproducts and to provide effective quality control.NEDFi has already initiated the setting up of a Design Centre for Handlooms andHandicrafts. Much more remains to be done. We can note the expiration of theMulti Fibre Agreement (MFA) in 2005, when textile and garment quotas will beabolished. This provides new opportunities for India as a whole and the NorthEast Region should alsotake advantage of it. The vast skills available in textiles inthe North East Region must be put to good use. A good deal of garment exports aredone by air. Once again, the existence of Guwahati International Airport must be putto good use.A good model for the technological upgradation of such a widespread householdactivity is the approach adopted in the milk sector by Dr. Kurien in the National DairyDevelopment Board. Technical work of the highest level is done in a centralisedfashion and passed on to households through effective extension. Through thisprocess, the quality of milch cows was improved tremendously over time, resulting inhigher yields and income of the dairy households. Animal food was improvedthrough research and extension activities; veterinary services were provided; andassured offtake of the milk produced. The centralised agency took upmarketing activities, built the Amul brand and others in different states, anddeveloped more markets. By analogy, design work, handloom upgradation, sourcingof materials, marketing and development of markets can be done in a centralisedfashion. With the availability of information technology and new connectivity,these new activities can become competitive in a way that was not feasible earlier.Designs can be standardised; communication can be done directly with foreign anddomestic buyers; and materials can be sourced in the most cost efficient manner.Moreover, communication can also be done with the many spread out householdproducers within the region. All this was not possible earlier. The region is blessedwith a full variety of silk worms, mulberry, muga, tussar and eri. The silk fabrics ofthe region are already well-known and fetch relatively high prices. Herealso, much better marketing can be done so that these products are available at amuch more widespread basis both in India and abroad. Much more can also be doneto design and manufacture not only traditional items for use in India but for garmentsand fashion items that could be marketed abroad. Branding here is a key issue.Among the disabilities of the region that are often cited are its hilly terrain and itsforest cover. The forest area of the region comprises 57 per cent of its area ascompared with only 23 per cent for the rest of the country. This is often seen as ahandicap in the productivity of the region. Except for saw mills and plywoodmanufacturing, there are no other forest-based industries in the region. This isdespite the fact that medicinal and aromatic plants are available in plenty in theregion. These plants can be used for the production of herbal medicines,perfumeries and other cosmetics. There are at least 120 known medicinal plants thatare known to grow wild in the region. Well planned exploitation of these resources,although on a strictly environmentally sustainable basis, can be used as atremendous prospect for the promotion and growth of medicinal plant based drugsand pharmaceutical industries in the North East Region. With the increasingpopularity of herbal medicines that is now a world wide phenomenon, this is truly anopportunity for this region as a whole. We can also note that such items are light innature and are, therefore, not handicapped by some of the transportationinfrastructure costs that make other items uncompetitive. The forests of the NorthEast Region are also rich in oil based plants. There are prospects for essentially oilbased industries such as agarwood oil, turpentine oil, cinnamon leaf oil, citronil oil,lemon grass oil and the like. These oils are used in items such as perfumes, othercosmetics, varnishes, soaps and detergents, paints, rubber, pharmaceuticals andconfectionaries.It is often said that the region has great potential for tourism. This is intuitivelyobvious for any visitor to the region. In the past, the region has probably sufferedfrom various controls that have existed on visitors not only for foreigners but also forIndian residents. Now that these controls have largely been lifted, there is no reasonwhy tourism cannot develop in a healthy manner throughout the region. However,once again, tourism also  cannot develop on a general basis and through generalexhortation. It must be understood that tourism development is extremely hard workand it requires a great deal of anticipation, imagination, planning and investment.The approach must be to develop a few destinations on a formal and incrementalbasis. This involves the development of a large range of facilities in terms of hotels,restaurants, transportation modes, entertainment and recreational facilities in each ofthese destinations. This requires a great deal of coordinated public and privateinteraction for joint investment. Public facilities must be provided by the public sector.Private investment as a whole follows only if it has relative confidence in the viabilityof the new facilities to be developed. It is for this reason that it is important thatspecific destinations be developed in a purposive manner. It is also not just thedevelopment of physical facilities that brings tourism. A great deal of other work hasto be done to persuade tourists to consider these destinations through directedmarketing activities. Tourist groups need to be formed, charter flights need to bedeveloped and a rich and pleasant tourist experience assured. The emergence ofKerala and Goa as popular tourist destinations for both domestic and internationalprovides useful pointers. What is in favour of such activity now taking off in theregion is a rapidly expanding middle class in our country that is actively looking forrecreation opportunities. That this class can now afford the explorationof foreign tourism and relatively expensive adventure tourism gives us an idea of thekind of demand that now exists for interesting recreational activities that this regioncan potentially provide in abundance. But the tourists, domestic or foreign, demandcomfort along with adventure and novelty. This must be ensured.  I have attemptedto list out selectively some aspects of the development potential that exists in theregion based on its own skills and its own resources that need to be broughttogether in a purposeful fashion. The elements that are common to the areas that Ihave mentioned are:l Relatively low investment requirements;l Availability of natural resources abundant in the region;l Use of local skills that already exist;l Use of new technology in upgrading traditional activities in an innovative manner;l A focussed selective approach to the development of facilities in a mannerthat makes maximum use of availableinfrastructure;l An outward orientation.In a visit that I made to this region as Adviser in the Planning Commission fifteenyears ago, I noted a great tradition that exists here for cooperation at the communitylevel for developmental activities. My impression is that this tradition has not beenwell recognized and, therefore, not utilised in taking forward that kind of productivedevelopmental activities that are needed in the region. Many of the activities that Ihave mentioned will now require a great deal of community level participation andcooperation. I am sure that this will be forthcoming once the people recognise theeconomic potential of these activities. It will also need greater coordinated actionbetween the Government and its agencies, industry associations and financingagencies. The institutional development that has already taken place in the regionmust now ensure such coordinated action.Looking at the distribution of education, the literacy levels in the region, theexistence of about ten universities, an Indian Institute of Technology, half-a-dozenengineering colleges, another half-a-dozen medical/dental/nursing colleges, I amconvinced that this region is abundant in productive and innovative humanresources. Thus, neither lack of human power nor infrastructure facilities can betaken as a major cause of the industrial ill health of the region. The abundance ofnatural resources in the North East makes it an extremely profitable business andinvestment destination. There is no shortage of opportunities: but vision andimagination are needed to turn these opportunities into reality. I would hope thatNEDFi can play an effective role in bringing about such a transformation in the NorthEastern Region.
