Primary Dealers, Debt Markets and StateFinances : Challenges and ResponsesMr. Joshi and friends,I am happy to be amidst you in the third of the annual Seminars organised by the PrimaryDealers’ Association of India (PDAI). I wish to place on record the valuable contribution of thePDAI not only in regard to Government Securities market, but also in the consultative process inpolicy making in important areas in financial markets. My presence here today is a reinforcementof our collaborative efforts to enhance efficiency and assure soundness in the financial sector ofIndia and thus contribute to price stability and growth.In this address, I will first narrate how some challenges in the market borrowingprogramme of the Central and State Governments have been met and highlight the role ofPrimary Dealers (PDs) in the process. A few issues relevant to the role of PDs will be flagged. Inthe second part, progress of reform in debt markets, particularly in Government Securities andprivate placements will be reviewed with a view to raising some issues for further debate andaction. The concluding part focusses on several aspects of State Governments’ borrowings,finances, and linkages with the banking system and PDs.The State finances are significant for social development component of reform, fiscaladjustment in general government sector, development of debt markets and emerging role ofPDs. In this regard, it will be necessary to recognise some non-transparent trends in theaggregate borrowings of State Governments, which apart from having an adverse impact on theiropen market borrowings, and distorting the process of development of debt markets in general,render the operations of the RBI as their fiscal agent and banker complex, and also complicatethe conduct of monetary policy.Challenges in Government BorrowingsWe had to face a serious challenge in managing the growing borrowing needs ofGovernment of India, which rose in ten years, by about thirteen times in gross terms and overeleven times in net terms.It is noteworthy that inspite of growing size of Government borrowings, undue pressureon interest rates was avoided.The RBI has been able to pursue a strategy of elongating the maturity pattern of theoutstanding Government debt since 1995-96 to reduce the refinancing risk though uncertaintiesin the financial markets during the first half of 2000-01 necessitated issuance of shorter-termsecurities.In the more recent times, there is focus on increasing the range of maturities. Thus, therange of maturities of loans issued was 2.89 – 20 years during 2000-01 as against 5.26 – 19.67years during 1999-2000. The weighted average maturity of the loans issued during the currentyear i.e. 2001-02 so far has been pushed up to 13.37 years, with the Government resorting to a 25year issue for the first time after reform.The market borrowings of State Governments also increased significantly, especially inthe very recent years. In 1997-98, net market borrowings amounted Rs. 7,193 crore, which rosesharply to reach Rs.12,405 crore in 1999-2000 and to Rs.12,880 crore in 2000-01. The weightedaverage interest rate on State Government dated securities, which was 11.82 per cent in 1991-92increased to reach 14 per cent in 1995-96. It has thereafter been steadily declining to reach 10.99per cent in 2000-01. During 2001-02 so far, (upto September 21, 2001) the weighted averageinterest rate was 9.97 per cent.The impressive performance reflected in these indicators, during a period of considerabledomestic and international uncertainties, indicates respectable exercise of skills and judgementby RBI coupled with excellent cooperation from market participants, especially the institution ofPDs.Role and Performance of Primary DealersWhat have been the role and performance of PDs in meeting these challenges?The share of PDs in primary issuances of dated securities of Central Government rose byabout four-fold in 2000-01 from Rs. 11,916 crore in 1997-98. In the Treasury Bills market, theshare of PDs was 85 per cent of total issues of Treasury Bills in 2000-2001.Of very recent origin is the close involvement of PDs in State governments’ borrowings –a subject to which a large part of this address is devoted. Between August 1999 and August2001, State Governments have raised Rs. 4,680 crore from 18 auctions. The share of PDs in theState Government auction issues held so far including purchases due to underwritingcommitments amounted to 36 per cent of total issues.In the secondary market too, the PDs achieved a noticeable expansion in theirtransactions covering a major part of transactions on outright basis and almost three-fourth ofoutright plus repos. In 2001, the PDs achieved a turnover of outright plus repos of Rs.5,09,133crore, representing 72.8 per cent of market transactions, out of which transactions on outrightbasis amounted to Rs.3,37,039 crore or 58.9 per cent.To fund their stocks of Government securities, all the fifteen PDs with Net Owned Fundsof a little over Rs. 3,000 crore have tended to rely on two major sources of funds, the call moneymarket and the liquidity support from the RBI. PDs share of the total call money market turnoverstood at about 30 per cent in 2000-2001.The RBI has for its part taken a number of steps for developing and strengthening the PDsystem and making it more effective. For instance, it now takes into account both the biddingcommitment and the performance of PDs in the primary and secondary markets for determiningthe quantum of liquidity support. Further, since PDs are only required to make biddingcommitments in auctions of T-Bills, the system of underwriting by PDs in respect of suchauctions has been withdrawn.Capital adequacy guidelines for PDs were revised in December 2000. PDs now have towork out market risk, based on Value at Risk (VaR) model and standardised method andmaintain capital charges based on the higher of the two. As a transitional measure, until PDsstabilise their VaR model and get these vetted by RBI, they have been allowed to work out themarket risk requirement at 7 per cent of the portfolio.Issues for Primary DealersAt this stage, it is appropriate to mention a few issues for PDs to ponder over.First, given the size of market and the uncertainties involved, PDs may considerincreasing the size of their net owned funds, besides enlarging the scope of stable short- tomedium-term borrowed funds. The holding capacity, market presence and intrinsic strength thata strong capital base provides cannot be substituted by other sources of funding. Strengthening ofthe capital base and stable borrowed funding will automatically reduce excess dependence oncall money borrowings and RBI liquidity and the resultant risk on account of market volatility2during uncertain circumstances. No doubt, PDs now have the flexibility of hedging their interestrate risks through the swap market.Second, the RBI has already announced its intention to move over to a full-fledgedLiquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), which does not envisage assured liquidity support. PDsshould incorporate this as part of their future business plans and strategies. PDs shouldstrengthen their market risk management and quickly move over to risk based capital measureslike VaR.Third, as you are aware, RBI is not averse to an exit route for PDs where necessary.Fourth, it is open to all eligible entities to apply for a PD’s licence at any time, since thepolicy of RBI is to keep it as an on-going process. Thus, both entry and exit routes are keptreasonably open to promote efficiency through competition.Fifth, as you are well aware, the RBI has embarked on changes in the technologicalinfrastructure, rationalisation of current account and Subsidiary Ledger Account, introduction ofnew products like STRIPS, T-Bills futures etc. The RBI is in consultation with the PDs and therest of the market on all these issues. Nevertheless, market players including PDs would be welladvised to position themselves for these changes appropriately.Reforms in Government Securities Markets : Review and IssuesIn the last meet, I had flagged a number of issues for further consideration. It would beuseful to review the progress in each of those issues, to separate those where we have gainedfurther ground from those, which still need to be addressed.First, on the status of the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL), it has since been setup with State Bank of India as the main sponsor. It will act as central counter-party in thesettlement of all trades in Government Securities, Treasury Bills, money market instruments (likecommercial paper and certificates of deposits), repos and foreign exchange. To begin with, CCILwill be settling all transactions in repos and Government Securities reported on the NegotiatedDealing System (NDS) of the RBI and also the rupee-dollar forex spot and forward deals.On its part, the RBI has already opened current account and SGL account for CCIL andgiven approval for its membership to INFINET. As regards forex clearing, RBI is incorrespondence with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for regulatory approval. CCIL onits part is reportedly setting up the hardware and software in place and has held many meetingswith banks for finalising procedures of settlement, changes to systems of member banks, etc. Thefirst phase of the project is expected to go live in November 2001, alongwith the expectedcommencement of parallel run of NDS.RBI attaches great deal of importance to CCIL in its reform process of the financialsystem, and in particular, from a monetary policy point of view, the second stage of movingtowards pure inter-bank market is linked to the date of its operationalisation. RBI is also keenthat CCIL should help to broaden and deepen the debt and the forex markets.RBI welcomes any suggestions that this Conference can offer to us in making CCIL amechanism that provides efficiency and safeguards on par with best international standards.Second, the RBI has commenced an integrated project on Negotiated Dealing System(NDS) for complete automation of the operations of its Public Debt Office. NDS will be aninterface between the members (SGL account holders) and the PDO. The entire system will beworking in a networked environment and INFINET will provide the backbone forcommunication. The NDS fully integrated with the computerised PDO and CCIL will lead tohigher efficiency in trading, guaranteed settlement and other improvements in services to3investors in government securities. In this regard, a decision has been taken to closely coordinatethe work relating to NDS with the CCIL, and in fact, place the whole system within the overalltechnological and institutional infrastructure for transactions in the financial sector with whichRBI is intimately concerned.The NDS software application has been installed and over 80 institutions have testedsoftware and given suggestions for improvements, which are being looked into by the vendor.The NDS is envisaged on lease lines and about 60 work orders have been released by MTNL.Some concerns have been expressed about the dependence on the MTNL lease lineinstead of VSAT network in view of the advantages of the latter. The RBI is discussing this issuewith participants. Another issue that has been raised relates to the auction design on the NDS.There is a suggestion that screen based interactive auction system whereby participants would beable to revise their bids would be more efficient. Similarly, there is an opinion that anonymousorder matching system in NDS should be considered by the RBI. In this context, there seems tobe a view in favour of wider participation in the NDS so that members can participate even fromsmall centres.RBI urges the PDs to discuss these issues and come out with concrete suggestions.Third, with the amendments to the Securities Contract Regulation Act, 1956, there isgreater clarity in the jurisdiction of the RBI over transactions in Government Securities, moneymarket securities, gold related securities, derivatives based on these securities as also readyforward contracts in debt securities. This enables the RBI to introduce new instruments andinnovative practices in the money and Government Securities markets appropriately withoutlegal hurdles.Fourth, a few issues were flagged for further action in the T-Bills market. As you areaware, a number of reforms were undertaken with a view to rationalising the T-Bills market. The14-Day and 182-Day T-Bills have been discontinued. The notified amount in the 91-day T-Billshas been increased to Rs. 250 crore and in 364-Day T-Bill auction to Rs. 750 crore. The 91-Dayand 364-Day T-Bills now mature on the same dates and together they now form a larger fungiblestock of T-Bills of varying maturities in the secondary market.An issue which has been raised by PDs relates to their exclusive access in primaryauctions of T-Bills and in open market operations with regard to Government dated securities.International experience with the Primary Dealers System shows that very few developedcountries have introduced exclusive access to PDs in OMO (USA and UK). On the other hand,many countries, both developed and emerging, have given exclusive access to PDs in theprimary auction process. PDs have exclusive access to the RBI’s OMO in Treasury Bills sinceFebruary 2000. In addition, RBI conducted “switch operations” for the first time in August 2000that was restricted only to PDs.There are also views that exclusive access might create private monopolies, which goagainst the creation of a deep and liquid market. There is another view that exclusive access toPDs may raise the cost of financial intermediation, which may not be desirable from theviewpoint of efficiency of financial markets. Moreover, there are certain operational constraintsthat PDs face in the present environment that increases their funding costs and exposes them tomarket risks. Under the circumstances, it is felt that the existing arrangement should continueand the issue of allowing PDs exclusive access to either primary issues or OMO should berevisited later.Fifth, on the issue whether RBI should withdraw itself from primary auctions of T-Billsand restrict its operations only to the secondary market, the RBI in its Monetary and Credit4Policy of April 2001 acknowledged that although it is desirable in principle, separation of debtand monetary management functions is a long-term process that is dependent on the fulfillmentof three conditions, viz., development of financial markets, reasonable control over the fiscaldeficit and necessary legislative changes. There has been progress of some of these aspectsincluding, as I mentioned, the amendment to the SCRA, the setting up of the ClearingCorporation and the technological infrastructure being put in place.Once legislative actions with regard to Fiscal Responsibility and Budget ManagementBill and amendments to the RBI Act already proposed to Government are accomplished, theseparation of debt functions from RBI could be operationalised.When the debt management function is moved out of RBI, the question of institutionalset up that could satisfactorily meet the needs of both Centre and States needs to be worked outsince the latter may justifiably seek a stake in ownership or control of a public debt office. Therelated issue is the nature of relationship between the separated debt office and institution ofPDs. Finally, the nature of relations, if any, between RBI and PDs under the changed scenarioneeds to be examined.Sixth, in the money market, the medium-term objective at present is to make the call/termmoney market purely inter-bank market for banks, while non-bank participants, who are notsubject to reserve requirements, can have free access to other money market instruments andoperate through repos in a variety of instruments. The completion of documentation and certainother operational details with regard to repos is critical to keep up with announced time schedule.In the context of LAF, there is a suggestion that we introduce a fourteen-day repo andreverse repo alongside the current daily operations. Whether such 14-day operations should beundertaken at all, and if so, what is the opportune time? Further, should such operations be as atemporary measure when needed or on a regular basis. The RBI would appreciate your views inthis regard.Introduction of the LAF has been one of the most important changes in the money marketin recent times. It has rendered the necessary flexibility to the RBI to operate on liquidity as wellas signal interest rates in the short-term money market. The LAF operations combined withstrategic open market operations consistent with market liquidity conditions have evolved as theprincipal operating procedure of monetary policy of the Reserve Bank. A market for interest rateswaps and Forward Rate Agreements already exists, although they are not very deep. Theabsence of a benchmark in terms of inter-bank term money market has been a shortcoming in theIndian market. A number of measures have been taken over the years, including greater interestrate flexibility to banks, exemption of inter-bank deposits from CRR requirements, reduction inminimum maturity of deposits, phasing out of non-bank participants from the call money market,etc.With the stabilisation of the full-fledged LAF and the termination of segmented refinanceat pre-determined interest rates, the RBI would have greater control over liquidity to move asappropriate interest rates in the short-term within a narrow band, thereby contributing to stableconditions. The Bank Rate would continue as a signalling and reference rate. This could pave theway for banks to take slightly longer positions than overnight and create a robust inter-bank termmoney market. It is necessary for the market participants and analysts to recognise the changingrole of Bank Rate since it has been reactivated about five years ago.5Private Placement in Debt MarketsThe issue of private placement of debt has recently been engaging the attention ofGovernment of India and Reserve Bank. In fact, Company Law amendments seek to partiallyremedy the observed shortcomings by restricting the number of subscribers. The issue, however,has to be approached with greater care not only in view of growing size and possible non-tradeability of some components but also the inadequate attention to end-use of funds, includingfunds raised by public enterprises, often guaranteed by Government. As a consequence, there areimplications for the health of financial sector as a whole and banking sector, in particular.The RBI Annual Report of 1998-99, had recommended regulation of the privateplacement market in view of the potential systemic risks involved. It suggested disclosure of allrelevant information in privately placed issues and the need to restrict an issue to a limitednumber of subscribers.While reviewing the private placement market, the RBI’s Technical Paper on theRegulation of Debt Markets (2000) recognised the regulatory gaps in the market, andrecommended that for any privately placed issue of debt, where the intention is that it willeventually be listed, the norm for public issues or a simpler version thereof may be followed. Forany other issues through private placement, the security will have to be treated as loan andprudential regulations for loans should be applicable for financial institutions.In June 2001, the RBI after extensive in-house analysis and widespread consultations,issued guidelines to banks on non-SLR investments covering prudential limits on investmentsincluding cap on private placement, credit risk analysis of investment proposals, internal ratingof unrated issues. The banks were also asked to diversify unrated privately placed bonds as riskmanagement measure, stemming from the concern of deficiencies in the appraisal of privatelyplaced debt due to absence of mandated disclosures. With encouragement from RBI, FIMMDAhas commenced announcing bond valuation effective March 31, 2001, which has an inbuiltdisincentive for unrated bonds.Inspite of these measures, a number of concerns relating to the private placement marketstill exist, and a regulatory review of bank’s participation in private placement has becomenecessary in view of the systemic implications of the private placements. Out of the non-SLRinvestment, it is estimated that close to half is invested in the private placement market. A majorconcern relates to the liquidity of such instruments as most of the instruments are not listed oreven quoted in the OTC market and banks do not have exit route. A core issue relates to non-performing assets arising out of the privately placed issues. More information, therefore, needs tobe obtained by banks/FIs regarding the exposure of companies raising funds through the privateplacement market as also the utilisation of funds and the NPAs on such investments. There is aview that compulsory listing may not be a feasible option, in view of operational constraints andalso due to the fact that the issuer has very little incentive to list them, particularly for the bondsof shorter maturity. It was also felt that such compulsory listing would adversely affect the smalland medium sectors’ access to funds through the private placement market.The RBI is currently devoting special attention to this issue and comprehensiveguidelines are being considered to enable greater monitoring of this market and infusingtransparency in transactions. PDs/banks/FIs/issuers and investors are urged to forward theirsuggestions to the RBI as soon as possible.State Governments Market Borrowings : Status and Issues6There have been significant developments in the management of borrowings of StateGovernments, consistent with the objective of healthy development of debt markets in general. Itis necessary to trace the background and recent initiatives to flag the emerging issues.The market borrowing programme of the State Governments is finalised by Governmentof India and Planning Commission, keeping in view Article 293(3) of the Constitution of India,whereby a State may not without the consent of the Government of India raise any loan if there isstill any loan outstanding to the Government of India. Before the beginning of the fiscal year, thefeasible levels of the market borrowing for Centre and States (including those under guaranteedbonds) together is advised to the Government by RBI. The feasible market borrowingprogramme as projected by RBI is taken into account by Government of India before finalisingthe borrowing programme for the next fiscal. As regards States, the programme is finalised byGovernment of India, Ministry of Finance in consultation with Planning Commission. The State-wise allocation of borrowings in respect of a particular fiscal year is conveyed to RBI for theconduct of borrowing programme. RBI does not invest in State Government loans either inprimary issues or in the secondary market.The normal procedure that was being followed until the first half of the ‘nineties was thatthe RBI would complete the combined borrowing of all States in one or two tranches at apredetermined coupon. After announcement of the loan, the RBI would write to banks indicatingtheir expected contribution, mainly based on the share of deposits, with a request to invest in theState Government bonds. Thus, high statutory preemptions in the form of SLR and the tie-up ofthe loans by the RBI ensured a captive market in banks for these bonds and the successfulcompletion of the borrowing programme.With the substantial increase in the market borrowing programme of the CentralGovernment, progressive reduction in SLR, increasing sophistication of debt markets offeringdiversified portfolio choices to banks, marked to market valuation norms, changes in riskweighted capital and the deteriorating financial position of States, it was becoming increasinglydifficult to complete the market borrowings through the tranche system of preannounced coupon.In order to reflect these new realities including the market perception of the status ofState Governments, in 1997 the coupon rate for all the borrowing programme for all States wasfixed broadly on the basis of a 25 basis points mark-up over the yield rate of ten-year stock ofCentral government.Apart from the fact that banks showed increasing reluctance to voluntarily invest in StateGovernment paper, the market had started discriminating among States in terms of theirperceived strengths and weaknesses. In order to enable well managed States to take advantage ofmarket conditions and raise loans at finer rates and at the same time protect the interest of thesmaller States, it was decided to introduce some flexibility in their market borrowings on anoptional basis replacing the totally pre-announced coupon approach.Based on the consensus in the meeting of the Finance Secretaries held in RBI onNovember 8, 1997, an option is available to the State Governments to enter the market through aflexible approach on their own to the extent of 5 to 35 per cent of their gross borrowings. Thetiming and volume of issues for auction are decided by RBI, taking into account the market andliquidity conditions and in consultation with State Governments.The auction system was experimental from the year 1998-99 with one State entering themarket through auction system in January 1999, two State Governments entering the marketduring 1999-00 and six State Governments entering the market in 2000-01. The experience hasbeen that States that have taken the auction route have generally been able to attract borrowings7at a rate lower than the tranche rate which implies a spread lower than the usual spread of 25basis points above ten-year Central Government yield.The recent experience of the subscription to the State loans, after the introduction ofauction, reveals that despite a 25 basis points differential over Central Government 10-yearyields and the State Governments’ canvassing with the banks to ensure full subscription to theamounts notified, there are cases of some under subscription for a few States. Of late, the undersubscription for some States has become repetitive, particularly in respect of States that are notprompt in honouring guarantees issued by them in respect of their enterprises. The initialundersubscription may not be noticed since the RBI has generally been successful in persuadingthe banks and other financial institutions to do the filling of gaps in subscription, but the processis found to be difficult to operate as the gaps tend to increase. In fact, the RBI in its MonetaryPolicy Statement of April 2001 had explicitly indicated that the borrowing programme in respectof some States has come under stress.The emergence of under subscription could lead to a serious reputational risk of the undersubscribed State Governments, and thus put severe pressure on the successful completion ofmarket borrowing programme through conventional floatation. There are risks inherent in allforms of raising funds, which emanate not merely from the fundamental financial situation ofStates but also the method of raising funds. First, under the pre-announced fixed coupon withnotified amount, the subscription received in respect of fixed coupon method depends on theextent to which banks and financial institutions are prepared to invest in concerned StateGovernment bonds at the yield offered. There is a downside risk of subscription not beingreceived to the extent of the amount notified. Second, under the auction method with notifiedamount, the rate at which the State is able to raise full subscription would depend on the rates ofinterest at which banks and financial institutions are prepared to invest in the concerned StateGovernments bonds. There is a downside risk of higher interest rates for filling the notifiedamount and possible risk of sufficient bids (even to the extent of notified amount) not beingreceived. Third, under the tap issue without notified amount, the amount received depends on thecoupon offered, market conditions and the interest shown by banks and financial institutions.There is a downside risk that the amount subscribed may fall short of expectations.The issue was discussed again in the Eighth Conference of State Finance Secretaries onMay 21, 2001. In this meeting, considering the risks in various methods of raising funds, it wasdecided to extensively adopt borrowings by tap issuances without announcing the notifiedamount, so as to avoid the embarrassment of any under subscription. In fact, in the samemeeting, PDs were also invited to discuss with State Finance Secretaries and explore thepossibility of raising borrowings through a process of book building.It may be noted that the market borrowing is only one component accounting for 12.4 percent of the capital receipts of State in 2000-01. The amount mobilised in the form of smallsavings from the public in competing instruments and at high effective interest rates outside themarket borrowing programme constituted about 32 per cent. It is, therefore, conceivable that infuture, a higher proportion of the debt of State Governments will be raised through themechanism of market borrowings as compared to small savings instruments. Thus, it is possibleto visualise a larger market-borrowing programme of State Governments, which will haveimplications for the development of debt markets as also the role of PDs. I would urge upon thePDs to take a more proactive role and guide State Governments in investment opportunities andtreasury management.8In any case, over a period of time, it may be necessary for all State Governments to moveover to a totally flexible approach to market borrowing in terms of method, timing andmaturities, particularly in the context of reduction in SLR of banks and the overall reforms takingplace in the financial sector and in particular financial markets.Non-transparency in State Borrowings and Bank FinancingDuring the last few years, the debt securities issuance sponsored by State Governmentsoutside the market-borrowing programme has been on the rise. It may be recalled that marketborrowing allocations to Government enterprises excepting State Finance Corporations havebeen discontinued since 1994-95. Public Sector Enterprises, particularly State LevelUndertakings backed by Government guarantee outside the market borrowing programme aremajor issuers of debt, mostly by way of private placement.Many public sector enterprises both Central as also State, like Power FinanceCorporation, Rural Electrification Corporation, Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd., StateElectricity Boards, etc., issue bonds with guarantee of Central/State Governments that areoutside the Market Borrowing Programme (MBP) for which approval from RBI is notapplicable. In view of the security of the Government guarantee, the limitations/prescriptionsapplicable to unsecured bond issues, which are treated as public deposits under the PublicDeposit Directions are not applicable to such issues, and, therefore, issuance is fast and easy.They also carry higher rates than the coupon rates under market borrowings, resulting insubstantial distortion in the market yields.The RBI has been receiving complaints from the banks and financial institutions ofdelay/defaults by the States/State bodies regarding their obligations for payment ofinterest/maturity proceeds. The adverse effect of non-honouring of guarantees on borrowing byState Enterprises was recently discussed in the Eighth Conference of State Finance Secretaries inMay 2001. It was revealed that often, guarantee was given only because financial institutionsinvesting in these bonds insisted upon it. In the cases of some financial institutions, guaranteeswere mandatory for investment.It needs to be understood that guarantees should not substitute credit appraisal. TheTechnical Committee of Finance Secretaries on State Government Guarantees, while exhortingthe States for prudent financial management and preserving the credibility of the guaranteesissued, suggested certain measures such as – the States should adopt selectivity in givingguarantees, institute limits/ceilings on guarantees and set up Guarantees Redemption Fund.While some States have taken the initiative and put in place some of the recommendations in thisregard, not all the States have done so.It is essential that the practice of routinely seeking guarantees particularly by CentralGovernment owned institutions be given up and where seeking such guarantee is mandatory,laws be amended urgently.There is another disturbing tendency of diverting the funds raised by public enterprisesostensibly for commercially oriented purposes to support budget operations of the Governmentconcerned. Such diversions lead to erosion of fiscal transparency, but more important, constitutediversion of bank funds raised through private placement for Governments’ budgetaryexpenditures. In this process, the only backing for such assets of the financial system is theguarantee of Central or State Governments. These operations, as they grow in size, distort boththe fiscal and financial systems of the economy and give rise to potential for vulnerability.9Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance may be approving proposals for theStates facilitating them to raise funds from the market through Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs).These SPVs consequently seem to issue bonds with guarantee by the concerned StateGovernment. It has also been reported that there have been instances where the StateGovernments have been allowed to resort to such method for specific Plan projects also,presumably with the approval of Planning Commission. The bonds issued by these entities withthe guarantee of the State Governments are mostly unrated and are privately placed. A StateGovernment had also sought direct debit permission from RBI on one such instance. Suchpractices tend to not only dilute the monetary management by RBI, but when carried too far,could undermine the macro-economic stability, introduce non-transparent fiscal burden on StateGovernments well beyond the sustainable level, and impart ill-defined quality to assets of thebanking system.Lending institutions are sanctioning such accommodation with minimum credit appraisalas regards the commercial viability and bankability of the project, substituting it by the guaranteeof the Government. In respect of State-level SPVs, it is reported that in a few cases, the bondsare neither serviced by the issuing entity nor honoured by the concerned State Government whenthe guarantee was invoked. If it is to be repaid out of budgetary funds, then the appraisal goesbeyond the project and into the realm of assessing the viability of the State finances. There is adanger that these bonds and loans could turn non-performing if the fiscal burden of theguarantees increase to such an extent that there will be large scale default. States, in such cases,face serious reputational risk and the risk of their market-borrowing programme not goingthrough, despite the efforts of RBI. It can be argued that the moral risk extends on to the RBI astheir debt manager.The RBI has issued explicit guidelines that in respect of projects by Public SectorUndertakings (PSUs), term loans may be sanctioned only for corporate entities. Further, the termloans should not be in lieu of or to substitute budgetary resources envisaged in the project. Theterm loan could supplement budgetary resources to the PSU if such supplementing wascontemplated in the project design. The intention clearly is to enable bank financing ofcommercially viable projects undertaken by public enterprises as a supplement to Governmentfinancing of such commercially viable projects. Certainly, the intention is not to enable bankfinancing of Governments budgets through public enterprises.RBI is sensitising the banks that for guaranteed loans, the prime factor should be thecredit assessment of the commercial viability of the project and that they should not merely askfor rating by the rating agencies but also ensure that the funds have been utilised for the purposefor which they have been raised.The issue of Automatic Debit Mechanism has been discussed at length in the Report ofthe Technical Committee on State Government Guarantees in February 1999. It was specificallymentioned that automatic debit mechanism runs the risk of insufficiency of funds relative to suchpre-emption and minimum obligatory payments such as salaries, pensions, amortisation andinterest payments. Reservations have also been expressed about such arrangements on othergrounds as well. Debit amounting to incurring of expenditure has to be authorised by Statelegislature in its budget and automatic debits being open-ended or uncertain may be outside thespecifically authorised expenditure. Recourse to automatic debit mechanisms should, therefore,be subjected to great circumspection.The issue of automatic debit mechanism in respect of loans guaranteed by StateGovernments was also discussed in the Conference of State Finance Secretaries held on10November 15, 1999. It was then, felt that such mechanism eroded the credibility of theGovernment concerned and should not be encouraged either by Ministry of Finance,Government of India, or by the RBI.There is another and more serious problem with issue of automatic debit mechanism,apart from the legal validity and moral basis of authorising open ended expenditures by theexecutive in the absence of specific legislative sanction. That issue relates to the automatic debitmechanism becoming a substitute for State Governments guarantees, thus undermining theceilings on guarantees imposed by the legislature.In case where such debit mechanism is offered in addition to formal guarantees, it erodesthe confidence in all formal guarantees of such a Government.In brief, State finances are under stress and hence recourse is being taken to extraordinarymeans of funding budget operations of non-commercial nature with bank finance. Such fundingis not only outside approved market borrowing programme, but is often outside formalguarantees. When automatic debit mechanism is superimposed on such a situation, there couldbe significant, open-ended, mutually reinforcing vulnerability of both fiscal and financial sector.Mechanisms to tackle the fiscal stress of both Centre and States should be devised urgently, andwhenever the non-transparent practices are noticed , they should be given up forthwith, forhealthy development of debt markets, and overall macro-economic stability.Under the circumstances, it may be necessary for the RBI to consider issuing guidelinesto banks to closely monitor end-use of funds available to Central and State level enterprises toensure that these are not diverted from commercial operations to provide direct or indirectsupport to State and Central Governments budgets. It would also be necessary to reiterate theneed for ensuring commercial viability of bank funding of operations irrespective of guaranteesand automatic debit mechanism. It may be desirable to advice banks and financial institutions todispense with the practice of seeking automatic debit mechanism. It is also essential for them toeschew any indirect support to budgetary operations of Governments through public enterprises.To the extent such streamlining of procedures results in more market borrowings in a transparentmanner, it would be appropriate to take recourse to such necessary borrowings in lieu of non-transparent and open-ended support to budgetary operations from the financial system.? Inaugural Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Seminar on The Future ofGovernment Securities Market in India organized by Primary Dealers Association of India, at Bangalore onSeptember 22, 2001. Dr.Reddy is thankful to Dr.A.Prasad for his valuable assistance.11
