India and GlobalisationThis is a truly momentous occasion in the life of this Institute, itsstudents, its teachers, and its friends. Let me begin by conveying my heartiestcongratulations to the students who are receiving their degrees today. For allof them, it is a culmination of years of hard work, and a recognition of theirhigh academic merit.All the teachers of this great Institute, who have put in so much timeand effort to make this day possible, also deserve our gratitude.I would like to specially welcome the parents of the students, who arepresent at this Convocation. Without some sacrifice and a good deal ofsupport, successful completion of higher studies by young men and women,who are here today, would not have been possible.I am personally grateful to the President of the Indian StatisticalInstitute, Prof. M.G.K.Menon and Director, Prof. K.B.Sinha, for inviting meto be a part of this occasion. A scientist, a scholar and a public figure, Prof.Menon has led this Institute with great distinction. He has been a source ofinspiration for all those connected with ISI and its teachers and students. It isa particular privilege and honour to deliver this address in his esteemedpresence.On this important occasion, I would also like to pay homage to thememory of Professor P.C.Mahalanobis, founder of the ISI and the builder ofthe modern statistical system in India. His technical contribution to thedevelopment of statistics as a science are fundamental and well known allover the world. What was even more remarkable, in a developing countrycontext, was his desire to use statistical methods including sample surveys tounderstand and solve the problems of an underdeveloped economy, includinglow productivity agriculture.The high quality, the depth, and the breadth of research and teaching instatistics and other inter-related subjects at this Institute are tributes to thevision of Prof. Mahalanobis and his confidence in our country’s future.While I am thankful for being here on this occasion, I am also a little daunted bythe task of having to say something useful which may be of interest to this variedaudience from so many different walks of life. After some reflection, I have chosen tospeak to you on “India and Globalisation”, or how we in India should look at the processof so-called “globalisation” that the world has been passing through in recent years. I hadan occasion to speak on this subject at Mumbai University Convocation a couple ofweeks ago. This is a matter of considerable contemporary debate, and I thought somereflection on this may also be of interest here in Kolkata.There is a debate not only in India but all over the globe about the prosand cons of “globalisation”. There is hardly any important global meetingwhich does not witness vigorous protest marches or picketing by theopponents of the globalisation process.Equally, on the opposite side, there are those who regard it as panaceafor all the world’s problems and key to unmixed prosperity and well being forall the countries and all the people. If you take a poll in any assembly,including I am sure this one, you will find some are strongly for and some arestrongly against globalisation.To my mind, neither view – for or against – is correct. The onlyrational view is to accept it as an emerging and powerful global reality whichhas a momentum of its own. Our job as an independent nation / state is toensure that we maximise the advantage for our country and minimise therisks. It has both pluses and minuses like any other major global economicthchange – say, the industrial revolution of the 18 century. Some countriesgained, some lost – partly because of the then prevailing politicalcircumstances. India, for example, lost because of colonialism andfragmented nature of our polity. U.K., Europe, U.S. – and later Japanprospered. Same is the case with globalisation. One big difference, however,is that unlike the olden days, today our destiny is in our own hands.Before we look at our opportunities and challenges from globalisation,it is good to be certain of facts – where exactly India is in terms ofglobalisation. If we look at some of our own debate, it would seem as if wewere already well on the way to globalisation, which was shaking up oureconomy. A most common measure of globalisation is openness to trade anda country’s participation in trade. By this measure, the extent of India’sglobalisation is insignificant – it is one of the lowest in the world. India’sshare in world trade is a meagre 0.7 per cent or so. If a map of the worldwere drawn on the scale of a country’s participation in trade, India with apopulation of more than 1,000 million will occupy a smaller area thanSingapore with a population of only 3 million. You would need a magnifyingglass to locate India on that map!A second commonly used measure of globalisation is a country’sparticipation in international capital flows, particularly Foreign DirectInvestment (FDI). As you know, annual flow of FDI across the globe is morethan $ 1 trillion, i.e., $ 1,000 billion. Annual FDI inflows into India is $ 3 – 4billion only or 0.3 – 0.4 per cent of the total – that is all. Same is true ofForeign Institutional Investment (FII).Therefore, the first point that I would like to emphasise is that despite all the talk,we are nowhere even close to being globalised in terms of any commonly used indicatorof globalisation. In fact, we are still one of the least globalised among major countries –however we look at it.An equally important point is that whether the so-called globalisationis considered to be good or bad for a country depends crucially on the sensein which the word is used. The word may be used in a purely descriptivesense to describe a “shrinkage” of distance among nation states due totechnological changes in transport and communication and closer integrationof product and financial markets across the world.Another sense in which the word may be used is the effect of suchchanges on different countries or groups of countries, such as, developed anddeveloping. In yet another sense, the word may also represent a“globalisation of ideas or ideology” and may be used as a synonym fortriumph of capitalism or dominance of unfettered markets.In discussing the issue of globalisation in the Indian context, I proposeto confine myself largely to the factual and descriptive sense in which theword is used, i.e. the technological changes, and associated policy changes,that have brought the world economies closer and made them more integratedwith each other.In this particular sense, I believe that the changes that have occurred inthe patterns of trade and capital flows in recent years are to India’s advantage– although, unfortunately, so far we have not made much use of it. Today, interms of the potential benefits of globalisation, India is in a very differentposition than would have been the case 50 or even 20 years ago.This is because the sources of what economists call “comparativeadvantage” have changed dramatically in India’s favour in the 1990s becauseof the technological revolution. In the old days, comparative advantage waslargely determined by “factor endowments”, i.e. land, labour and capital.Geographical location and early starts in industry also conferred greateradvantages.Thus, at one time, a country’s trade pattern, was determined by itsnatural resources and the productivity of its land. Leaving aside political andinstitutional factors, a country’s level of income was also largely determinedby the global demand for its natural resources and its relative efficiency inexploiting them. The importance of land as a source of comparativeadvantage, however, changed dramatically after the industrial revolution.Today, it is almost insignificant. Thus, except for the United States, countriesaccounting for a predominant share of the world GDP have a relatively smallshare of global land area.After the industrial revolution, the availability of “capital” orinvestible resources became the most dominant source of comparativeadvantage. At this Institute, established by the great Prof. P.C.Mahalonobis, Ihardly need to elaborate on the importance that was attached to domesticcapital accumulation in early development economics. In fact, scarcity ofcapital and low domestic savings were considered to be, and rightly so, asprincipal causes of a country’s underdevelopment.Today, availability of capital and productivity are still crucial indetermining a country’s growth rate. However, there has been a dramaticchange in the global mobility of capital, and national boundaries are nolonger important determinants of sources and uses of capital. A dramaticillustration of this is the fact that the most developed country in the world,which enjoyed unprecedented growth during the 1990s, is actually a capital-importing country, i.e. the United States. Similarly, the fastest growingdeveloping country, i.e. China, is one of the largest recipients of capital fromoutside.Similary, labour is no longer an important element in cost ofproduction and in determining a country’s comparative advantage. In mostthmanufacturing industries in the world, it is no higher than 1/8 of totalcosts. In India, it may be somewhat higher because of our domestic laws, butthe important fact to note is that India no longer needs to specialise only inthe production of labour-intensive plantation crops or primary commodities.A related development which is linked to the above changes, is the“Services Revolution”. The focus of attention in conventional economics,was on production of goods – manufactured products and agriculturalcommodities. It was, of course, recognised that the services sector (whichincludes transport, communication, trade, banking, construction and publicadministration, etc.) was an important source of income and employment inmost economies. However, overall, the growth of services was perceived atbest as a by-product of developments in the primary and secondary sectors,and at worst as a drag on the prospects for long-term economic growth.In the last few years, there has been a phenomenal change in theconventional view of services and their role in the economy. This change hasbeen facilitated by unprecedented and unforeseen advances in computer andcommunication technology. As a result, the development of certain servicesis now regarded as one of the preconditions of economic growth, and not asone of its consequences.The boundary between goods and services is also disappearing. Manyindustrial products are not only manufactured, but they are also researched,designed, marketed, advertised, distributed, leased and serviced.An important aspect of the “services revolution” is that geography andlevels of industrialisation are no longer the primary determinants of thelocation of facilities for production of services. As a result, the traditionalrole of developing countries is also changing – from mere recipients toimportant providers of long-distance and high value services.From India’s point of view, these developments provide opportunitiesfor substantial growth. For example:? The fastest growing segment of services is the rapid expansion ofknowledge-based services, such as, professional and technical services.India has a tremendous advantage in the supply of such services becauseof a developed structure of technological and educational institutions,such as this one, and lower labour costs.? Unlike most other prices, world prices of transport and communicationservices have fallen dramatically. By 1960, sea transport costs were lessthan a third of their 1920 level, and they have continued to fall. The costof a telephone call fell more than ten-fold between 1970 and 2000.Moreover, the cost of communication is also becoming independent ofdistance. The most dramatic example in this area is, of course, providedby the “Internet”. India’s geographical distance from several importantindustrial markets (for instance, North America) is no longer an importantelement in the cost structure of skill-based services.? It is now feasible to “unbundle” production of different types of goodsand services. India does not necessarily have to be a low-cost producer ofcertain types of goods (e.g., computers or discs) before it can become anefficient supplier of services embodied in them (e.g., software or music).At the same time, it must be recognised that the “death of distance” andthe growing integration of global product, services and financial markets inrecent years have also presented new challenges for management of thenational economy – not only in India but all over the world. The trendtowards integration of markets, particularly financial markets, is by no meansan unmixed blessing. Unlike the old days, a heavy price may have to be paidby national economies for somnolence, sloth and non-conformity to generallyaccepted international norms and standards of macro-economic management,disclosure, transparency and financial accountability.Another consequence of recent global trends is the greater vulnerabilityof national economies to developments outside their own borders. A crisis inany one or a group of countries, can be transmitted to other countries –including countries which may not have any strong economic linkages withcrisis-affected countries. Thus, the ’nineties have been marked by a largenumber of currency crises (for example, in Mexico, Russia, East Asia andBrazil – and currently Argentina and Turkey); substantial swings in exchangerates (including the exchange rate of three leading currencies – the dollar, theEuro and the Yen); and run ups in asset prices followed by sharp collapse(for example in Japan and East Asia earlier and the United States last year).While the crises initially occur in one or two specific countries, their adverseeffects are felt across the world.While we must be careful, on the whole, in my view, – the death ofdistance, the services revolution, and the mobility of capital – whichcharacterise globalisation – present unprecedented opportunities for India.The primary source of comparative advantages today are : skills and abilityto adapt and change. And, India has the advantage – of skills, ofentrepreneurship and of managerial competence in taking advantage of thesechanges.If what I have said is correct, then, why are we not jumping with joyand optimism? Why are we so “unglobalised” in terms of our share in trade,investment or communication?Transition from a closed to a vibrant, open and a more globallydominant economy will certainly take time and will not be painless.As of now, we also have much greater tolerance for waste, non-workand survival of the inefficient, and the self-seeking than other fast growingcountries. Somehow to make this transition – from a less productive and lesschallenging economy to a more work-oriented and competitive economy – isthe real challenge of globalisation.If we continue in our old ways, I see real social problems andinequalities emerging in our society. We will have islands of prosperity andexcellence – IT, beauty parades and media entertainment amidst growingdisparity, rising unemployment and immiserisation. And as has happened inseveral countries in the 1990s, including Turkey and Argentina - just now,those who are with us today will be the first to leave.The principal lesson of recent economic and technologicaldevelopments, and growing tensions and inequalities within and acrosscountries, is that our fate is in our hands. Our public policies have to respondto our own requirements rather than to any fixed global ideology or a pre-determined and internationally prescribed model of economic progress. In myview, this is the real lesson of the 1990s.My fervent hope is that as you – the best and the brightest of ourcountry – go out and face a “globalising” world, you will keep India’sinterest, its integrity, its indivisibility and its future potential close to yourhearts and your minds. I have no doubt that, with your help, India of 2025will be a very different place, and a much more dominant force in the worldeconomy, than was the case twenty five years ago or at the beginning of thenew millennium.Thank you.
