March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Finance for Industrial Growth*RAKESH MOHANIt is indeed a privilege and an honour whom the lecture is named. The theme offor me to deliver the Mohan today's lecture is to examine the adequacy ofKumaramangalam Memorial Lecture here at finance for growth in the Indian context with athe Administrative Staff College of India. special focus on industry.Mohan Kumaramangalam was one of theI. Introductionmost distinguished public servants of hisFinance is a crucial ingredient forgeneration. His untimely and unfortunateeconomic growth. In this lecture, I proposedeath in a plane crash in 1973 deprived Indiato examine the adequacy of the availabilityof a worthy son. A leftist in his student daysof finance for fuelling growth in the latein England, Mohan Kumaramangalam was a1990s, a period during which Indianleading light of Mrs. Gandhi's cabinet. Hiseconomic growth has tended to slow down,enduring contribution was to create theparticularly in the industrial sector. Althoughconcept of a holding company of allied publicI am concerned with overall economicsector units, with a degree of autonomy fromgrowth, my focus in this lecture is on thethe red tape of direct government control. Itfinancing of industrial growth.is entirely appropriate that the Steel Authorityof India, which was his brainchild as ministerThe way we think about the modes offor steel, has instituted this lecture in hisfinancing industrial development has beenmemory. Whereas it is primarily my current changing over the years (Levine, 1997). Theinterest that prompted me to choose theinitial literature focused on the need totheme of today's lecture, "Finance fordevelop extensive financial systems that couldIndustrial Growth", I would imagine that this tap savings and then channelise the funds sotheme would have been close to his heart.generated to a wide spectrum of industrialactivities. It has been realised gradually thatIt is, of course, risky to talk on this subjectthe mode of provision of industrial finance isin front of Mr. Narasimham, Chairman of theas important for fostering industrial growth asAdministrative Staff College of India, who hasis the quantum of funds. Cross-countrybeen a former Governor of the Reserve Bankexperience suggests that economies thatand also author of the most influential reportshave mature financial systems for allocatingon the financial sector. So my talk today isfunds efficiently among competing uses tendreally about marrying the interest of today'sto grow faster. Well-functioning banks,Chairman and Mr. Kumaramangalam afterDr. Rakesh Mohan is Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India. He is grateful to Partha Ray, Indranil Sen Gupta*and A. Prasad of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance.319March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004financial institutions and other financial In this background, I propose to examineintermediaries such as venture capital funds if financing is now forming a constraint in thepromote technological innovation and growth process. To do this, I will first reviewindustrial growth by providing risk capital and the alternative approaches to financingfunds to those entrepreneurs who have the patterns as they exist in different countries andhighest probability of developing new as they have evolved. I will then trace ourproducts, production processes and own history and briefly review reforms in thecompetitive production facilities. The Indian financial sector in India. I will, thereafter,financial sector reforms of the 1990s, largely examine the performance of banks andguided by the two excellent reports authored financial institutions in recent periods. It is inby Mr. Narasimham (1992, 1998), have been this context that I propose to look into howdesigned to adapt the Indian financial system the major contours of the financing pattern ofto the new realities of an open competitive Indian industries have changed over time.economy in a globalising world. What are the key stylised facts of thefinancing of Indian industries? What has beenThe key objective of India's economicthe nature and dimension of changes thatreforms initiated in the early 1990s was tohave occurred in the financing pattern in theaccelerate growth. The reform process of therecent period? Has Indian industry been1990s did help to accelerate overall economiccredit-starved? Have the financialgrowth over that of the 1980s, but onlyintermediaries done their task? I will finally putmarginally (RBI, 2003). Real gross domesticforward some ideas for discussion for furtherproduct (GDP) grew at 5.9 per cent duringimprovement of the financing system.the reform period (1992-93 to 2002-03),higher than that of 5.6 per cent in the pre- The rest of the lecture is formallyreform period (1981-82 to 1990-91) (Table 1). structured as follows. As a perspective,Growth in both industry and agriculture has Section II takes a look into the framework ofbeen slow after the initial burst in the 1990s, corporate financing in India. Sections III andalthough growth in the tertiary sector has IV delve into the pre-1990s and post-reformaccelerated somewhat (Acharya, 2002). model of industrial finance in India. Section Vis essentially futuristic in nature and discussesTable 1 : Sectoral Growth in the 1980s and 1990sthe options of long-term finance in India.Sector 1981-82 to 1992-93 to 1994-97 1997-20021990-91 2002-03Concluding observations are presented in1 2 3 4 5Section VI.Agriculture andAllied Activity 3.5 3.3 4.6 1.9 II. Framework for Corporate FinancingIndustry 7.9 6.3 10.8 4.0To set the stage, let me start with theManufacturing 7.6 6.7 12.2 3.8basic framework of corporate financing.Services 6.4 7.5 7.9 8.0Corporate entities raise capital from eitherGDP 5.6 5.9 7.5 5.5Source: Central Statistical Organisation a) internal sources, essentially retained320March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004profits, or b) external sources. External funds based, because the lenders are few andare accessed from sources outside the firm large. At the risk of broad generalisation,through the issue of equity capital and debt bank-based systems tend to be stronger ininstruments. Equity capital can be raised from countries where governments have taken athe firm's promoters or the capital market that direct role in industrial development, such astaps institutional investors, mutual funds and Germany, in the 19th century, and Japan, Eastretail investors. Debt can be raised through Asia, South-East Asia, China and India, in thethfloatation of corporate bonds or borrowing 20 century.from banks and non-bank financialThe basic point of partition between theintermediaries. An important aspect of thetwo systems is that in the one case, corporategrowth process that has been widelyentities interact with the intermediary, say adiscussed in recent times is the type of the'bank', whereas in the other, they directlyfinancial system that is most conductive toapproach the "public" for finance. Thisgrowth. Seen from this standpoint, most of thedistinction between a 'bank-based' and asystems of industrial finance in developed'market-based' system is not a water-tightcountries can be grouped into two clearcompartment; on the contrary, it has becomesystems. At one end is the Anglo-Americanblurred in recent years with themodel of market-based finance where financialinstitutionalisation of the sources of financemarkets play an important role and the roleall over the world. The blurring of theof the banking industry is much lessdistinction has emanated from the gradualemphasised. At the other extreme is thespread of universal banking, spanning theContinental/Japanese model of bank-basedentire range of financial services acrossfinance, in which savings flow to theircommercial banking, insurance and securitiesproductive uses predominantly through(investment as well as underwriting). This hasfinancial intermediaries such as banks andbeen fortified by the emergence of institutionalother financial institutions, and the capitalinvestors, in the capital market, includingmarket is less important for the raising ofmutual funds, which, for example, have anfunds.asset base of as much as 70 per cent of GDPMost of the industrial financing systemsin the US.have evolved endogenously from their ownThere are also historical reasons for thisparticular circumstances of economic historyemerging convergence. A number of- and have their own success story to tell orcountries, including the USA segregatedotherwise. The market-based system isbanking and securities trading in their financialrelatively impersonal because the sources oflicensing laws as it was believed that directfunds could actually be atomistic householdcommercial bank involvement in corporatesavers, directly or indirectly through mutualsecurities would involve significant conflicts offunds, pension funds or insurance funds. Theinterest. It was only recently that the USbank-based systems are more relationship-321March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Financial Services Modernisation Act of 1999 Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (2000) forrepealed the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, details] outstripping bank credit offtake. Equitywhich had prohibited commercial banks from markets, especially in the G-4 markets andunderwriting, holding or dealing in corporate the East Asian tigers, also grew explosively -securities, whether directly or through although much slower than that of the bondsecurities affiliates. A number of emerging market. Corporate bond markets remainmarket economies, such as Argentina (1991), underdeveloped in most emerging marketsChile (1997-98), Indonesia (1995) and since they are more difficult to develop thanMalaysia (1991) have also recently liberalised equity markets.restrictions governing banks' exposures to theIII. The Pre-Reform Model of Industrialcapital markets.Finance in IndiaBeyond the partition based on riskHow did India fare in the domain ofcharacteristics, it will be recognised that theindustrial finance? The Indian economy, likeneed for diversification of the financialmost of the former colonial economies,structure is also driven by the demand foradopted a path of planned development afterfunds of different tenors. Banks, for example,Independence. This was, in a sense, dictatedare a natural source of working capitalby the compulsions of contemporary politicalbecause their resource base essentiallyeconomy. While there was a wide consensusemanates from the economy's transactionthat economic growth could only spring fromprocesses, and the funds available with themlarge-scale industrialisation, in consonanceare of a short-term nature. Bond markets arewith the contemporary big-push theories ofrelatively more flexible because they caneconomic development, it was thought thatmediate both the short-term corporate fundsfirms lacked the resources to finance suchas well as long-term household saving.rapid growth. The strong preference for self-However, in the absence of developed capitalreliant growth in view of the mercantilist rootsmarkets, there arises a need for specialisedof colonialism, reinforced by faith in the nationfinancial institutions - the so-called- building capacity of the polity shaped by thedevelopment financial institutions - whichsuccessful freedom movement - led to a state-provide project finance.led development strategy during the 1950s.The process of corporate financing is This preference was also reinforced by thechanging all over the world. There has been, perceived success of the State led Russianfor example, a sharp jump in market-based model, that was so visible in the immediatefinancing during the 1990s driven by a post-World War II period.combination of financial liberalisation and highThe industrial financing strategy adoptedgrowth. Private bond markets grew especiallyin the 1950s centred around the Governmentrapidly, jumping 500 per cent between 1980-as the primary entrepreneur in the economy.85 and 1992-97 by one estimate, [seeThe state-led development initiatives had two322March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004distinct avenues, viz., a) direct investment to provide a cushion to DFIs byfrom the government budget (such as in case offering guarantees on bonds issuedof irrigation projects, construction of dams, by them along with special access toand railways), b) public enterprises (such as concessional funds from the Reservethe steel plants - "the temples of modern Bank.India") often funded by budgetary provisions,l Corporate entities could supplementand government guaranteed bonds. This wasthese forms of funding by resourcereinforced by the channeling of public savingmobilisation from the capital market,by an elaborate banking network to thebut this also needed government"socially productive" uses by an elaborateapproval within the constraints of themechanism of directed credit programmes andcredit allocation process.concessional interest rates for "priorityA natural corollary of the planningsectors".process was then the conscious adoption ofAs a result, the role of the financiala model of the bank-based mode of financingsystem was restricted to the channelling ofas against a model of market-based financing,resources from the savers to the users in linewhich was adopted in some emergingwith the "socially productive" pattern ofcountries. Although the capital markets inresource allocation, charted by the planningIndia were among the oldest in Asia, the roleprocess. The emphasis, thus, lay in buildingof equity as a mode of financing was nota financial system with a widespread network,considered as important because of thenot only in terms of the geographical spreadlimited attraction that risk capital wasand socio-economic reach but also in theperceived to have for projects with a longfunctional sense, in terms of specialised formsgestation lag.of finance, through developmental financeThere can be little doubt that the basicinstitutions. The resultant financing strategy forobjective of developing an extensive financialindustrialisation, as it then emerged, restednetwork was, by and large, fulfilled by theon four building blocks:early 1990s, especially following the spreadl Banks would provide short-termof the branch bank network following theworking capital, with appropriatebank nationalisations of 1969 and 1980allocations for the priority sector.(Table 2).l Development Finance InstitutionsThe corporate financing strategy, as it(DFIs) would provide medium- toevolved, was, however, inextricably linked tolonger-term funds for the corporatethe fiscal position, because of the assumptionsector.that public investment would eventuallyl Since banks had a readymade access generate surpluses for the social good. Asto cheap resources by way of banking fiscal deficits began to enlarge, the entiretransactions, the Government sought financial system began to be geared to323March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 2 : Progress of Commercial Banking Table 3 : Ownership Pattern of Banks (in 2001)in IndiaCountry Per cent of Total BankAssets Government OwnedIndicator June June March March March1969 1980 1990 2000 2002India 801. Number ofSouth Korea 30ScheduledThailand 31CommercialBanks Indonesia 44of which: 73 148 270 297 293Malaysia 0Regional RuralU.K 0Banks — 73 196 196 196Germany 42Other ScheduledCanada 0Commercial Banks — 75 74 101 97U.S.A 02. Number of BankOffices 8,262 32,419 59,752 67,868 68,195Source : Levine (2001).3. Per CapitaDeposits (Rs.) 88 494 2,098 8,542 11,008Thus, the difficulty was that the Indian4. Per Capitafinancial system, though extensive, wasCredit (Rs.) 68 327 1,275 4,555 5,9275. Population per Bank limited in its ability to allocate resourcesBranch (thousand) 64 21 14 15 15efficiently. A number of structural bottlenecksSource : Statistical Tables Relating to Banks in India, RBI.emerged in the process. First, a combinationfunding the Government's budgetary needs. of an administered interest rate regime andBanks' statutory liquidity ratio, originally adirected credit controls prevented properprudential requirement for solvency, waspricing of resources. Second, most financialsteadily raised to provide a captive market intermediaries remained confined to marketsfor public debt. Although interest rates wererelating to their area of operation becauseinitially kept artificially low, even at the costof balance sheet restrictions, leading toof financial repression, to contain the interest market segmentation. Finally, there was thecost of public debt, the return on governmentproblem of missing markets, especially at thesecurities was steadily raised to enhanceshorter end, with caps even on the inter-banktheir attractiveness to the market. As it got rate. Hence, although the Indian bankingincreasingly difficult to get voluntarysystem has grown tremendously, it has a longsubscriptions even at higher rates of return,way to go. Even relative to other developingthe Government resorted to a large-scale countries, the ratio of bank assets/GDP formonetisation of the fiscal deficit by the end-India continues to be low (Chart 1).1980s. Concomitantly, the Reserve Bank hadThe role of banks as financialto raise reserve requirements in order tointermediaries can, therefore, be expected tocontain the inflationary impact of deficitgrow significantly in the years to come.financing. By the early 1990s, statutory pre-Surprisingly, the population serviced by aemptions of banks amounted to over 60 perbank branch is also much higher in thecent of deposit mobilisation. This processIndian case than in many other countrieswas accentuated by the Government(Chart 2).ownership of banks (Table 3).324March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004It is against this backdrop that financial At the heart of financial reforms lay thesector reforms were initiated in the early need to contain the propensity of the1990s. There was clearly the need to reduce Government to preempt resources fromthe role of Government in the allocation of financial institutions through fiat. The 1990sresources in the economy. As this process saw three fundamental changes in thewould unfold, a competitive environment was relationship between the fisc and the financialsought to be created in the financial sector to system. First, the Government securities marketenhance the allocative efficiency of financial was transformed to a market-determined pricemarkets as a whole. Such financial sector discovery process by switching over to anreforms would then accelerate the overall auction mechanism for sale. This enabled theeconomic growth process. rest of the segments of the financial markets325March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004to price off this market. Second, the reduction IV. Sources of Finance for Indianin the statutory liquidity requirements to the Industries during the 1990sminimum of 25 per cent of demand and timeIt is now instructive to review the financingliabilities freed resources of the banking systempatterns for industry during the 1990s. Thefor credit. However, public sector banksgeneral impression that has gained ground ispresently continue to hold about 40 per centthat bank finance for industry has gone down.SLR bonds voluntarily. Third, the phasing outA closer look at the major sources of industrialof the process of automatic monetisation of thefinance as a proportion of GDP (Table 4) bringsfiscal deficit, rendered a sense of autonomy to out clearly the following stylised facts. First,the Reserve Bank and enabled it to gradually banks have kept up their credit to industry. Notcut reserve requirements to the current level only has there been an increase in theof 4.5 per cent. proportion of conventional credit to GDP, inaddition there has also been resource flow inThe traditional model of industrialthe form of investments in non-SLR instrumentsfinancing thus began to crumble by the mid-- such as commercial paper, corporate bonds1990s. The dismantling of the administeredand equity. Second, financing from FIs tostructure of interest rates allowed the1industry has clearly fallen. The decline hasemergence of market-based interest rates sobeen sharper in recent years because of thethat resources could be allocated by marketconversion of ICICI into a bank as well as thesignals. Besides, the gradual withdrawal ofproblems besetting Industrial Financerestrictions on both the assets and liabilities ofCorporation of India. The key change that tookthe banks and non-bank financial institutionsplace in the late 1990s is the virtual collapse ofenabled them to optimise their portfolios acrossthe capital market as a source of industrialinstruments of varying risk and tenor accordingfinance. Correspondingly, as might be expected,to their commercial judgment, consistent withthe demand for debt from the DFIs also fell,the process of price discovery. Further,which was compensated to a certain extent, byconcessions, such as availability of governmentthe participation of banks in subscribing to bondguarantees and central bank funding forissues and other debt instruments of corporatefinancial institutions, were gradually phased outentities through the private placement route. Thein the process of market integration. By the lateexuberance of investment activity in the mid-1990s, therefore, the Indian financial system was1990s also led to the creation of over capacityenabled to develop in such a way as to competein industry, including some uncompetitivein the increasingly open economy.capacity that led to erosion of profits which, in1In order to obtain DFIs’ support to the industrial sector, estimates of sanctions and disbursements of DFIs, beingin gross terms (i.e., without taking account of the repayments), may have been misleading. Instead, we havetaken the investments and loans and advances of the major DFIs. In particular, in order to arrive at an estimateof DFIs’ support to industrial finance, we have added the following items, viz., investments & credit to industrialconcerns by IDBI, equity investments, debentures & loans and advances of IFCI; investments in bonds & equityand Rupee and foreign currency loans of ICICI, credit by IIBI (since investments are negligible); loans & advancesand investments (including government securities in absence of break-up) of SFCs; and loans & advances toindustrial concerns and commercial investments of SIDBI.326March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 4 : Major Sources of Industrial Financeturn, perhaps explains the poor performance of(as percentage of GDP at current market prices)the stock market during this latter period. WithYear Banksthe recovery of corporate profits in 2002-03 andNon-SLR Capital Totalits continuation in 2003-04, the stock market has Credit Investments DFIs Market1970s 1.8 0.3 0.1 2.2recorded high growth since May 2003. With the1980s 2.7 0.7 0.6 4.0prevailing low interest rates, and a recovery of1990s 2.6 1.0 1.2 4.81992-93 to 1996-97 2.9 1.0 1.9 5.8the stock market, we can now expect some1997-98 to 2001-02 2.7 0.7* 0.6 0.2 4.2increase in industrial investment demand.* Non-substantial prior to mid-1990s.1. Banks' support includes conventional credit in the form of loans andOverall also, non-food credit has increasedadvances and bills rediscounted.2. Capital market support to the industrial sector has been taken to be newas a proportion of GDP in the past few decadescapital issues by non-Government public limited companies (i.e., ordinaryreflecting both the demand for credit per se asshares, preference shares & debentures) and their ordinary shares.Source : Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy 2002-03, RBI.well as an acceleration in the process ofmonetisation with the spread of branch banking. Thus there is reasonable evidence, at leastThis ratio continued to increase during the post- in the aggregative sense, to suggest that Indianreform period as well though it had fallen industry has not been starved of bank credit insomewhat in the early 1990s, even though the recent years. A related question is the adequacyprocess of monetisation is now more or less of finance is across all sectors. Were there anycomplete (Chart 3). This, in turn, suggests that specific sectors that did not get adequatethere has been no credit constraint as far as finance? The picture is really no different when2we look at the sectoral numbers (Table 5) .industry is concerned during the late 1990s.2The demand for credit, when seen as an essential input to the production process, has to be linked to the valueadded. While for aggregate non-food gross bank credit, GDP at current prices would be the appropriatenormalisation factor, for credit going to agriculture and industrial sectors, as well as, to the SSI sector, we havetried to capture their appropriate contribution in value added. For credit going to the agricultural and industrialsectors, we have taken GDP (at current factor cost) originating in ‘agriculture and allied activities’ and‘manufacturing’. As far as ‘GDP originating in the SSI sector’ is concerned, there is no readymade estimate –therefore, we have taken the GDP originating in unregistered manufacturing and added to it the contribution ofthe SSI sector in organised manufacturing as revealed from the Annual Survey of Industries [Mohan (2001)].327March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 5 : Sectoral Distribution of Non-foodcommercial sector and increasingly, the restGross Bank Creditof the world. With the increase in fiscal deficit(as per cent of relevant GDP)of the Government in the late 1990s, at aYear Agricultural Industrial SSI Credit/ Non-Foodmacro level, we could not expect an overallCredit/ Credit/ SSI GDP Gross BankAgricultural Manu- Credit/GDPreduction in banks' subscription to SLR bonds.GDP facturingGDPHowever, if there had been buoyant private1 2 3 4 5sector credit demand we would have1980s 10.0 65.6 38.9 19.9observed hardening of real interest rates,1990s 9.2 68.4 43.8 20.6rather than the softening that has been1992-93 to1996-97 8.9 65.9 42.4 20.1observed in the last 2-3 years.1997-98 to2001-02 10.0 71.9 45.3 21.6The more serious issues in the flow ofSource: (1) Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy 2002-03, RBI, forresources to industry in the late 1990s thussectoral deployment of credit data.centre around the problem of the gradual(2) National Accounts Statistics, CSO for manufacturing andagricultural GDP.shrinkage of development financial institutions,(3) Author's calculations for SSI-GDP.as a sector, on the one hand and theThe correct way to evaluate adequacylacklustre performance in the functioning ofof the trend in sectoral credit is to look at itthe capital market, on the other hand. Thereas a proportion of sectoral value added.is also the issue of corporate profitability whichInsofar as the sectoral credit trends aremight have affected the latter phenomenon.concerned, the above data indicate that theComparison of Banks and FIsfall in the agricultural credit- agricultural GDPratio during the 1990s has been arrested inThe process of financial sector reformrecent years. In fact, as a ratio tohas changed the operating environment inmanufacturing GDP, credit to the industrialwhich the financial institutions, banks and non-sector has experienced a steady upwardbank intermediaries operate. Until the earlytrend. Interestingly, contrary to popular1990s, the role of the financial system in Indiaimpression in terms of the ratio to its GDP,was primarily restricted to the function ofcredit to the SSI sector has exhibited a steadychanneling resources from the surplus toincrease.deficit sectors. Reforms in the financial sectorcreated a deregulated environment andIt might still be argued that reduction inenabled relatively free play of market forces.the SLR stipulations from about 38.5 per centIt also altered the organisational structure,to 25 per cent should have spurred a largerownership pattern and domain of operationsquantum of bank credit than what has beenof institutions and infused greater competition.achieved. At the same time, while theIn order to appreciate the consequentialreduction in statutory pre-emptions doesimpact on the resource flow, it is useful toenhance credit availability, the actual supplystudy the impact of financial sector reformsis contingent on credit demand and banks'on each segment of financial intermediaries.own allocations across the Government, the328March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 6 : Banking Sector PerformanceIn the case of banks, there have been,(Per cent of assets)in particular, three clear elements of change.Variable G-3 (1999)First, banks now have greater operationalIndia (1999)countriesflexibility and functional autonomy in terms ofPublic Sector New PrivateBanks Sector Bankspricing and resource allocation. Second, the1 2 3 4strengthening of prudential norms has resultedSpread 2.8 2.0 2.0in the clean-up of balance sheets of banks,Other income 1.2 1.5 1.0and reinforced financial stability. Third, theOperating cost 2.7 1.7 1.8Loan Losses 1.0 0.8 0.3banking sector is facing increased pressureNet Profits 0.4 1.0 0.8#of competition, from both within the banking# Refers to pre-tax profits.system, with the emergence of new banks andSource : Report on Currency and Finance, 2001-02, Report on Trend andfrom other intermediaries and to some extent,Progress of Banking in India, 1999-2000, RBI.from the capital market.Financial InstitutionsThere is very little doubt that theThe operating environment of DFIsbanking sector has recorded improvementsunderwent a radical change in the 1990s. DFIsin profitability, efficiency (in terms ofare facing new challenges both on the assetintermediation costs) and asset quality in theand liability sides. Concessional sources of1990s. Within the commercial bankingfunds have dried up and financial institutionssystem, public sector banks however,are raising resources including short-term fundscontinue to have higher interest rate spreadsat market related rates. On the asset side, thebut at the same time earn lower rates ofdistinction between banks and DFIs is gettingreturn, reflecting higher operating costs.blurred as both are offering long and short-Private sector banks, on the other hand,term financing. Further, both banks and DFIsappear to have lower spreads as well astogether face competition from market basedlower operating expenses comparable to themodes of financing.banking system in G3 countries (Table 6). AtThe difficulties faced by the DFIs in thethe same time, asset quality is weaker solate 1990s are reflected in a gradualthat loan loss provisions continue to beshrinkage of their balance sheets. Lending byhigher. This suggests that, whereas there isthe DFIs has fallen continuously over the lastgreater scope for enhancing the asset quality5-7 years. This has led to a growing body ofof banks in general, public sector banks, inopinion that DFIs are intrinsicallyparticular, need to reduce operating costsuncompetitive, especially because of a legacyfurther. Although higher administrativeof high-cost long-term liabilities and poor assetexpenses are often explained away by thequality. A closer look at the balance sheetslarge branch network, it should be borne insuggests a mixed bag.mind that banks in the G-3 countries actuallyThe most striking feature is that thehave a lower ratio of population per branchprofitability of DFIs as a group remains, byratio (see Chart 2).329March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004and large, comparable to that of banks (Chartdegree of manoeuverability enabling them to4). This is essentially because operating costscut interest expenses faster in a scenario ofof DFIs are lower than that of banks, becausedeclining interest rates. Another issue is thatthese financial institutions do not have a widewhile interest income for DFIs is typically higherbranch network.than that of banks because of the longer tenorThis advantage of low operating costs is, of commitments, the spread between the twohas been narrowing in recent years with thehowever, largely neutralised by the fact thatdrying up of the demand for project finance astheir interest costs are higher than banks(Chart 5). While it is true that interest costs well as the emergence of alternate sources oflonger-term funding. Together with the rigidityare likely to be always higher because DFIsin interest expenses, this has been squeezingraise longer-term funds, the shorter tenor ofthe banks liabilities allows them a far greater the profitability of DFIs. An interesting fact is330March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004of roles: banks were to fund working capitalthat the operating expenses of new privaterequirements while DFIs (and to the extentsector banks are comparable to that of thepossible, the capital market) were to caterDFIs. This suggests that financial institutionsto longer-term financing needs of theare likely, sooner than later, to face a challengeeconomy. The downscaling of operations offrom new private sector banks whose interestDFIs, together with sluggishness in thecosts are much lower (Chart 6).capital markets in recent years has createdIt is thus not entirely obvious,a gap at the longer end of the institutionalconventional wisdom notwithstanding, thatfinancing spectrum in the Indian economy.DFIs cannot be competitive. There is no doubtThis inevitably brings us to the possible rolethat, with no access to current deposits, theirthat banks could play in bridging this gap.average cost of funds will always be higherThe tenure of funds provided by banksthan that of banks. But this is compensatedeither as loans or investments dependsby lower operating costs since they typicallycritically on the overall asset-liability position.do not need a large branch network. But asAn inherent difficulty in this regard is thatbanks continue to cut down their ownsince deposit liabilities of banks often tendoperating expenses, DFIs will also have toto be of relatively shorter maturity, long-termgradually reduce their operating costs furtherlending could induce the problem of asset-in order to maintain their commercial viability.liability mismatches. The maturity structure ofThis underscores the need for DFIs to paycommercial bank deposits in 2002 shows thatgreater attention to their non-performingless than one fifth is of a tenor of more thanassets, and to address legacy issues.three years, and less than 7.0 per cent forBank Financing of Long Term Assetsprivate banks (Table 7).The traditional model of corporate On the asset side, nearly 40 per cent hasfinancing was based on a clear-cut partitionalready been invested in assets of over three331March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 7 : Maturity Profile of Bank Liabilitiesanalysis of the relative roles of banks and(Percentage share in Total Liabilities)financial institutions in term lending for financingMaturity SBI Nationa- Foreign Indian Totalgrowth suggests that there is a greater needRange lised Banks PrivateBanks Banksto think about the future of DFIs. The structure 1 2 3 4 5 6of their relative costs suggests that, if theUp tolegacy problems of DFIs are addressed theyone year 19.3 35.5 61.9 56.5 37.8Over one yearmay not be intrinsically uncompetitive in theirto 3 years 59.4 47.5 17.6 36.8 46.1financing operations. They will have to improveOver 3 years 21.3 17.0 20.5 6.7 16.1their operating efficiency through the use ofTOTAL 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0Source :  Statistical Tables relating to Banks in India, RBI.technology and other means in order to bringdown operating costs further. Their comparativeyears maturity, mostly in investmentadvantage in relevant skills for appraisinginstruments, primarily SLR bonds. Only aboutprojects will continue to give them an edge10 per cent is invested in loans and advancesover commercial banks in their operations.(see Table 8).They will also need to diversify their operationsIn view of the large demand by theto take advantage of the new opportunitiesCentral and State Governments for funds foroffered by the opening of the capital marketlong-dated government paper, there is littleand use of new investment techniques aroundflexibility left for extension of longer-term creditinstruments.by banks to infrastructure, industry, agricultureBanks also have some capacity to investand other productive sectors. Any largerin longer term assets, but this capacity willinvestment by banks in longer term assetsremain highly limited until the fiscal deficitcould result in asset-liability mismatches. Thisremains as high as it is and GovernmentTable 8 : Maturity Profile of Bank Assetsdemand for investment in long dated bonds(as percentage share of Total Assets)remains high, even though they are of courseMaturity SBI Nationa- Foreign Indian Totaltradable. Some enhancement of their capacityRange lised Banks PrivateBanks Banksto invest in infrastructure, industry and 1 2 3 4 5 6agriculture in longer gestation projects can beLoans andenhanced by allowing a limited recourse toadvances 44.1 53.5 58.4 52.3 51.1longer term bond issues.Up to one year 19.0 21.9 38.3 25.9 23.1Over one yearV. Capital Marketsto 3 years 14.5 17.9 11.9 19.0 16.8Over 3 years 10.6 13.7 8.1 7.4 11.2The Indian capital market began toInvestments 55.9 46.5 41.6 47.7 48.9expand in the late 1980s (Table 9). This wasUp to one Year 9.1 3.9 18.8 14.8 8.5Over one year abetted by wide-ranging reforms in the capitalto 3 years 11.3 6.0 9.7 10.7 8.6markets, in terms of reviving the process ofOver 3 years 35.5 36.6 13.1 22.3 31.7price discovery, enhancing transparency andTOTAL 100 100 100 100 100improving trading and settlement practices.Source : Statistical Tables relating to Banks in India, RBI.332March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 9 : Capital Market IndicatorsWhile there was a sharp increase in(Percentage of GDP)market capitalisation as a percentage of GDPYear BSE Market New Equity Issuesduring the 1990s, the share of capital issuesCapitalisationto GDP, a measure of resource mobilisation1 2 31980s 9.2 0.2 by the capital markets, followed an inverted1990s 37.0 0.7U curve during the 1990s. The spurt in1992-93 to 1996-97 37.8 1.1capital issues beyond 1.0 per cent of GDP1997-98 to 2001-02 33.8 0.1during 1993-96 could not be sustained with2002-03 23.1 0.01Source : Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy 2002-03, RBI. the onset of the economic slowdown in thelatter half of the 1990s. As a result, capitalThe reforms in the capital markets during theissues, especially equity issues, dwindled to1990s in terms of market microstructure andthe 1970s' levels (as a proportion of GDP)transactions have ensured that the Indianin the latter half of the 1990s. In fact, publiccapital market in particular is now comparablecapital issues by non-Government publicto the capital markets in most developedlimited companies declined to 0.2 per centmarkets. The early 1990s saw a greaterof GDP during 1998-2002 from 1.9 per centwillingness of the saver to place funds induring 1992-97 and 0.6 per cent during thecapital market instruments, on the supply side1980s. Besides, public equity issues by non-as well as an enthusiasm of corporate entitiesGovernment public limited companiesto take recourse to capital market instrumentsdeclined to 0.1 per cent of GDP during 1998-on the demand side. The size of the capital2002 from 1.1 per cent during 1992-97 andmarket is now comparable to other developing0.7 per cent during the 1980s.countries but there is still a long way to go. ItThe market for corporate debt is still inis important to note that developed economiesthe process of development in the Indianwith bank-based systems, such as Germanyeconomy, as is the case with mostand Japan, also have capital markets withdeveloping economies. The privatesubstantial market capitalisation in relation toplacement market has emerged as anGDP (Table 10).important source of resource mobilisation inTable 10 : Capitalisation of Stock Marketsthe Indian debt market. The first steps in(Percentage of GDP)development of the debt market have beenEconomy 1990 1999taken through development of the1 2 3government securities market. The issue ofJapan 98 105Germany 22 68government bonds through auction, and theirUK 86 203active trading by banks has led to theUSA 53 182emergence of a sovereign yield curve. StepsIndonesia 7 45Malaysia 110 184have also been taken, though still in theirThailand 28 47infancy, to enable active trading ofIndia 12 41government securities in the stockSource : World Development Indicators, 2001.333March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 11 : Pattern of Sources of Funds forexchanges. As this market grows and asIndian Coporatessteps are taken to regulate the private(Per cent of total sources of funds)placement market, the corporate bondItem 1985-86 to 1991-92 to 1992-93 to 1997-98 tomarket will also develop. Creditworthy1990-91 2000-01 1996-97 2000-01corporate borrowers will then be able to raise1 2 3 4 51. Internal Sources 34.1 35.7 31.3 43.1longer term funds for financing their growth.1. External SourcesOf Which 65.9 64.3 68.7 56.9After the exuberance of the stock marketa) Equity capital 7.0 16.1 20.5 12.8in the mid-1990s and its decline thereafter, ab) Borrowings 36.2 32.0 33.2 28.3large number of individual investors took flightDebentures 10.3 6.2 5.2 6.1From Banks 12.7 10.0 10.7 9.4to safety in bank deposits, safe retirement From FIs 8.4 9.5 8.3 9.8instruments and insurance. It remains to bec) Trade dues &seen when and how fast such savers return other currentliabilities 22.5 15.9 14.8 15.3to the capital market so that it performs itsTotal 100 100 100 100intermediary function efficiently.Note : Data pertains to Non-government Non-financial Public Ltd.Companies.VI. Pattern of Industrial Finance amongSource : Report on Currency & Finance, 1998-99, RBI for data up to1997-98 and articles on "Finances of Public Limited Companies",Indian CorporatesRBI Bulletins (various issues) for subsequent years.Having run through the supply side ofinteresting trends emerge. The share ofthe story, let me now turn to the demand sideequity increased in the 1990s. Besides, thereof industrial finance in India. An interestingwas a shift to equity from debentures,shift in the pattern of financing of the Indianespecially during the mid-1990s when thecorporate sector needs to be highlighted inequity issues commanded a large premiumthis context (Table 11). During the 1980s toin the public issues markets. The share ofmid-1990s, internal sources as a percentagecapital market-based intermediaries hasof total sources of funds ranged between 30-increased somewhat pulling down the debt-35 per cent, while during recent years it hasequity ratio. The overall share of borrowings,increased to more than 40 per cent; in factat about one third, remains, by and large,for 2000-01, the proportion of internalintact. There has been a greater reliance onsources touched nearly 60 per cent.internal resources during the downturn duringCorrespondingly, there has been a reductionthe latter half of the 1990s. It is not clear atin the reliance on external financing.this stage whether this trend would changewith an upturn in the capital market.The question, however, remains as towhether this reflects the effect of substitutionIt is now appropriate to arrive at broadof internal sources for external sources orgeneralisations from the sources side ofthe scale effect of an external constraint. Infinancing. First of all, bank credit hasterms of external funding, a number ofincreased, but only marginally; the important334March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 12 : Composition of Financial Savingsaspect is that it has not gone down contraryPortfolio  of Indian Householdsto general belief. Second, banks continue to(Per cent of Financial Savings)prefer investing in government securitiesItem 1970s 1980s 1990s 1992-93 1997-98despite the reduction in SLR requirements.to to1996-97 2001-02Third, flows from DFIs have reduced, but they1 2 3 4 5 6may not be uncompetitive intrinsically. While1. Currency 18.8 16.1 11.9 12.5 10.0their interest costs are high, they have2. Net Bank Deposits 32.7 22.8 27.0 25.9 31.4managed to curtail operating costs. Finally, the 3. Social Security 41.0 47.8 44.2 39.4 54.2a) Life Fund 12.1 10.3 11.8 11.0 14.4contraction in the capital market during theb) PF & Pensionlast 5 years has been dramatic. Overall,Fund 26.3 23.8 21.9 20.5 23.9corporates have depended more on internalc) Net Claims onGovt 2.6 13.7 10.5 7.9 15.9sources of financing during the second half4. Non-Bank Savingof the 1990s.Instruments 7.4 13.3 17.0 22.3 4.4a) Net Non-BankingDeposits 1.1 3.7 5.6 9.9 1.9VII. Supply of Fundsb) Shares &debentures 2.0 5.3 8.2 9.5 4.0Household financial savings are thec) Units of UTI 0.6 3.0 4.4 3.9 0.2main source of funds in the Indian financiald) Trade Debt 3.7 1.3 -1.2 -1.0 -1.7system. Private savings performance, at about5. Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.025 per cent of GDP, has been reasonablyMemo Item:impressive by international standards, perhaps Household FinancialSaving (as % of GDPwith the exception of some of the East Asianat current market prices) 4.6 6.8 10.0 10.2 10.4countries. Reflecting the gradual willingnessSource : Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy, 2002-03to invest in risk capital since the 1980s, the Notes :1. Net Bank Deposits = Bank Deposits - Bank Advances - Loans &share of financial scrips amounted to almostAdvances from Co-Op Non-Credit Societies10 per cent of total household saving by the2. Net Non-Banking Deposits = Non-Banking Deposits - Loans & Advancesfrom Other Financial Institutions.mid-1990s (Table 12). The late 1990s,3. Net Claims on Govt = Claims on Govt - Loans & Advances from Govt.however, witnessed a reversal of this process,4. Saving in Trade Debt is "Change in Trade Dues in respect of sundrycreditors minus changes in loans and advances to sundry debtors",with a flight to the safety of bank deposits andfrom the Company Finance Studies.social security. The present indications areVIII. Options for Longer Term Financethat we can expect this continuing shift to lifeinsurance, pension funds etc, although thereAgainst the backdrop of the discussioncould be a return to the capital market if it on various aspects of financing patterns,does well for some time. As regards the othersources of funds, maturity structure of assetssources of saving, the fiscal deficit continuesand liabilities of banks and DFIs, it is appositeto act as a drag, leading to negative public to discuss the options available for financingsector dissavings, which pull down the overallinvestment for growth. There are, of course,savings of the country.many sources of project finance available:335March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004banks, insurance companies, DFIs, pension requirement of funds going to social securitiesfunds, leasing companies, investment augurs well as a potential source of productivemanagement companies and individuals. It is investment.perhaps useful to begin by exploring theA second set of options centre aroundoptions available within the existingpossible innovations within the existinginstitutional framework and then turn to otherinstitutional framework. Banks (and FIs) couldpossible innovations.play an innovative role in project finance byExisting Institutional Framework utilising and improving on their appraisalexpertise. This could be achieved throughWe have already observed that thelonger-term credit enhancements, take-outmaturity structure of the liabilities of banks isfinancing, special purpose vehicles (SPVs)essentially short-term in nature. On the assetand guarantees of corporate bonds. A typicalside, they already hold large volumes of long-long-term project faces the highest risk interm government paper, which is in tradableinitial years and cash flows usually stabiliseform. The composition of assets suggests thatafter 5-7 years. The basic idea is that banksbanks are less averse to taking on interestand FIs can take initial risks through medium-rate risk than credit risk. Given the portfolioterm lending and as cash flows becomechoice, it seems to make sense for banks tosecure, the loans could be securitised, andkeep the maturity of their loans short. It issold to those institutions that have a longer-therefore necessary to change the perceptionterm liability structure. Another option is theof banks regarding credit risk. An added setmarketisation of a mix of loans, such as,of institutional sources of finance is emergingJumbo Mortgages. This kind of securitisationwith the increasing magnitude of funds flowingof all kinds of assets is especially appealingto mutual funds, insurance and pension. Thebecause it can encompass even loans tosize of the mutual fund industry in the Indianrelatively small-scale industries. The basiceconomy is still very small as compared withphilosophy is for banks and DFIs to take onthat of developed countries. Contractualthe initial risks and thereafter package thesavings are yet another source of projectrisks into different baskets to match varyingfinance. There are two sets of completelyrisk appetites in the market.opposing views on the investment of suchsavings. The first, advocates higher return and There is, of course, some long-termhence advocate investment in the equity bank lending that is already being extended.market, while the proponents of safety-first A new competitor to project finance isadvocate investment in gilt-edged securities. emerging in the form of housing loans.Both sets of arguments are equally strong - Current indications are that housing financeand the international experience does not is likely to keep increasing, especially as theprovide a definitive guide one way or the default rate is still relatively low. Clearly, banksother. At the same time, the increasing seem to prefer interest rate risk to credit risk,336March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004and as long as the fiscal deficit is high, this Information Bureau as a credit registry is alsooption will always be available to them. likely to reduce information asymmetries andcut down on transaction costs such as projectWhat does the future hold for projectappraisal.finance from the DFIs? In the Indian case,ICICI is already a bank, but presumably has Development of the Corporate Debt Marketthe expertise to do project financing. IFCI isA necessary condition for the processin great difficulty. IDBI is in process ofof asset securitisation is the evolution of arestructuring. A number of financial institutionsdeep and liquid corporate debt market. As Iare still in the business of long-term projecthave already mentioned, the corporate debtfinancing: IDFC for infrastructure and SIDBImarket has not fully developed in the Indianfor funding small-scale industries. A seriouscontext, though there is some activity in recentrethinking needs to be done about the futureyears, especially in the private placementof these DFIs. DFIs as has been observedsegment.earlier, are not intrinsically non-competitive. IfSeveral pre-conditions for the evolutiontheir legacy problems can be sorted out, it isof a successful corporate debt market are nowpossible to evolve a future role for them. Indiain place. These include a well-functioningis not yet at a stage where it can fund growthmarket for government securities, wellexclusively out of market-based approach.developed infrastructure for retail debt, a liquidThere is very little alternative and it ismoney market, an efficient clearing andtoo early to give up the bank / DFI-basedsettlement system, a credible credit ratingfinancing for industrial investment at thesystem and a formal regulatory framework. Atpresent juncture because markets are notthe same time, the lack of good qualitydeep enough to securitise loans. There areissuers, institutional investors and supportingother developments that are creating a moreinfrastructure continue to constrain marketenabling environment for a long-term creditdevelopment. There is also the need toculture. There are several ways in whichenhance public disclosure, standardisecreditors rights are being strengthened, whichproducts, put in place effective bankruptcyshould go a long way in mitigating the riskslaws and use technology to reduce transactionof large-scale project financing. These includecosts further.initiatives such as the setting up of DebtMarket Based FinancingRecovery Tribunals (DRTs), the introduction ofCorporate Debt Recovery(CDR) mechanismsA final set of possibilities hinge aroundand the emergence of asset reconstruction a shift in emphasis towards a market-basedcompanies following the passage of theapproach. Could the capital markets provideSARFAESI Act, 2002. It is hoped that all thisthe long-term funds to industry by directlywould make securitisation of assets easier. tapping the long-term savings potential in theBesides, the institution of the Crediteconomy? Indian households are typically risk337March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004averse and there has been a massive flight equity markets mainly because of betterto the safety of bank deposits and contractual opportunities in the debt markets. Further,saving instruments. At the same time, the insurance companies and pension fundscontinuing increase in the saving rate of could be tapped, with appropriate riskhouseholds suggests that there is no supply management. Investment funds - a categoryconstraint in terms of financial resources of non-banking financial companies in theavailable. Indian context - also provide an avenue forchanneling funds into the stock markets,The challenge is really to harness thesealthough the very logic of investmentsavings into risk capital. In a country like India,management carries an inherent bias forwhere a large number of retail investors enteroperations in the secondary market ratherthe equity markets directly, there is greatthan the primary market. Venture capitalpotential to develop institutional intermediariesfunds with specialisation in certain regionsto tap these funds. In contrast, the investorand certain sectors provide anotherprofile in most developed countries is relativelypossibility, although in the Indian case thusmore institutional, with mutual funds andfar, their portfolio is still not very large andpension funds often accounting for a largeoften carries a preference for later-stageproportion of the trade. This effectively meansprojects with a smaller gestation lag ratherthat investors in India bear far more risks thanthan projects at the absolute initial stages.their counterparts in developed economies,who are able to spread their risk profile by IX. Conclusionssay, buying units of a large mutual fund, withIt is now time to take stock of where wethe necessary technical expertise ofstand. While reviewing the trends in industrialinvestment management. The emerging poolfinance during the last three decades, certainof institutional investors in the equity markets,stylised facts stand out:therefore, needs to tap the savings potentiall Bank credit to industry and agriculturemuch more effectively. The Unit Trust of Indiahas increased as a proportion of theirwas able to successfully perform thisrespective sectoral GDP - but not asassignment of transforming household savingmuch as it might have compared withinto equity financing till excessive returnsthe size of the reduction in SLR.eroded its very sustainability.l Given the current maturity profile ofThe expansion of the mutual fundtheir assets and liabilities and theindustry thus becomes a target candidate forexisting fiscal deficit, banks' ability tohigher resource mobilisation from the capitallend in the medium- and long-termmarkets. The size of the mutual fund industryseems to be limited.in the Indian economy is still very small ascompared with that of developed countries. l DFIs are not intrinsically uncompetitiveBesides, mutual funds have been exiting thebut they need to clean up their legacy338March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004of bad debts, emphasise their Ian Domowitz, Jack Glen and Ananthstrengths and enhance their market Madhavan, (2000), "International Evidence onorientation. Aggregate Corporate Financing Decisions".Mimeo, (Washington DC: World Bank).l Adequate savings are available in theeconomy. The issue is to channelGovernment of India, (1991), “Report of thethem for investment for growth. Committee on the Financial System(Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham)”, ReserveThe Indian financial system, thus, needsBank of India.to look at new ways of doing business, interms of knowledge-based banking and better Government of India, (1998), “Report of themanagement of information. It is necessaryCommittee on Banking Sector Reformsto tailor the new institutional funds to long-(Chairman: Shri M.Narasimham)”, New Delhi.term investments. Besides, the next stage ofRoss Levine, (1997), "Financial developmentindustrial financing would depend on anand economic growth: Views and Agenda".accelerated development of the bond marketJournal of Economic Literature, Volume 35facilitating the securitisation of corporatepp. 688-726.lending.Rakesh Mohan, (2002), "Small Scale IndustrialIn terms of the broad framework ofPolicy: A Critical Evaluation", in Economicindustrial financing, it is clear that there isPolicy Reforms and the Indian Economy, ed.sufficient room for a greater role for marketAnne Krueger, Oxford University Press, Newfinancing. At the same time, this does notDelhi.mean that the Indian economy is ready for aRakesh Mohan, ( 2003), "Developing theshift to a market-based system of finance. TheCorporate Debt Market in India". Presentationpanacea to the present challenges in industrialat the 3rd Invest India Debt Market Roundfinancing hinges on the ability to design anTable, May 6. available at http://www.rbi.org.in.appropriate mix of the bank- and the market-based systems of financing.Reserve Bank of India, (2003a), “Report onCurrency and Finance 2002-03” Reserve BankReferencesof India.Shankar Acharya, (2002), "MacroeconomicManagement in the Nineties." Economic and Reserve Bank of India, (2003b), “Report ofPolitical Weekly, 37, No.16. pp. 1515-38. Trend and Progress of Banking in India”,various issues Reserve Bank of India.James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio. Jr., and RossLevine, (2001), The Regulation and Raghuram Rajan and Luigi Zingales, (2003),Supervision of Banks around the World: A Saving Capitalism from the CapitalistsNew Database, Washington DC: World Bank. NewYork: Crown Business.339
