1Currency Management: Issues and Challenges (With special reference toIndia)Mr. Tom Ferguson, Chairman, Banknote Conference 2014; Mr. Tim Vigotsky,Director, Banknote Conference 2014, my fellow speakers - Mr. Barna Barabas,DMD, Jura Security Printing Alliance; Dr. Wolfram Seidemann, Managing Director,Louisenthal; other delegates; ladies & gentlemen. At the outset, I thank theorganizers of Banknote Conference 2014 for inviting me to speak at this augustgathering. From the contents of the Conference Schedule and from the feedbackthat I have received from my colleagues in the Reserve Bank of India, who haveparticipated in this Conference over the years, I gather that  the Conference seeks toserve certain useful purposes, notably, providing a platform for a free and frankexchange of views, showcasing  the latest developments in the rapidly changing fieldof currency management, bringing together the service providers and the serviceseekers from across the world under one roof and generally helping the participantsto chalk out their future strategies and plans of action.2. Because of the sheer size of our population and the quantum of banknotes thatwe are required to put into circulation every year, India has emerged as one of thebiggest consumers of the ingredients that go into production of banknotes in theworld. In keeping with the magnitude of the banknotes that are put into circulation,the corresponding need to import other machinery for processing, detection anddestruction of the bank notes is also humongous.  Thus, India is a very significantmarket for the suppliers of all ingredients and equipments, which form the entireecosystem of the banknote production and destruction process. As in-charge of thecurrency management function in the country, we at the Reserve Bank of India, theCentral Bank of the country, have experienced severe constraints, some of whichcan be traced, directly or indirectly to the operations of the global suppliers andvendors in the banknote industry. I intend to use the presence of these globalsuppliers and vendors and the opportunity to speak at this platform today to highlightsome of these concerns, which I feel must be bothering other Central Banks which1Text version of DG (KCC)’s presentation at the Banknote Conference 2014, Washington on April 8, 2014. Theassistance provided by Shri B. P. Vijayendra, Ms. Kaya Tripathi and Shri Arvind Kumar is gratefullyacknowledged.rely on imports for their currency management, especially in the emerging markets. Iwould be extremely happy if the suppliers /vendors could reflect on our concerns anddevelop some practical solutions to our problems. However, before I get into thespecific issues, let me begin with a brief perspective on various dimensions of theIndian currency system and the issues and challenges that we face in our currencymanagement efforts. I would also like to share some of the recent steps we havetaken in this area with a view to seeking your views and feedback for improvements.Introduction3. Currency management has a great degree of significance for Central Banks theworld over as it is one of the most visible functions which touches the lives of everyindividual. Since people often tend to judge the efficacy of the central bank from theease of continuous access and quality of notes in their possession, currencymanagement function entails a certain degree of reputational risk for the centralbank.  As is the case in most jurisdictions, issue of banknotes and management ofcurrency is one of the core functions of the Reserve Bank of India. It is enshrined inthe preamble to the RBI Act, 1934 as “…to regulate the issue of Bank Notes andkeeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in India and generallyto operate the currency and credit system of the country to its advantage.”4. The mandate of any central bank is to protect the integrity of banknotes throughnew design and security features, estimate the demand for banknotes and coins,plan the supply and distribution of adequate quantity of banknotes and coins andensure quality of banknotes in circulation by timely withdrawal of soiled banknotes. Itis equally important to maintain confidence in currency through improvement insystems / procedures and by raising public awareness by enlisting support from allassociated with the design, production and supply of banknotes.Some Numbers5. There has been a steady increase in the demand for banknotes and coins overthe years, despite the increased use of technology-driven non-cash modes ofpayments/e-currency/virtual currency-bit coins, etc. Even internationally, notes incirculation have been increasing despite the use of non-cash modes of payment.However, the large numbers in India present a unique situation as compared to other2countries. A comparative picture of the Notes in Circulation (NIC) in India ascompared to some major countries is indicated in the table given below:Year India US UK Euro zone Australia Canada2012/13No. of Pieces (in 76.47 34.5 2.99 15.8n 1.15 2.00billion)Value in home 12468 1198 58 933.7 53.6 63.7currency terms billion billion billion billion million million6. Globally, the cash in circulation to GDP ratio has ranged from 2.5% to 8%whereas in India it has been around 13% due to the predominant usage of cash by amajority of the population. The world-wide growth rates of cash in circulation hasvaried between 6% and 13%, with Central & South America figuring at the top endfollowed by Africa (12%), Middle East (11%), Europe (10%), Asia (7%) and finally UKand Ireland at 6%.  In the year 2013, 154 billion banknotes were issued globally, ofwhich the maximum banknotes, 54 billion, were issued by China and almost 20billion banknotes by India.  The global projections for the next three years have beenworked out at 160 billion, 166 billion and 173 billion banknotes, respectively. Thesenumbers are simply astounding. While it presents a massive opportunity for thevendors associated with the production of banknotes, I believe it simultaneouslyenjoins upon them certain responsibilities. For instance, the vendors need to beconscious of the impact of their activities on the environment.  I will touch upon someof these issues later in my address. At this stage, I would like to mention that thereneeds to be more investment in research and development efforts by the vendors toensure that the longevity of the banknotes improves and eventually, the cost ofprinting of banknotes for the society as a whole comes down. Vendors need todevelop such banknote paper that can resist dirt and moisture, thereby increasingthe life and quality of the banknotes in circulation. But while the focus needs to be onbringing down the cost of printing banknotes, it cannot be done by compromising onsecurity. In fact, effort has to be on making the banknotes more secure with lesser,but stronger security features.3Currency Management in India- Major Challenges7. Let me now share with you some of the challenges that we encounter in currencymanagement and currency distribution in India. In a country like India having an areaof approximately 3.3 mn sq. km. and a population of more than 1.2 billion, reachingthe currency to the end users in far flung areas dotted with difficult terrains, poses anenormous challenge. As on December 31, 2013, there is a network of 110,520commercial bank branches and 137,080 ATMs. The notes in circulation as on thesame date was approximately 76.47 billion pieces valued at ` 12, 468 billon while thecoins in circulation were around 89.91 billion pieces valued at ` 168 billion. As thedemand for notes and coins is subject to diverse socio-economic, behavioural andother often unpredictable factors, the task of forecasting demand for currency is achallenging task and can be subject to large variations. At present, the system posesconsiderable difficulties in capturing the structural and cyclical demands for currencyand projecting demand with precision. I would, therefore, also take this opportunity toextend an invitation to the delegates present here to come forward and see if theycan work with us for making accurate projections for the demand of banknotes andcoins.8. The other challenges in currency management relates to ensuring durability ofbanknotes, ensuring adequate supply of all denominations, improving operationalefficiency in distribution of notes by controlling cost of handling, distribution andsecurity in transit /storage, providing last mile connectivity at reasonable cost,ensuring equity in distribution and repositioning RBI as an upstream facilitator in thefresh note/coin supply chain, rather than as a retailer with limited reach. Let mehighlight the challenge associated with durability of the banknotes in India by givingsome figures. We in India, withdraw more number of banknotes from circulation thanthe number of banknotes collectively produced by all countries taken together withthe exception of China. In fact, we are constrained to withdraw over 75% of all notesthat we circulate every year as may be seen from the table below:4Supply of Banknotes by RBIto Currency Chests and disposal of Soiled notesDenomination Volume(Million Pieces)2010-11 2011-12 2012-13Supply Disposal Supply Disposal Supply Disposal1 2 3 4 5 6 7`1000 706 179 371 375 1536 450`500 4347 1864 5560 1994 2725 2263`100 4085 5227 1091 5577 6348 5627`50 1114 2095 1522 1578 1257 1357`20 1296 664 4237 562 904 609`10 5580 3657 3379 3584 5991 3752up to `5 549 166 1440 101 105 72Total 17677 13852 17600 13771 18866 14130(78%) (78%) (75%)9. Such massive withdrawal of banknotes from circulation not only means additionalcost for printing of fresh notes but also additional requirement of various resourcesused in production of banknotes. In this context, it becomes imperative that effortsare made to enhance the durability of the banknotes so that not only the wastagesare reduced, but also resources are utilized in a sustainable manner, therebyensuring that the environmental footprint of our currency management operations isminimized.10. Mechanization of soiled note processing while augmenting capacity has alsothrown up new challenges like ensuring standardization of machine parameters, slowprogress in improvement in processing capacity by commercial banks and  securityrisks on account of manual intervention. Another challenge with the likely potential toevolve into a reputational risk for RBI is the shortage/ ‘perceived’ shortage of coinsand the lack of understanding on the exact role of the central bank in its distribution.It needs to be understood that while the responsibility for issue of coins is that of theGovernment of India (GoI), RBI’s role is restricted to putting into circulation the coinsreceived by it. Then, there are issues arising out of similar shapes and sizes of coinsof different denominations. Last, but not the least, is the growing menace of forged5notes in circulation and creating public awareness about various aspects ofbanknotes.Recent Measures in Indiaa) Constitution of High Level Committee11. To address the significant challenges faced by us in India and other relatedissues, a High Level Committee was recently constituted by GoI (Chairman: Dr. K. C.Chakrabarty) having members representing GoI, RBI, Note Presses & Mints. TheCommittee reviewed the forecasting methodology and studied the international bestpractices in cash distribution by other Central Banks. It made wide-rangingrecommendations, notably, (i) RBI to focus exclusively on management and planningof currency system while passing on the responsibility for distribution of banknotesand coins entirely to commercial banks, (ii) need to introduce private entrepreneursfor distribution of banknotes and coins on behalf of banks, if last mile connectivity fordistribution has to be achieved, (iii) identification of a bank willing to assumeleadership of currency management function in the district, etc. All theserecommendations have been accepted and are at various stages of implementation.b) Distribution Mechanism12. The functions relating to issuance of currency (both banknotes and coins) andtheir management is performed by the Reserve Bank through its 19 issue offices anda network of 4,209 Currency Chests and 3,966 Small Coin Depots spread across thecountry. Despite the large number of currency chests (extended arms of RBI’s IssueDepartment), the primary responsibility for reaching currency to the banks rests withRBI because of the currency management structure. Every year, based on theBank’s indent for banknotes and coins, the Printing Presses and Mints dispatchnotes and coins to the RBI offices. From the RBI offices, the notes and coins areremitted to currency chests operated by commercial banks. The central bankarranges for transport and police escort for transfer of treasure and bears all theexpenditure related to it unlike other countries where the commercial banks areresponsible for transport of cash. Thus, distribution of cash in India is the primaryresponsibility of the central bank. The treasure held in the currency chests is theproperty of the central bank and is subject to audit/verification. Any withdrawal or6deposit in the currency chest by the bank holding the chest is reflected asdebit/credit in the bank’s account held with RBI.13. To improve last mile connectivity, we have decided to involve privateentrepreneurs in the distribution function. The Cash-in Transit (CIT)companies/Business Correspondents have been allowed to process coin andbanknotes, including packaging, sorting and delivery to banks’ customers and forretrieval. Banks, including urban co-operative banks and regional rural banks, arealso being involved to ensure that last mile delivery of cash related servicespenetrates throughout the country. We have also initiated a pilot exercise under thelead bank scheme for currency management and intend to upscale it going forward,based on the experience gained.c) Direct remittance of banknotes14. At present, remittances of notes from printing presses accompanied by pressrepresentatives and police escort are received at our Issue Offices. After receivingthese boxes, they are subjected to preliminary verification (PV) wherein the contentsof the box are verified by the vault joint custodians in the presence of the pressrepresentative. Later, at the time of sending remittance to banks, packing of theboxes is done in the presence of the accompanying RBI staff and vault jointcustodians. At the bank, the RBI staff remains stationed till the verification of notes iscompleted by the bank officials.15. We have realized that the present process has some inherent inefficiency as thecurrency notes have to be transported several times before they reach the public.This not only reduces productivity but is also cost-inefficient. Accordingly, we haveintroduced a scheme for direct remittance of banknotes from Banknote PrintingPresses to the commercial banks instead of routing them through RBI Issue officesto save time, efforts and resources. The new process is being given greater impetusby the RBI.d) Pursuit of Clean Note Policy16. Since the year 1999, the Bank has been pursuing a 'Clean Note Policy' to ensurean uninterrupted supply and circulation of good quality banknotes.  As may be seen7from the Table at para 8 above, during the last three years, 13852 million pieces(mpcs), 13771 mpcs and 14130 mpcs respectively of soiled banknotes werewithdrawn and disposed of. While the objectives of Clean Note Policy have been byand large achieved in respect of higher denomination notes, the quality of lowerdenomination notes, especially` 10, continues to be a cause for concern, possiblydue to reluctance/constraints on the part of banks to mop up such notes fromcirculation.17. To ensure that genuine banknotes alone are put into circulation, high priority isaccorded to detection of counterfeit notes in the banking system. Towards this end,banks have been directed to enhance the use of technology to re-align their cashmanagement systems so as to ensure that cash receipts in the denominations of `100 and above are not put into re-circulation without being machine processed forauthenticity. Banks have also been advised to put in place suitable systems toensure that counterfeit notes detected are duly impounded and reported by followingthe prescribed procedure.e) Currency Processing in India -Trends in Expenditure18. The currency production costs in our country have been substantial over theyears. We in RBI have incurred an expenditure of ` 23.76 billion in 2010-11, ` 27.36billion in 2011-12 and ` 28.72 billion in 2012-13 on this activity. The two note printingpresses, BRBNMPL and SPMCIL, exhibit an increasing trend in their overallexpenses viz. `12.22 billion, ` 13.09 billion and ` 14.23 billion in the case of theformer and ` 26.17 billion, ` 27.88 billion and `32.82 billion in the case of the latterduring the last three years respectively, with the cost of paper and ink contributingsignificantly in the overall costs. Additionally, RBI has incurred an expenditure of `5.23 billion for acquisition, upgradation and overhaul of its 59 CVPS machines and28 SBS (Shredding and Briquetting system) machines employed for destruction ofsoiled notes.The Road Ahead & Key Messages19. Currency management offers significant business opportunities for the players asthe cost of printing of banknotes is increasing every year due to the increasing8demand for banknotes. As I mentioned earlier, this also enjoins certain amount ofresponsibility on the part of the vendors. It is expected from them that the productsoffered are of high quality and reliability and they strictly adhere to the agreedtechnical specifications. In this context, I wish to allude to the failure of the selectedbidders in meeting the technical specifications of the plastic banknotes in ` 10denomination that we are proposing to introduce on a trial basis in India,necessitating undertaking the exercise afresh, thereby delaying the process. Thevendors are also expected to co-operate with the national governments and CentralBanks to avoid production of counterfeits by developing country-specific securityfeatures and bringing about improvisation in raw materials like paper, ink, thread,etc. Any failure of the vendors in this regard could result in total loss of business withindividual countries making efforts to indigenize.20. Let me now focus your attention on some expectations that we have from thevarious vendors present in the Banknote Conference here. We all agree that theintegrity of banknotes is the most important factor. In this context, it is also actuallyquite ironical that for the circulation of forged notes the blame is put on the centralbank when, in fact, the blame should go to the manufacturer of the forged notes as inthe case of spurious drugs, where the manufacturers are prosecuted. However, it ismy considered opinion that the integrity of the banknotes is not a technology issuebut more of a law and order issue. When I say this I feel I would be echoing thesentiments of all consumers of various products that the industry produces,especially the representatives of the emerging market countries, who rely heavily onimports for currency production in their respective jurisdictions. I firmly believe thatupgrading the security and design features of the banknotes every few years tooutsmart the counterfeiters is not a long-term solution but only adds to the cost ofproducing the banknotes.21. Let me elaborate what I mean. If the counterfeiters are able to do a good job ofproducing duplicate currency, they are obviously having access to good qualitycurrency paper, printing ink and other components that are necessary for productionof banknotes. So, the question is, what is the source of supply for the fraudsters andwhat is the role of vendors in perpetration of these unlawful activities. Thecommercial banks the world over follow stringent KYC procedures on theircustomers. As counterfeiting is a global issue, what I would like the vendors present9here is to similarly do a proper customer identification/due diligence on all theircustomers.  The vendors must join hands to find out who has supplied ink, paper,machinery, etc. to the counterfeiters which would enable the regulators to takeappropriate action. In a manner the banks close accounts of customers doing anydoubtful transactions; the suppliers should be able to cut off their links with theirdoubtful customers. In fact, the need of the hour is that counterfeiting should betackled as a criminal activity with active co-ordination and collective might of allstakeholders-the vendors, Central Banks, law enforcement agencies, etc. Finding along-term solution to this menace may also require close cross-border cooperationbetween various countries. The global vendors have, in fact, the maximum stake inensuring that these problems are countered at the earliest. Over time, the vendorshave made significant investments in building capacities and, in the process, createdeconomies of scale and scope. They are the least cost producers of the variousingredients/ components used in production of banknotes and any attempt  byindividual countries at creating manufacturing capacities could prove inefficient andin many cases, wasteful investment. But the bottom line is that any failure to initiatenecessary corrective measures would push more and more countries like India to gofor indigenization thereby resulting in loss of big business for the vendors.22. The global banknote industry, comprising various manufacturers of machines,paper, ink, security features, etc is very huge. I understand that the overall market forthis industry is roughly USD 27 to 28 billion. So, while the opportunities for thevendors are immense, I would also take this opportunity to request all themanufacturers, suppliers, vendors in the banknote industry to put their mindstogether and come up with ideas on not only reducing the cost of paper, ink,machines, etc. but also for enhancing the durability of the banknotes throughtechnological innovations. The vendors must realize that they also have aresponsibility towards the environment. These innovations are necessary to reflectthat the vendors are conscious about promoting environmental sustainability and‘green’ practices. Thus, it is extremely significant that currency production activitiesare not viewed as mere business proposition for the vendors but also as somethingwhich has serious implications for the reputation of all stakeholders - the nationalgovernments, Central Banks and the vendors themselves.23. I once again thank the organizers for the opportunity provided to me andappreciate the patient hearing given by the participants. I hope that the delegates10present at the Conference would reflect on the messages /concerns that I have triedto convey this morning. I hope the Conference would deliberate on these issues andcome up with practical solutions to the present/impending challenges.  Global co-ordination and intensive efforts to ensure integrity of banknotes is the need of thehour and I hope that all stakeholders viz., the Central Banks, state, policy makersand vendors who are involved in the process of production, supply and distribution ofbanknotes, would discuss these issues in a more purposeful manner. Ultimately, thisis the prime objective of the Conference. It is our collective responsibility to bringgreater efficiency in the entire currency management function – an essentialcommitment that all of us must make to the end users spread across regions andjurisdictions.Thank you.11
