*Financial Regulation: Which Way Forward?I thank Prof. Rajas Parchure for inviting me to this Economic Conclave at theGokhale Institute.  The Conclave has brought together eminent scholars and policypractitioners to brainstorm on issues of contemporary relevance to the Indianeconomy. Such interchange of ideas is important not only in encouraging researchbut also in shaping the contours of policymaking.While the recent global financial crisis taught us several lessons, one keymessage has been the weaknesses in financial regulation.  Greater belief on marketdiscipline led to light touch regulation of financial entities.  Even this was foundonerous by many entities which shifted their activities outside the regulatoryperimeter. Coupled with inadequacies in the pricing and measurement of risks, thisled to the build-up of substantial risk in the global financial system.Against this backdrop, I examine the rationale for regulation in the context ofthe debate and initiatives in the post-crisis period.  I then discuss the approach by theReserve Bank to regulation and its interface with the new Basel standards andconclude by highlighting some related issues.Rationale of Banking RegulationLet me begin by asking the question: Why do we need to regulate thefinancial system, particularly banks? This is because banks have a critical role inmodern market economies. First, banks channel money from the ultimate savers tothe ultimate users of these funds. In this process, they determine which projectsshould get credit and closely monitor borrowers. These are tasks, which left to asingle saver, would be difficult to execute. Second, banks are the backbone of thepayments system. Hence, even if a few banks get into trouble, the resultant financialdisruptions could be very high. Third, given the primarily short-term nature ofbanks’ deposit contracts and illiquid nature of loans, banks are susceptible to “runs”.*Speech by Shri Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India at the EconomicConclave on the theme “Indian Economy: Performance and Challenges”, Gokhale Institute ofPolitics and Economics, Pune, February 15, 2014.  The assistance provided by Dr. Saibal Ghosh inpreparation of this paper is acknowledged.1Even a perceived threat of failure of a bank might induce customers to withdrawtheir funds from other healthy banks as well. This interconnectedness is muchgreater for banks than in other industries.In view of the above risks, there is a justification for intervention by the Statethrough regulation. However, there are opposing views. The public interest viewwhich dates back to Pigou (1938) contends that, by addressing market failures,1governments regulate banks to facilitate their efficient functioning. Since bankingcrises impose significant social and economic costs, their prevention is often anexplicit goal of public policy. The other view, often labelled the private interestview, accepts the presence of market failures, but conceives regulation as a product2whose outcome is determined by the interplay between suppliers and demanders.What this means is that different interest groups compete to influence policiestowards banks in ways that favour their vested interests, even if those might besocially sub-optimal.In this context, it is interesting to observe that the importance of regulationwas not lost on Adam Smith, arguably the greatest proponent of laissez faire, when3he observed that:Such regulations may, no doubt, be considered as in some respect a violation ofnatural liberty. But those exertions of the natural liberty of a few individuals, whichmight endanger the security of the whole society, are, and ought to be, restrained bythe laws of all governments; of the most free, as well as or the most despotical. Theobligation of building party walls, in order to prevent the communication of fire, is aviolation of natural liberty, exactly of the same kind with the regulations of thebanking trade which are here proposed.While there is evidence in support of both these views, the balance ofargument is in favour of regulation which has been further reinforced by the recentglobal financial crisis.1 th A Pigou (1938). The Economics of Welfare, 4 Ed (London: Macmillan)2G. Stigler (1971). “The Theory of Economic Regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics andManagement Science 2, 3-21.3 Adam Smith. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations [E-book, 2009].(Book II – Of the nature, accumulation and employment of stock; Chapter II: Of Money, consideredas a particular branch of the general stock of the society, or of the expense of maintaining thenational capital).2Crisis and RegulationBefore I delve into regulatory initiatives following the recent crisis, let mebriefly touch upon the earlier initiatives following the Asian crisis in the mid-1990s.The Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision were expedited andinitiatives such as the IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program(FSAP) took shape. The Basel II regulatory framework also saw the light of day.These international efforts were complemented by national initiatives atstrengthening the supervisory architecture.The financial crisis that began in 2007 and morphed into a full-blowncatastrophe with the collapse of Lehmann Brothers in 2008 served as a rudeawakening as to how piecemeal those efforts towards revamping the regulatory4architecture had been. A microprudential approach to supervision coupled withinformation gaps and asymmetries limited the ability of supervisors to monitor riskexposures, risk transfers and threats to systemic stability. Indeed, a recent WorldBank study on differences in regulatory and supervisory practices across 143jurisdictions comprising both advanced and emerging economies highlights the factthat not only did crisis countries allow for less stringent definitions of capital but5they also had less strict exposure limits.In addition, several “too-big-to-fail” institutions remained outside theregulatory perimeter.  The comingling of rating and advisory services by creditrating agencies perhaps gave a false sense of comfort to the supervisors.Furthermore, misalignment in incentives between home and host supervisorsimpeded cross-border information sharing. Although institutions becameinternational in scale and scope of their operations, regulation remained pre-dominantly national in character, eroding the efficacy of the supervisory apparatus.In response to these deficiencies, the leaders of the G-20 mandated theFinancial Stability Board (FSB) with enhanced role and responsibilities to promote4R.G. Rajan (2010). Fault Lines: How Hidden Fractures Still Threaten the World Economy.Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press.5World Bank (2012). Global Financial Development Report (Rethinking the role of the state infinance). The World Bank: Washington DC.3effective regulatory and supervisory policies. As part of this agenda, the BaselCommittee has prepared new capital and liquidity requirements for banks. The Baselregulatory framework rests on three pillars: Pillar I: minimum capital requirements;Pillar II:  supervisory review and evaluation process, and Pillar III: marketdiscipline.  First, the quality of capital that a bank holds has been improved alongwith the inclusion of two buffers: a microprudential capital conservation bufferdesigned to cushion banks during periods of stress overlaid with a macroprudentialcountercyclical buffer, to be applied by national authorities to smooth cyclicalswings. This has been supplemented with a backstop leverage ratio requiring banksto hold a minimum amount of equity as proportion of their total assets. Capitalsurcharges have been introduced for market and counterparty risk, includingincentives for banks to use central counterparties for OTC derivatives, higher capitalrequirements for trading and derivative activities, securitisation and off-balancesheet exposures.Second, in order to address imprudent maturity transformation, the BaselCommittee has introduced two new liquidity ratios: the Liquidity Coverage Ratio(LCR) requiring banks to have adequate funds to meet severe liquidity stress over aperiod of 30 days and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR) requiring banks to holdan adequate amount of stable funds over a one-year horizon. Third, the stipulations under Pillar II have also been substantiallystrengthened with improved requirements on corporate governance and stresstesting. The disclosure standards under Pillar III have also been upgraded whichinclude a detailed description of capital instruments and its components.Fourth, the FSB has come up with a broad range of proposals, including thoserelated to compensation practices, credit rating agencies and dealing with too-big-to-fail issues.Fifth, the IMF has also raised the profile of financial stability assessmentsunder the FSAP of 25 jurisdictions with systemically important financial sectorswhich includes India.4Let me now turn to key initiatives at the national level in major jurisdictions.Countries have reoriented their institutional arrangements with an overarching focuson financial stability. Three broad models of such arrangements are discernible. Inthe first case, the central bank has been assigned the role of systemic stabilityregulator. This approach is best exemplified by the Financial Policy Committee(FPC) of the UK.  In the second case, a coordinated systemic stability regulatorycouncil, typically headed by the chief of the Treasury and comprising of heads ofnational financial supervisors, has been advocated. The Financial Stability OversightCouncil (FSOC) of the US is an example of such an approach. The third model isthe European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) arrangement. Its main focus is ensuringmacroprudential oversight of the financial system within the European Union (EU)so as to mitigate systemic risks to financial stability in the EU.The above jurisdictions are also contemplating regulations that imposerestrictions on the scope of banking activity, or have already taken steps towardsdoing so. These include the Volcker rule in the US, the Vickers Commission in theUK and the European Commission's Likanen Report. Draft legislations in this regard6are underway in Germany and France.The aftermath of the crisis has also pointed to a need for reforms in the7shadow banking system . In the US and elsewhere, policymakers are engaged indebates to ensure that the risks inherent in shadow banking are appropriatelyunderstood and managed. The FSB has recently published its Global ShadowBanking Monitoring Report examining the interconnectedness between banks andnon-banks.While several initiatives have been taken, it is not clear how safe they wouldmake the financial sector. There are views that the Basel capital standards have6L.Gambacorta and A van Rixtel (2013). Structural bank regulation initiatives: Approaches andimplications. BIS Working Paper 412, BIS: Basel.7The definition of shadow banking, as adopted by the Financial Stability Board (FSB, 2011) iscredit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system.58become too complex for their own good. To quote from Admati and Hellwig9(2013):Today’s banking system, even with proposed reforms, is as dangerous and fragile asthe system that brought us the recent crisis. But this situation could change.What is important to note is that the global financial crisis has triggered ahealthy discussion on the best approach to regulation and supervision. This willinform the regulatory process going forward, leading to better future outcomes.  Letme now turn to our experience with financial sector reforms and regulation in India.The Indian ApproachIn India, the financial system till the early 1990s was essentially gearedtowards the needs of planned development, with an overarching role for thegovernment.  A large proportion of bank deposits was pre-empted in the form ofreserves. Added to this was an administered regime of interest rates characterized bydetailed prescriptions by size, purpose and activity. The penetration of technologywas limited and the quality of customer service was low. Consequently, the bankingsystem was characterised by low competition, insufficient capital, low productivityand high intermediation costs. Financial sector reforms since the early 1990s was premised on the idea thatthe competitive efficiency in the real sector can only be fully exploited whenaccompanied by substantive improvements in the financial sector. Accordingly, themajor focus of such reforms was to improve the allocative efficiency of resources.Concurrently, reforms have also focused on developing financial markets, removalof structural bottlenecks, introduction of new players and instruments, market-determined pricing of financial assets and improved clearing and settlementpractices. In essence, the thrust has been to create depth and liquidity and promoteefficient price discovery.8A Haldane and V. Madouros (2012).“The dog and the frisbee”. Paper presented at the FederalthReserve Bank of Kansas City’s 36 Economic Policy Symposium, The Changing Policy Landscape,Jackson Hole, WY, USA.9 A.Admati and M.Hellwig (2013). The Bankers’ New Clothes. Princeton University Press.6Indeed, the progress of financial development is evidenced from the variousfinancial ratios at the macro level (Chart 1). Illustratively, the finance ratio - the ratioof total financial claims in the economy to national income – has risen from 0.17during the early 1970s to 0.61 by 2011-12, indicating financial deepening.Similarly, the financial interrelations ratio – the ratio of total financial claims to netdomestic capital formation – has increased from 1.38 to 2.0 during thecorresponding period.Chart 1: Flow-of-funds based indicators of financial developmentThe liquidity- and credit-based indicators also paint a similar picture. Forexample, the credit-to-GDP ratio and the broad money (M )-to-GDP ratio have both3increased substantially over the years (Chart 2). Interestingly, while currency-to-GDP ratio declined somewhat, it is the sharp increase in deposits-to-GDP ratio sincethe mid-1970s that pushed up the money supply, reflecting a greater role of thebanking sector in economic development.7Chart 2: Liquidity and credit-based indicators of financial developmentIn terms of regulation, reforms have evolved to gradually bring the Indiannorms at par with international best practices, while taking on board the country-specific considerations. Accordingly, prudential norms relating to capital adequacyincome recognition, asset classification and provisioning (IRAC) were introducedearly in the reforms process.India was one of the earliest countries that employed macroprudentialmeasures in 2004 by imposing higher risk weights on bank lending to selectedsectors that seemed in danger of over-extension.  While cross-national studies on the10efficacy of macroprudential policies are not entirely conclusive , the balance ofevidence in the Indian context appears to suggest that these measures were effectivein moderating credit expansion.The robust regulatory framework, well-managed banking system and timelyand proactive action by the policymakers prevented any serious contagion of theglobal financial crisis that unravelled in 2008. However, the long-drawn global10S. Claessens, S.R. Ghosh and R.Mihet (2013).“Macroprudential policies to mitigate financialvulnerabilities.” Journal of International Money and Finance 39, 153-185.8recessionary headwinds and several domestic policy uncertainties began to graduallyseep their way through into the macro-economy, compounding the policychallenges. The crisis fast-forwarded several of the reforms that were on the anvil. Thetime dimension of macroprudential policies were supplemented with measures thatfocused on the cross-section such as limits on cross-investments in capitalinstruments of banks and financial institutions, limits on aggregate uncollateralisedinter-bank liabilities and limits on bank investments in mutual funds. Recognisingthat credit quality concerns could derail the stability of the financial system, a higherProvisioning Coverage Ratio was stipulated for banks. This is proposed to bereplaced by a more robust dynamic provisioning practice, which is expected to be inplace with improvements in the system. In addition, guidelines have been issued for unhedged foreign currencyexposures of corporates, measures announced for restructuring of advances by banksand financial institutions, guidelines issued on liquidity risk management and banks’exposures to group entities. The oversight of banks is strengthened with theintroduced of Risk Based Supervision (RBS) process, beginning April 2013. Theconsultative process in supervision has also been buttressed with the establishmentof supervisory colleges and the signing of MoU with several overseas financialsector regulators.Even before the crisis, the institutional arrangement in the financial sectorwas already in place for inter-regulatory co-ordination to monitor financial stabilityin the economy. A High Level Co-ordination Committee on Financial Markets(HLCCFM) was set up in 1992 with the Governor of the Reserve Bank as Chairman,and the Chiefs of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the InsuranceRegulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) and the Pension Fund Regulatoryand Development Authority (PFRDA), and the Finance Secretary to Government ofIndia as members. However, post-crisis, the collegial approach to financial stabilityhas been further strengthened by constituting the Financial Stability andDevelopment Council (FSDC).9In addition, various committees of the Reserve Bank’s Central Board monitorfinancial stability issues:  the Board for Financial Supervision reviews the ReserveBank’s supervisory and regulatory initiatives and the Board for Payment andSettlement Systems oversees the overall functioning of the payment system.Keeping in view the manifold requirements of finance for an ever-expandingeconomy, the Reserve Bank undertook a review of the existing banking structure interms of its size, capacity, ability to meet divergent credit and banking servicesneeds, access and inclusiveness.  As part of this process, a Discussion Paper onBanking Structure was released, taking on board the observations made by earliercommittees in this regard. Two salient features of the Discussion Paper wereadvocating a multi-tiered banking structure to cater to various niches of the societysupplemented by a process of continuous authorisation for new banks to enhancecompetition, enrich product diversity and promote newer ideas in the financialmarketplace. I might also mention in this context that the recently released report ofthe RBI-appointed Committee tasked with the mandate of broadening access tofinance chaired by Dr. Nachiket Mor has also advocated different categories ofbanks that can collectively meet the needs of the economy. Going forward, as the financial sector grows in size and complexity, newerforms and dimensions of risk will emerge that will need to be carefully monitored. Abeginning has already been made with issuance of guidelines on domesticallysystemically important banks (D-SIBs) and the creation of a central repository onlarge common exposures.Conclusion Let me conclude by highlighting some issues of relevance to the financialsector.First, the quality of loan portfolio of financial institutions is directly dependenton the health of the non-financial enterprise sector. However, the current weaknessesin corporate balance sheets partly due to subdued economic environment have beenfeeding into banks' balance sheets. This trend, if left unchecked, could ultimately10impinge on financial stability. In this context, the Reserve Bank has recentlyoutlined a corrective action plan for tackling delinquent loans, includingincentivising their early identification, timely revamp and prompt steps for theirrecovery or sale.Second, there is a need to further beef up the levels of transparency anddisclosures standards.  Several countries have begun publishing financial stabilityreports (FSRs) to provide an objective assessment of the risks and vulnerabilitiesconfronting their financial systems. However, publishing a FSR is not by itself11sufficient to ensure financial stability. FSRs for many countries are less thancomprehensive owing to serious data gaps, which impede a holistic assessment oftheir financial sector, particularly the non-banking sector. While we have expandedthe depth and analytical content of our FSRs, we are also looking into the data gapsin the financial sector that need to be addressed to improve our assessment.Third, as we move along the path of stricter and more comprehensiveregulation, it is important not to lose sight of the pricing mechanism, as determinedby market forces. In India, we have, over time, moved away from an administeredstructure of interest rates, both on the lending and the deposit sides. Thesederegulations have given flexibility to banks to price their deposits and loans andhave improved access to formal finance. Notwithstanding these advancements,distortions in pricing still persist which need to be addressed.Fourth, in an underdeveloped financial system, lenders and borrowers may betwo distinct categories. However, as the economy has gathered momentum andcompetition among banks has intensified, newer areas of lending, such as those forhousing, education, automobiles - broadly categorised under the rubric of retailloans –has emerged, blurring the watertight distinction between lenders andborrowers. Hence, competitive and transparent pricing of both deposit and loanproducts has become important to enhance social welfare.11M.Cihak, S.Munoz, S.T.Sharifuddin and K.Tintchev (2012). Financial stability reports: What arethey good for? IMF Working Paper 1. IMF: Washington DC.11 Fifth, the recent global crisis has highlighted the relevance of improvinginvestor awareness, not only for ensuring orderly market conditions, but also forefficacy of regulation. However robust the regulatory framework might be, unlessthe small investor is adequately informed, it is possible for fly-by-night operators toexploit the regulatory arbitrage.  In this context, the Reserve Bank is taking steps toimprove awareness through the financial literacy campaign.To sum up, the global financial crisis has given a greater macroprudentialorientation to financial regulation and emphasised on better quality capital so as tosafeguard financial stability.  While there are differences in views on matters ofdetails, there is broad acceptance of the new direction in regulation. India being aparticipant in global initiatives, with presence in various international bodies, oureffort has been to adopt international best practices with necessary modifications tosuit our local conditions.  However refined the financial regulation might be, itcannot compensate for weaknesses in the real economy.  Hence, macroeconomicstability characterised by fiscal prudence sustainable growth with low inflation isimportant to preserve the overall stability of the financial system.Thank you.12
