January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Towards Globalisation in the Financial Sector in India*Y.V. REDDYI am indeed very happy to be, once interest of its citizens. In the context of publicagain, amongst friends– albeit in a slightly policy relating to globalisation, a critical issuedifferent capacity. All of you have been totally is the trade-off between individual freedomsupportive to me and, I must express my deep and collective self-interest as also where thesense of gratitude to you for the warm and burden of proof lies, namely, with individualsaffectionate welcome that you gave for my or national authorities.appointment. My address today is in theGlobalisation has several dimensionsnature of sharing of some of my preliminaryarising out of what may be called thethought processes on the subject ofconsequential enhanced connectivity amongglobalisation and the financial sector. Thepeople across borders. While such enhancedpresentation today starts with a framework forconnectivity is determined by threeappreciating globalisation and then providesfundamental factors, viz., technology, tastesome insights in the context of the financialand public policy, cross-border integration cansector, with special reference to banking. Inhave several aspects: cultural, social, politicalthe Indian context I would setout some of theand economic. For purposes of thisinitiatives by Reserve Bank of India, which arepresentation, however, the focus is onrelevant to the issue of globalisation.economic integration. Broadly speaking,Globalisation : A Framework economic integration occurs through threechannels, viz., movement of people, goodsThe concept of globalisation, in theand services, and movements in capital andsense in which it is used now, can be tracedfinancial services.to the phenomenon of nation states.Government-imposed restrictions on The most notable achievement of recentmovement of goods, services, people and globalisation is the freedom granted to some,capital are less than a hundred years old; in if not all, from the tyranny of being rooted tofact, passports and visas and the whole gamut a place and the opportunity to move andthof restrictions are a feature of the late 19 connect freely. For example, many IndiansthCentury and the first half of the 20 Century. relatively from poorer sections have benefitedThe nation state put restrictions on its citizens by developments in Middle East while manyin their involvement with other nation states talented professions gained from movementin what was perceived as the collective self- to UK and USA. At the same time, in reality,Inaugural Address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Twenty-Fifth Bank Economists’*Conference – 2003 at ITC Grand Maratha Sheraton Hotel, Mumbai on December 11, 2003.69January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004there are several economic as well as non- domestic and cross-border transactions. Theeconomic, especially cultural or emotional implications for public policy of suchreasons for people not globalising. developments in the domestic area are on adifferent footing in the sense that domesticIn regard to trade in or movement offinancial markets are in some ways subjectgoods and services across borders, there areto governmental regulation by nationaltwo types of barriers, viz., what are describedauthorities while cross-border flows are not asas natural and artificial. Natural barriers relatesusceptible to governmental regulation. Finally,to various costs involved in transportation andin the context of cross-border capital flows, ininformation over distances. Artificial barriersthe absence of procedures for dealing withare those that are related to public policy,international bankruptcy and facilities for thesuch as, import restrictions by way of tariff orlender of last resort, the liabilities incurred onnon-tariff barriers. The pace and nature ofprivate account can devolve on publicglobalisation will depend on the combinedaccount. In brief, at this juncture, in respecteffect of technology and public policy, both atof global economic integration throughnational and international levels.movement of capital, several risks devolve onIn regard to capital movement also, thedomestic public authorities, especially in theinterplay between technology and public policycase of developing countries.becomes relevant. There are, however, somespecial characteristics of capital flows. These Globalisation is a complex phenomenoncharacteristics have highlighted the issue of and a process that is, perhaps, best managedwhat is described as contagion, namely, a by public policies. In managing the process,country is affected by developments totally developing countries face challenges from aoutside of its policy ambit though domestic world order that is particularly burdensome onpolicy may, to some extent, determine the them. Yet, as many developing countries havedegree of vulnerability to the contagion. In any demonstrated, it is possible for public policycase, cross-border flows of capital have wider to manage the process with a view tomacroeconomic implications, particularly in maximising benefits to its citizens whileterms of the exchange rate that directly affects minimising risks. The nature of optimalthe costs and movement of people as well as integration, however, is highly country specificgoods and services; the conduct of monetary and contextual. On balance, there appears topolicy and the efficiency as well as stability of be a greater advantage in well-managed andthe financial system. Furthermore, capital flows appropriate integration into the global process,by definition involve future liabilities or assets which would imply not large-scale but moreand could involve inter-generational equity effective interventions by governments. In fact,issues. markets do not and cannot exist in a vacuum,i.e., without some externally imposed rulesDevelopments in technology andand such order is a result of public policy.innovation in financial services impact both70January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004assessment of international financial flows thatThe poor, the vulnerable and themuch more difficult to capture in the data.underprivileged will continue to be theresponsibility of national governments andIt is also interesting to consider thehence of concerns to public policy. Soundpattern of net capital flows to emerging marketpublic policies at the national level in countrieseconomies. While private net directlike ours are very critical in the current contextinvestment has been consistently positive andof levels of development and extent ofabove US $ 100 billion since 1995 to 2003,globalisation. In brief, it is necessary toprivate net portfolio investment which wasrecognise that nation-states, as those stillpositive in the years 1995 to 1999 is sinceprimarily responsible for social order in thenegative in the rest of the years. The rangecommunities in which people live, have a dutyduring 1995-2003 has been from a positiveto manage the process of globalisation. ThisUS $ 83 billion to a negative of US $ 53challenge is particularly complex in the areabillion. It is, thus clear that both in terms ofof financial services, more so in the case ofmagnitude and stability, private directbanks in the larger emerging economies.investment seems to have a significant edgeover portfolio investment.Globalisation in the Context of theFinancial SectorOn the quality of capital flows, it isinteresting to note that at the end of 1997,At the outset, it would be useful tothe estimated share of Off-shore Financialconsider the emerging picture of financialCentres in the total of cross border assetsflows as per the latest data released by IMFstood at 54.2 per cent, as per a recent studyin the context of increasing globalisation. Forby OECD discussed in the G-20 meeting inalmost all the years from 1999, the currentMexico. The study mentions that inadequateaccount balance of advanced economies hasaccess to bank information in such centresbeen negative and it is estimated to reachgreatly facilitates money laundering, smugglingUS $ 225 billion in the year 2004 from aof goods, counterfeiting and financingpositive of US $ 41 billion in 1998. Theterrorism, etc. In any approach to the policiesdeveloping countries, which had a currentrelating to the financial integration, it may beaccount deficit of US $ 83 billion in 1998, areuseful to keep these facts in mind, particularlyestimated to have a surplus balance of aboth quantitative and qualitative factors inprojected US $ 28 billion in 2004. It issuch flows, particularly in the context of theinteresting to note that while globalisation isbanking sector.expected to result in flows of capital fromdeveloped to developing countries, it is not As already mentioned, there is anclear whether the turn arounds in the current increasing recognition of a distinction betweenaccount deficits is a temporary phenomenon.trade integration and financial integration andThe removal or attenuation of cross-border this distinction has been recognised forcefullybarriers to trade and capital flows renders in a recent study made a few months ago by71January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004the IMF. The summary of the study reads as integration with the rest of the world, capitalfollows: flows both foreign direct investment andportfolio investment, are predominantly“The empirical evidence has notaccounted for by a few countries which areestablished a definitive proof thatnot very high in terms of financial integrationfinancial integration has enhancedwith rest of the world. In other words, de juregrowth for developing countries.financial integration seems to be distinct fromFurthermore, it may be associated withde facto integration. Furthermore, the way thehigher consumption volatility. Therefore,financial markets as well as internationalthere may be value for developingfinancial institutions respond to economiescountries to experiment with differentrequiring adjustment problems appear to bepaces and strategies in pursuingasymmetrical. The financial markets, in fact,financial integration. Empirical evidencetend to be far more pro-cyclical in the casedoes suggest that improvingof the emerging economies, thus makinggovernance, in addition to soundemerging economies subject to greatermacroeconomic frameworks and thevolatility in flows than the other countries.development of domestic financialIt is essential to recognise that the capacitymarkets, should be an important elementof economic agents in developing economies,of such strategies.particularly poorer segments, to manageIt might not be essential for a country tovolatility in all prices, goods or forex are highlydevelop a full set of sound institutionsconstrained and there is a legitimate role formatching the best practices in the worldnon-volatility as a public good.before embarking on financialGlobalisation and the Banking Sectorintegration. Doing so might strain thecapacity of the country. An intermediateIt is in this overall scenario, the policyand more practical approach could berelating to the financial services, and into focus on making progress on the coreparticular banking, must be considered. It isindicators noted above, namelyinteresting to note that WTO negotiations ontransparency, control of corruption, rulefinancial services have been cautious and theof law, and financial supervisorycommitments of many larger economies in thecapacity……..”banking sector are rather particularly limited.In other words, in the context of issue ofApart from this interesting research onnational ownership of financial intermediaries,the subject, on a judgemental basis,banks appear to have a unique place in publicconsidering the cross-country experiences, itpolicy. There are several noteworthyis possible to discern some disconnectsfeatures of ownership and control of banks inbetween impressions and reality. Thoughall major economies – irrespective of whethermany developing countries have adoptedthey are developed or emerging. In almost allsignificant policy measures for financial72January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004cases, banks are either widely held or have financial intermediation in developingsubstantial State ownership. Furthermore, countries. This is understandable for severalthere are special conditions governing the reasons viz., the savers’ eagerness forextent of ownership, the nature of ownership assured income; inadequate capacity toand control, and transfers of such ownership manage financial risks and the fact that theor control through statutory backing. These banking institutions in some sense and inare justified since the banks are admittedly different degrees, enjoy deposit insurance andspecial. The discussions in WTO on either implicit or explicit guarantee ofCommitments relating to opening of domestic government.banking sector to foreign banks/ownershipIt is important to note that banking crisisreflects these concerns in most of the majorinvariably results in heavy costs to theeconomies.Government, whether they are publicly owned,privately owned, domestically owned or foreignIt is worth recalling what Sir Eddieowned. The fiscal costs of banking crises areGeorge, the Governor of Bank of England hadownership-neutral.said on the subject banks being special: “theyremain special in terms of the particularAn important question in this context isfunctions they perform - as the repository ofwhether the role of banks in financialthe economy‘s immediately available liquidity,integration in developed countries is differentas the core payments mechanism, and as thefrom that in the emerging market economies.principal source of non-market finance to aIt is useful to assess the significant differenceslarge part of the economy. And they remainin the structure of the banking industry inspecial in terms of the particularemerging vis-à-vis developed markets.characteristics of their balance sheets, whichIn most emerging markets, banks assetsare necessary to perform those functions –comprise well over 80 per cent of totalincluding the mismatch between their assetsfinancial sector assets, whereas these figuresand liabilities which makes banks peculiarlyare significantly lower in developedvulnerable to systemic risk in the traditionaleconomies. In most emerging marketsense of that term.” He is even more forthrighteconomies, the five largest banks (usuallyin making it clear that treatment of banks candomestic) account for over two-thirds of banknot be on par with non-banks. “On the otherassets. These figures are much lower inhand, I am not persuaded that the specialdeveloped economies. Another difference inpublic interest in banking activity extends tothe banking industry in developed andnon-banking financial institutions, thoughemerging economies is the degree ofdifferent functional public interests in manyinternationalisation of banking operations.cases clearly do.”Internationalisation defined as the share ofData clearly indicates that banksforeign-owned banks as a percentage of totalcontinue to play a pre-dominant role inbank assets, tends to be much lower in73January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004emerging economies. This pattern is, however,More importantly, the issue of financialnot uniform within world regions.integration and in particular the integration ofbanking sector has to be considered in termsFinally, a significant feature of banking inof overall sequencing in this process ofdeveloped versus emerging economies,integration with the rest of the world. Theespecially in recent years, has been theoverriding issue is not whether to globalise orprocess of consolidation. The most notablenot, but how best to manage the process ofdifference between the consolidation processglobalisation, particularly with a view toin developed and emerging markets is theaccelerating the process at the currentoverwhelming cross-border nature of mergersjuncture where the global outlook on India andand acquisitions in the latter. In particular,India’s confidence as well as competitivenesscross-border merger activity in continentalare strong.Europe and also between US and Europeaninstitutions has been more of an exceptionThere is now a consensus amongrather than the rule. In contrast, there has beenacademicians and policy makers that tradea sharp increase in foreign ownership of someliberalisation should take precedence overemerging market banks due to process offinancial liberalisation. Even in the context ofprivatisation often associated with crises.financial liberalisation, the liberalisation inregard to borrowings in foreign currencyAn important difference in this contextshould have a lower priority compared to allhas been the role played by the authorities inother capital flows. There is also consensusthe financial sector consolidation process. Inthat the foreign currency exposures ofmature markets, consolidation has been seenhouseholds, corporate sectors and financialas a way of eliminating excess capacity andintermediaries should be assessed separatelygenerating cost savings to the institution. Inand in a continuous fashion to assess theemerging markets, on the other, consolidationgains as well as the vulnerabilities to thehas been predominantly a way of resolvingsystem. In particular, there is a greaterproblems of financial distress, with therecognition of the need to put in placeauthorities playing a major role in the process.appropriate prudential regulation in regard toIndian Contextthe financial intermediaries insofar as foreigncurrency transactions are concerned in allWhile there has been a significantemerging countries. There is virtual unanimityprogress towards globalisation in the recentthat the currency mismatches of financialpast and policy-wise, there have beenintermediaries is a major source of downsideimpressive initiatives, the extent to which Indiarisks of financial integration which can beis globalised is considerably at the lower endmitigated by monitoring and regulations.of the emerging economies. This indicatesAmong the financial intermediaries, banks noenormous opportunities but also challengesdoubt have a unique place. There is also ain terms of transition from a stage of low base.74January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004observers, including capital markets. Thestrong consensus, globally, on the importancebanking sector in India is poised for aof what have been described as preconditionsquantum jump in productivity and scope forfor capital account convertibility – in particularexpansion in view of the competitive strengthson the fiscal front and efficiency of theacquired in Indian industry. Public sectorfinancial sector.banks have shown substantial improvements,In the context of maximising benefits ofthough in view of their large presence andfinancial integration and minimising the risks,some institutional constraints, further progressthe link with conditions in the real sectorin reform is desirable. The analysis in thecannot be lost sight of. In China, reforms inReport on Trends and Progress of Bankingreal sector preceded reforms in the financialin India a few weeks ago provides ansector and it was possibly the reason for someexcellent overview of problems, prospects,vulnerability of the latter. In India, reforms inand areas for further reforms, and hence thatfinancial sector started early in the reformwill not be covered here. The ongoing effortscycle which imparts significant efficiency, andof RBI, in close co-ordination with Governmentstability to the financial sector. The financialand consultations with market participants,sector can add competitive strength andespecially in moving up the policy as well asgrowth if reforms in the financial and realregulatory regimes to global standards, havesectors keep apace. In other words, flexibilitybeen narrated in successive announcementsin product and factor markets play a part noton Monetary and Credit Policy statements byonly in capturing the gains from financialDr. Rangarajan, Dr. Bimal Jalan, and mostsector reform but also more generally fromrecently in the Mid-term Review. Theseglobalisation. A major agenda for reform atnarrations would indicate that RBI’s effort isthis juncture for us, given the impressive all-to open up the economy, maximise benefitsround confidence in the economy, relate tofrom globalisation while minimising risks andthe structure and functioning of institutions andenable as well as equip banks to face globalin particular the high transaction costscompetition. This is an ongoing process andprevalent in our systems. There are severalI believe we in India are better equipped nowdimensions to the transaction costs – rangingthan ever before to globalise with a sense offrom legal provisions, judicial system,confidence and pride. Having said this, it isprocedures, etc. to attitudes. It is proposed touseful to mention a few initiatives beingmention a few measures being contemplatedconsidered by RBI at this juncture.by RBI in this direction.Governor Jalan in his Inaugural addressSome measures by RBIto this forum in January 2001, said – “TheAt the outset it must be recognised that long term vision for India’s banking system tothe improvements in efficiency of the financial transform itself from being a domestic one tosector in India, in particular banking sector the global level may sound far fetched athave won the respect and admiration of most present. However, it is not beyond our75January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004capacity provided we have the will and the favour of any person which would take thedetermination”. It is interesting that this year, holding of shares to more than one per centthe subject chosen relates to globalisation and (subsequently raised to five per cent) of theperhaps I should enlist a few measures taken total paid up capital of such banking company.by RBI to demonstrate the will and Since shares are acquired first and thendetermination to make our banking industry lodged for registration, the Reserve Bank’sreally global. directions create a somewhat piquantsituation. To plug the gap, a Bill has now beenConsolidationintroduced in the Parliament relating toAs mentioned by Governor Jalan in hisbanking regulation. The RBI’s proposals in thisaddress to this forum in 2002, “In financialregard should reasonably take care ofsystems worldwide, todays buzzwords aretakeover of the management by one fromcompetition, consolidation and stability”. Thereanother and the Reserve Bank will havehas been impressive stability and considerableappropriate regulatory power to satisfy itselfcompetition in India but the process ofthat persons proposing to acquire such sharesconsolidation in banking industry has justare fit and proper persons.commenced. The issue of consolidation hasThe procedure for amalgamation of twobeen addressed by the Narasimhambanking companies under Section 44A of theCommittee Report on Banking Sector ReformsBanking Regulation Act, 1949 (the Act) is easy(1998) but the issue in regard to policy is yetto follow and cost effective. After the twoto be pursued vigorously. There are threebanking companies have passed theaspects to consolidation viz., clear cut legalnecessary resolution in their general meetingsand regulatory regime governingrepresenting not less than two third value ofconsolidation, enabling policy frameworkthe shareholding of each of the two bankingespecially where several banks are owned bycompanies, proposing for the amalgamationGovernment, and market conditions thatof one bank with another bank, suchfacilitate such consolidation, recognising thatresolution containing scheme of amalgamationall mergers and acquisitions may notis submitted to the Reserve Bank for itsnecessarily be in the interests of either thesanction and if sanctioned, by an order inparties concerned or the system as a whole.writing by the Reserve Bank, is binding notAs regards the legal framework, theonly on the banking company concerned, butReserve Bank is not very comfortable withalso on all shareholders thereof. Whilelack of clear statutory provision regardingsanctioning the scheme of amalgamation, thetakeover of management of banks. In 1970,Reserve Bank takes into account the financialthe Reserve Bank had issued directions to thehealth of the two banking companies tobanks requiring them to seek the Reserveensure, inter alia, that after the amalgamation,Bank’s permission or acknowledgementthe new entity will emerge as much strongerbefore effecting any transfer of shares inbank. The experience of the Reserve Bank76January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004has been by and large satisfactory in Section 23A of the Regional Rural Banksapproving several schemes of amalgamation Act, 1976 (RRBs Act), empowers the Centralin the recent past. Government, in consultation with theNABARD, concerned State Government andThese provisions, however, do not applysponsored bank, to amalgamate two RRBs,to the banks in public sector, viz., theby issue of notification in the official gazette,nationalised banks, State Bank of India andwith such liabilities, duties and obligations asits subsidiary banks. As regards themay be specified in the notification. As in thenationalised banks, the Act authorises thecase of amalgamation of a nationalised bankCentral Government, after consultation withunder Section 9(2) of the Nationalisation Act,Reserve Bank, to prepare or make a scheme,every notification under this section is alsointer alia, for transfer of undertaking of arequired to be laid before both the Houses ofcorresponding new bank (i.e. a nationalisedParliament.bank) to another corresponding new bank orOf course, in the case of a bankingtransfer of whole or part of any bankingcompany in financial distress and having beeninstitution to a corresponding new bank. Underplaced under the order of moratorium, on anthis procedure, the New Bank of India wasapplication being made by the Reserve Bankamalgamated with Punjab National Bank butto the Central Government under sub-sectionthe experience in this regard was considered(2) of Section 45 of the Act, the Reserve Bankto be not altogether satisfactory. Unlike thecan frame a scheme of amalgamation forsanction of schemes by the Reserve Banktransferring the assets and liabilities of suchunder Section 44A of the Act, the schemedistressed bank to a much better and strongerframed by the Central Government is requiredbank. Such a scheme framed by the Reserveunder Section 9(6) of the Nationalisation ActBank is required to be sanctioned by theto be placed before the two Houses ofCentral Government and has to be notified inParliament.the official gazette. As in case ofThe State Bank of India Act, 1955,amalgamation sanctioned by the Centralempowers the State Bank of India with theGovernment under the Nationalisation Act andconsent of the management of any bankingRRBs Act, the notification issued forinstitution (which would also include a bankingcompulsory amalgamation under Section 45company) to acquire the business, includingof the Act is also required to be placed beforethe assets and liabilities of any bank. Underthe two Houses of Parliament.this provision, what is required is the consentOne area of concern to the Reserveof the concerned bank and the approval ofBank is amalgamation of non-bankingthe Reserve Bank and the sanction of suchcompanies with banking companies as the lawacquisition by the Central Government.does not impose any obligation on the partSeveral banks were acquired by the Stateof such non-banking company (for that matter,Bank of India by invoking this section.77January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004even of the concerned banking company) to which are the minimum requirements for aseek the Reserve Bank’s regulatory approval sound payment system. These requirementsbefore filing the scheme of amalgamation in were also highlighted in the year 2000 by thethe High Courts under Sections 391 of the Bhide Advisory Group which examined theCompanies Act, 1956. To take care of these International Standards and Codes relating togaps, Reserve Bank has proposed some payment systems, from the perspective ofamendments to the legislation on Banking conformity in the Indian context.Regulation Act that amalgamation of a non-With the growing importance beingbanking company with a banking company willascribed towards payment and settlementbe made by following the similar proceduresystems the world over, and in view of theirwhich is applicable for amalgamation of twosignificance for financial stability, most centralbanking companies.banks have set up an appropriate machineryPayment Systemto regulate and supervise such systems toprovide for an explicit legal base for paymentPayment and settlement systems in Indiaand settlement systems. In this background,have had a long history. The currenta draft ’Payment and Settlement Systems’ billpredominant mode of funds settlement iswas prepared by the Reserve Bank andthrough the clearing process - achieved byforwarded to the Government of India.the functioning of about 1050 clearing housesin the country. These clearing houses functionIn anticipation of the statutory changes,on the basis of the ‘Uniform Regulations andcertain preliminary steps are proposed to beRules for Bankers’ Clearing Houses’ (URR),taken by the Reserve Bank to build thea model regulation propounded by therequisite infrastructure for having effectiveReserve Bank. Though the systems aresupervision over payment and settlementpredominantly confined to cheque clearing,systems. A Board for Payment and Settlementmany other types have also gainedSystems (BPSS) is proposed to be constitutedsignificance - such as electronic payment andsoon. The Board would function in a mannersettlement, securities settlement, and foreignsimilar to the Board for Financial Supervision.exchange settlement. All these are regulatedBPSS would provide policy directions in areasby their respective rules and procedures, asrelating to regulation and supervision ofin the case of the Rules relating to Electronicpayment and settlement systems, approval ofClearing Service (ECS), the Electronic Fundpayment systems, criteria for membership,Transfer (EFT) Regulations and the bye-lawsvarious aspects relating to admission,relating to the operations of the systems ofcontinuation and denial of membership,the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd.handling of offences etc. This initiative wouldThe Bank for International Settlements, ensure that all the payment and settlementBasel, has formulated a set of ‘Core Principles systems in the country are subject to goodfor Systemically Important Payment Systems’ and efficient governance and that they adopt78January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004the best practices in risk management which Users’ Panel on Regulatory Instructionsis a prime requirement relating to a safe,A Standing Technical Committee onsecure and efficient payment and settlementFinancial Regulation has been constitutedsystems. These arrangements should facilitaterecently to advise on regulatory regimeseasy transition to a more formal statutoryadministered by RBI. It is recognised that insystem.spite of existing consultative process, severalRating of Supervision regulatory instructions, while laudable in theircontext are not clear or unambiguous inThe supervision of banks is, on allcapturing operational issues at theaccounts, becoming extremely complex. Theimplementation stage. On the basis ofsupervisors are required to acquire technicaldiscussions in the RBI, it has been decidedskills, exhibit considerable judgements onto prepare, in consultation with self regulatorysystems and develop inter- institutionalorgansiations, a Users’ Consultative Panelinteractions on a continuing basis. Whileconsisting of those incharge of compliance inevery effort is made by the Reserve Bank inthe regulated institutions. The intention is tothis regard, there is considerable benefit inobtain feedback on regulations at theintroducing a system of feedback from theformulation stage to avoid ambiguities andsupervised banks on the adequacy,operational glitches. The Reserve Bank will,appropriateness and quality of supervision.from time to time, seek advice from selectThis would help in rating of our supervisorymembers of the panel to avoid burdening allperformance from time to time and obtainofficials in the regulated units. I would seeksuggestions for improvements from a rangefull co-operation from the banking industry inof banks, large and small foreign and local.this regard.In the light of discussions in the RBI earlierthis week, a decision has been taken to Conclusionsintroduce such a system of feedback onIn conclusion, I would like to emphasisesupervision from the supervised on a regularthe role of institutions and incentives inand continuing basis. We expect to seekensuring globalisation that benefits all. Thefurther guidance from Board for Financialglobal giants in banking all over the world areSupervision, due to hold its meeting nextmanned by Indians, educated and trained inweek and finalise an ongoing system ofIndia. The best of technology for the mostfeedback.sophisticated banks in the world is providedIt is hoped that with these arrangements, by Indian companies and by Indians in foreignsome of the unnecessary elements will be companies. Yet, banks in India do not as yeteliminated while enhancing quality of appear to be world class, though I have, nosupervision particularly in terms of its utility to doubt, that our banks could well be on thethe supervised and result in overall reduction anvil of being reckoned to be on par withof transaction costs. international banks. My submission is that, to79January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004reach global standards, and hopefully surpass Hanson, James. A (2003): “Are Smallthem, we need to focus on legal, institutional Countries Underbanked?”, In James A.and transactions aspects; and the RBI’s Hanson, Patrick Honohan, and Giovannimeasures detailed today try to make a small Majnoni (eds.): Globalisation and Nationalbeginning in addressing some of these issues. Financial Systems, Washington D.C: WorldBank.Let me thank the organisers for theopportunity and RBI looks forward to getting the Lamfalussy, Alexandre (2000): Financial Crisisbenefit of your discussions in this Conference. in Emerging Markets, New Haven: YaleUniversity Press.References:Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-JinBarth, J, G.Caprio and R.Levine (2001): “TheWei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2003): “Effects ofRegulation and Supervision of Banks AroundFinancial Globalisation on Developingthe World: A New Database”, mimeo, WorldCountries: Some Empirical Evidence”, mimeo,Bank.International Monetary Fund.Caprio, G, and D. Klinzebiel (2003): “EpisodesReserve Bank of India (2003), Report onof Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises”,Currency and Finance, 2001-02.mimeo, World Bank.Reserve Bank of India (2003), Report onGeorge, Eddie (1997): “Are Banks StillTrend and Progress of Banking in India,Special?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,2002-03.February.80
