Forex Markets in India: Some ThoughtsIt gives me great pleasure to address this gathering of forex professionals from all overthe country. Looking at the list of speakers from the central bank who have addressed thisaugust assembly in the past, I find that you have opted for change by inviting theregulator/supervisor rather than the exchange rate policy maker and manager from RBI.Although I am not very certain as to why, may be the fact that I was on your side of themarket till a few months ago might have prompted this change!Ever since I accepted this invitation, I have been pondering about the contents of thisaddress. I shall not obviously be speaking at great length either about RBI’s ExchangeRate policies or Management. We have left nobody in doubt about our intentions in thisregard, i.e., ensuring orderly market conditions and combating excess volatility. Havingachieved this to a great degree of success, even in the face of turmoil all round us, this isperhaps the ideal forum for an informed debate as to how we should move forward.It was Keynes who once remarked that knowing nothing about the past makes a man asprimitive as knowing nothing about the future. In other words, one cannot live in thepresent alone. Although in the financial markets, future need not have a link to the past,nevertheless, it is important to know a bit of the past to make informed predictions aboutthe future. The outline of my address would therefore be to take a bird’s eye view of thepast, reflect on the present scenario and charter a road map for the future.In a market oriented economy, segmented markets tend to obscure the transmission ofpublic policies and often result in sub optimal allocation of resources. In India for a longtime the pace of development in the financial market segments like the money market,foreign exchange market, government securities market and the capital market have beenslow and consequently the markets remained segmented. A comprehensive package ofreform measures recommended by the Narasimham Committee in 1991 became thestarting point of gradual deregulation of the financial sector and the integration of varioussegments of the financial market. However, it was the implementation of therecommendations of the Sodhani Committee on foreign exchange markets that furtheredthe course of integration between call money market and the foreign exchange market.The linkage between the call money and forex market existed in a small way in the pastas banks were permitted to maintain nostro account surpluses or avail of overdrafts to alimited extent. This has further strengthened following the introduction of FCNR (B)Scheme and particularly after the permission was accorded to borrow and lend overseasupto 15% of Tier I capital. This linkage is often more pronounced in times of volatilemarket conditions.The emerging linkages among money, Government securities and foreign exchangemarkets have required the RBI at times to use short-term monetary measures alongsidemeeting demand-supply mismatches to arrest excessive volatilities in the foreignexchange market.  While there is no settled conclusion about the appropriateness of anexchange rate regime, the primary objective of the Reserve Bank, as stated earlier,continues to be the maintenance of orderly market conditions no doubt, in a regime whereexchange rate is determined by demand and supply conditions.  Some of the recentempirical work in the Indian context do suggest evidence of growing integration betweenmoney, debt and foreign exchange markets with relatively weak convergence of capitalmarkets.  In the aftermath of terrorist attacks in the US, the Indian financial markets havesometimes exhibited some tendencies to be in tandem with the movements in globalfinancial markets, reflective of the growing inter-linkages between domestic andinternational markets on the one hand and among various segments of the domesticfinancial market on the other, as a result of financial sector reforms and increasingglobalisation led by IT.In this context, I would like to highlight some critical data regarding the forex market.There is a widespread feeling that market volumes have dropped significantly on accountof certain measures taken by the Reserve Bank in the past like withdrawing the freedomto rebook cancelled forward contracts, placing restrictions on swaps etc. But the datacollected by the Reserve Bank belie this belief.  The average monthly turn over in themerchant segment of the forex market increased from USD 20 billion in 1999-2000 toUSD 23 billion during 2000-01.  The average monthly turn over in the inter bank foreignexchange market has also increased to USD 90 billion in 2000-01. A recent survey of theforeign exchange market turn over during April 2001 by the BIS in which 43 countriesincluding India participated reveals the interesting fact that while forex turn over worldover has declined considerably as compared to 1998, India bucks this trend by showingan increased turn over.Let me now turn to the specific issues relating to the Indian forex market that would needto be addressed. The market is skewed with a handful of public-sector banks accountingfor the major share of the merchant transactions and the private and foreign banks havinga greater share of inter-bank business. It is conducive for healthy market development tohave much larger number of players active in the market with enhanced volumes ofbusiness.  The presence of increased number of players and larger volumes alone lendcertainly greater depth to the forex market leading to a more efficient functioning.Forex derivatives have not picked up sufficiently. The development of a vibrantderivatives market in India would critically depend on the growth in the rupee basedderivative products, which in turn depends on a well developed and liquid forward dollar-rupee market. This would in turn require development of a deep and liquid inter-bankterm money market.  In this regard, making tax laws pertaining to derivativesunambiguous and liberal will go a long way in the development of an active derivativemarket.  In our market in its present stage, the focus of reforms should be the growth ofrupee-based derivatives. The RBI took a major step in this context by putting in place anAsset-Liability Management (ALM) system for the banks. But any attempt at makingALM as a catalyst for the development of more vibrant and integrated financial marketswould need to recognize the following characteristics of the Indian financial system.1) Retail nature of the Indian banking system that makes it difficult to get real timeinformation. The answer lies in spreading technology based solutions.2) Absence of a clear-cut transfer pricing system, firstly on account of lack ofcentralization of treasury operations and secondly on account of the absence of arupee yield curve across maturities. A recent article by Zagorski in the CapitalMarkets News published by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago highlights theimportance transfer pricing system. To quote “ without a well-implemented fundstransfer pricing system the impact of interest rate risk is buried within the resultsof the other operating units. Thus a bank would not be able to accurately measurethe profitability of either its Treasury unit or its business units, and would notprecisely understand the volatility of its net interest margin”.3) Absence of adequate instruments to hedge interest rate risks.There is also a need to put comprehensive risk management system in place.  Riskmanagement concepts, such as, value at risk (VaR) need to be developed andimplemented in the Indian market. Technological upgradation in forex transactions,clearing and settlement is a pre-requisite for developing a proper risk managementsystem.  The setting up of Clearing Corporation of India is a step in this direction.  The2Clearing Corporation of India, in addition to government securities, will also handleinter-bank forex settlements, which will go a long way in enhancing the efficiency andsecurity of our settlement system for government and forex securities. The objectives ofthe forex clearing arrangement is to provide market infrastructure to mitigate and managesettlement risks while also reducing the costs associated with these transactions.  TheCorporation which is planning to act as a central counterparty for effecting clearing andsettlement through de facto multilateral netting is in an advanced stage ofoperationalisation.  It is in the interest of the Authorised Dealers that they becomemembers of the Clearing Corporation at the earliest and undertake the changes requiredin regard to their back office software systems to get them integrated with the CCILsystem.  I understand that shortly FEDAI will be organising a Seminar to help itsmembers expedite the formalities of taking up membership of Clearing Corporation tohasten the process of implementation of the project. Reserve Bank attaches considerablesignificance to an early operationalisation of the forex clearing system.In the context of integration of Indian financial market with international markets, themove towards capital account convertibility, which has an important bearing on our forexmarket, assumes paramount significance.  Some of the preconditions/signposts for capitalaccount convertibility, as mentioned in the CAC committee report, such as, fiscalconsolidation, mandated inflation rate, consolidation of the financial sector, adequacy offoreign exchange reserves, sound BoP situation, etc., need to be adhered to properlybefore rupee is made fully convertible on capital account.  As CAC integrates both thereal as well as the financial sectors with the international economy, the impact of externalimpulses would be felt more strongly, which makes it imperative to have thepreconditions in place before full capital account convertibility is allowed.In the present context, the major thrust of RBI Policies would continue to focus on thedevelopment of deep, liquid and integrated financial markets.  The importance attached tothe forex market would be evident from preamble to the newly enacted Foreign ExchangeManagement Act.  One of the main objectives of the FEMA is to promote the orderlydevelopment of the foreign exchange market in India.In this context let us identify issues that are of immediate concern both to the market andthe regulator.The first issue that would need to be addressed relates to depth and liquidity in the marketparticularly in the forward segment.  It is well known that barring well developedmarkets, forward markets are rather shallow in many of the emerging countries. Why?Given the constraints in such emerging markets are there any solutions?In most of the developing markets, liquidity is not there for maturities are not availablebeyond one year period.  I believe that this would be the case in most of the marketswhere there are restrictions on capital movements.  In other words, in markets dominatedby trade related flows and which are not financially driven, where capital controls exist,liquidity across the spectrum as seen in the developed markets, may prove to be difficultat least in the early stages of development of the market.  The question that we wouldneed to address is within these constraints, how can the liquidity improve?  Indianexperience suggests that there could be two impending factors in this regard. First is theabsence of a well developed local money market and second more important thereluctance of larger public sector banks who handle the major portion of the export-import transactions to assume the mantle “market makers”.  While the solution to the firstproblem partly lies with the Central Bank and there have been many initiatives in thisregard as I had stated earlier, it is entirely up to the bank managements to make theirbanks more pro-active in the market and realise that Forex dealing rooms could be animportant profit centre, provided proper risk management systems are in place.  You may3have a point of view that liquidity has come down after the imposition of restrictions onre-booking of cancelled contracts. While this kind of liquidity in an emerging market,which often tends to get one sided, is a debatable issue, absence of this freedom is moreacceptable than wide swings in policy prescriptions whenever volatility erupts.In the developing markets where volumes are not large, it has to be remembered that thepositioning of the markets, types of players allowed entry into the market, the amount ofunhedged position, all could prove crucial when turbulence erupts.  The last mentionedissue that of unhedged positions of the corporates is curently attracting the attentionworld over.  Reserve Bank would welcome and support efforts of the banks in monitoringsuch positions on an ongoing basis since this is closely linked to the issue of credit risk aswell.A major issue that has attracted sustained debate among the Forex market participantsduring the last one year, has been the issue of long term rupee – foreign currency swap.This was permitted in 1997 as a hedging mechanism for corporates who run long termforeign currency exposures.  When instances of use of this product to merely take a viewon the currency movements and putting in place structures that would be tantamount tocorporates effecting pre payment of the foreign currency loan were noticed, banks wereadvised last year to put through transactions only on a fully matched basis.  The matterhas since been reviewed and the banks accorded limited freedom to run a swap book.  Weare aware that banks have been raising a few issues in this regard and demanding greaterfreedom to make this product a genuine hedging tool.  Reserve Bank would continue tomonitor transactions in this area and take pro-active decisions with a view to offeringfurther relaxations wherever warranted.There have been demands from the market players to be accorded greater freedom in theinvestment of foreign currency funds and using new products like the options to bettermanage their balance sheet and proprietary trading positions. Given the fact that FCNR(B) deposits are presently accepted for maturity ranging upto three years, there isjustifiable demand for permitting longer tenor investment out of these funds.  ReserveBank of India is actively reviewing the current restrictions in this regard. Althoughoptions could be a very useful to any managing risk positions, particularly at theTreasurer level, there has been very limited demands from the market for using thisproduct.  Reserve Bank is open to the suggestions from the banks for using new productsto help them in better managing risks.Finally, Reserve Bank is alive to the developments around us, with its epicenter in the USthat could have a bearing on the Indian economy and the financial markets. Severalgroups within the Reserve Bank are reviewing the position in its various dimensions onan ongoing basis. Options are considered as developments unfold and expectations areformed. Actions are explored as appropriate to meet the dynamic situation. Our actionssince September 11, in regard to various financial markets testify to alertness andpromptness of RBI, whenever considered necessary.With these observations, I have great pleasure in inaugurating this Conference and wishyour deliberations all success.* Keynote address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at thethinauguration of the 12 National Forex Assembly organised by Forex Association of India at Goa onOctober 26, 20014
