March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004*Capital Flows and Indian Policy ResponseY.V. REDDYAfter such an illuminating lecture by Mumbai a couple of days ago for the meeting.Prof. Krueger and a very lively discussion, I And we are going to meet Mrs. Kruegerwould with your permission, dispense with the tomorrow in RBI. Thus, we would be able toformality of a formal address. However, as is have advantage of understanding diverseexpected of me, I will make a few comments. opinions. That is normally what India believesin and from the days of Buddha, India hasAt the outset, I should confess the mainfollowed the philosophy of preferring thereasons for my being here. It is out of mymiddle-path. We have imbibed it in ourpersonal affection, great respect forpolicies as well, and have done reasonablyscholarship and admiration for the leadershipwell in managing the economy since 1991as well as diplomatic skills of Prof. Krueger,when the IMF had to come to our rescue.that I made it a point to be here. Of course,Balancing is the crux of middle path andas the Chairman of the Governing Councilrequires an awareness of theory as well asof NIBM, it is also my duty to be here wheninternational practice. While theory is indeedthere is such a distinguished visitor. I amimportant, at the same time, one should notfulfilling my responsibilities as Chairman inbecome a prisoner of any ideology. Althoughseveral ways; have met the NIBM faculty forthis non-ideological approach or preferencean hour in the forenoon and hope to meetto pragmatism may create some confusionand interact with the young students here aton occasions, even in our own minds in2.30 pm. Apart from these reasons, beingsome ways, it also helps and gives us ahere also gives me an opportunity to be acertain amount of resilience to the processlittle more free in whatever I say, as I canof change in a complex, uncertain andclaim I was just being an academic and notdynamic setting.Governor, RBI. So in case some media ispresent and they quote me, I also keep theWhile Prof. Krueger’s talk has givenliberty of saying that I was indulging insome boost to our ‘feel good factor’ she hasacademic discourses and not in policy-at the same time indicated the type of thingsstatements.that should be done if we have to feel better,such as in the area of public debt. We takeYou must have heard that we had thethe advice very seriously. I also agree thatWorld Social Forum meeting in Mumbai. Prof.the most ideal time to move forward with theJoseph Stiglitz was a distinguished visitor toPresidential Comments by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India on the speech “Intolerable Surge?*International Capital Flows and the Indian Policy Response” delivered by Ms. Anne O. Krueger, First DeputyManaging Director, IMF at National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM), Pune on January 21, 2004.313March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Very often, there may be broadreform is during good times because goodintellectual agreement on where to go but, thetimes are generally associated with progressproblem often is ‘how’ to go. Here, we willon several fronts. So, adjustments in termscontinue to adopt the middle path. Basicallyof burden sharing of the reforms are easierthere are two aspects to the macroeconomicsin a growth process than in a crisis situation.of reforms: the monetary and fiscal policy andSo in that sense, I would reinforce Prof.the players are RBI and Government.Krueger’s point that good times are idealCorrespondingly, there are two dominanttimes to move forward in the reformsfactors in proceeding with the reform; first isbecause it is easier to reconcile the differinghow to avoid social or political disruption,perceptions and differing interests in regardwhich is the main concern for Governmentto burden sharing during the process ofand second is how to avoid the adversetransition. And in fact one can see differentconsequences of extreme market volatility insegments of India actually benefiting throughthe process of reforms which is the mainliberalisation - with the highly skilled goingconcern for RBI. Over a period, therefore,to USA, the not-so-skilled going to Middlethere should be a social consciousness toEast and semi-skilled deriving the benefit ofaccept the logic of reforms and also theoutsourcing through the computers. So it ismarkets should be developed enough to bedifferent generations as well as people ofable to handle the volatility that may bedifferent skills that are able to take advantageinvolved in the process. In fact, you will findof globalisation. In this context, we certainlya reflection of this extremely difficult balancingendorse the view that the signs of revival ofact even in matters related to interest rates.protectionism in the world particularly amongindustrialised economies are extremelyAs Prof. Krueger rightly pointed out,disturbing.capital inflows play a very important role incapturing the benefits of globalisation, and inIn emphasising the advantages offact, our own assessment is that it is not soderegulation, globalisation and economicmuch the quantity but the quality that isreforms, a word of caution is necessary; thatmaking the difference. In the old two-gapfor a society like India, which is complex andtheory, we thought, it is the quantity of moneydiverse, comprising different states withthat counts. We are now conscious that it isdifferent levels of development, socialthe technological and managerial skills, thedisruption has to be avoided. The total costwork culture, and the synergies accompanyingof the social or political disruption or marketcapital flows that seem to give a lot moredisruption has to be weighed against the flowcontribution to growth. Even with regard toof benefits whenever we talk of economicportfolio flows from Foreign Institutionalreforms. So in that sense again, it involvesInvestors (FIIs), the way in which FIIs assessbalancing between benefits over a periodmarket practices in stock exchanges haveand costs of immediate disruptions.enhanced our own practices and skills among314March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004participants to global standards. So one has agree with Prof. Krueger, and I think it hasto look at the capital flows in a broader sense been recognised by the Tarapore Committeerather than as mere numbers and in any case Report on Capital Account Convertibility also,the issue has to be evaluated in the country that there is a greater comfort for more rapidcontext with a medium-term perspective. In capital account liberalisation when the fiscalthis connection, we believe that of late, there deficit is reasonably under control. So, thoughis strong universal endorsement of our policy our financial sector is perhaps a lot moreof calibrated capital account liberalisation. resilient and more efficient now than otherAlthough the pace of liberalisation required comparable countries, as Governor RBI, Imight be debatable, we feel that there is an would not like to take too many risks on theagreement on the need for some calibration, financial sector. Therefore, taking anand Prof. Krueger also confirmed this today. integrated view of the domestic financial aswell as the fiscal situation and the imperativesProf. Krueger has also made a veryof the international financial architecture, ourgood point about the importance of prudentialcarefully calibrated capital accountregulations in the financial sector. In fact, toliberalisation precisely captures this objective.give an example, you would have noticed therecent liberalisation of the external commercial On the question whether theborrowings. The whole process of permitting international financial architecture is in asuch external debt may be either through the position to give us comfort if we get into orautomatic route or non-automatic route, but happen to have a problem, there are twoslowly the automatic route is being expanded aspects. I entirely agree with Prof. Kruegerand the non-automatic route reduced. Again, that the resilience of the world today to handlein the capital account apart from the their economies and the private capital marketgovernment’s there are three balance sheets has improved enormously since 1997.that we take into account whether for residents Government’s macro policies, and approachesor non-residents: The balance sheet of the of international financial institutions as well ashouseholds, the corporates, and the financial the resilience of the markets have improved.intermediaries. Though in theory, everything But the risks are not eliminated. They aremay be integrated, in our phase of mitigated to some extent though not to thedevelopment, definitely these three are distinct extent needed for countries like India. So wein terms of their immediate reactions to market have to take into account the possible risks.forces. That is the reason, the recent External Indian public policy also takes into accountCommercial Borrowings (ECB) policy makes the geo-political considerations which doa clear distinction between financial influence the comfort that internationalintermediaries and corporates. So, depending financial architecture provides to a specificon the situation and the nature of balance country in times of crises. This requires asheets, one has to define the capital account continuous assessment of the degree orconvertibility. In this context, definitely I would extent of risks that can be taken by any315March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004the years ahead the debt dynamics can be acountry’s public policy, the capital accountbigger problem for developed countries also.convertibility has to be packaged within thatThen we are going to have a situation whereoverall contextual framework. Therefore, evenwe have to revisit the old hypothesis that thenon-domestic economic factors figure asbenefit of globalisation is that capital will flowinputs in determining the pace and the naturefrom developed countries to developingof capital account liberalisation.countries to fill the gap between investmentExchange rate management is againneeds for growth and domestic savings. It isone of those cases where we totally practicequite possible that capital can go fromwhat we preach. We were one of the earliestdeveloping countries to developed countriesto accept, as advised by Rangarajanas is seen to be happening in a limited senseCommittee in 1992-93 the principle that thebetween Asia and USA now. So the factexchange rate should be flexible. In fact, it isremains that public debt is an important issue.determined by demand and supply but theAnd it has to be handled over the mediumcritical question is where does flexibility stopterm and in the global context. The soonerand volatility begin. That line keeps onthe process starts and is brought underchanging depending on the country context,reasonable level, the better it is in shapingespecially the views relating to behaviour ofthe universal or unanimous perceptions of alldomestic as well as international financialthose concerned. Having said this, I wouldmarkets, and in particular the currencycertainly agree with Prof. Krueger that theremarkets. In the last ten years, we have beenis no imminent crisis or problem in India, butavoiding volatility and also moving to greatereven the most remote case of a threat toflexibility to the extent the policy and state ofstability can be totally avoided if the fiscaldevelopment of financial markets permit. So Ideficit in the medium term can be brought intothink, it is absolutely right that flexibility in theshape. More importantly, the growth rate canexchange rate provides greater comfort, asbe accelerated – to the extent of its exceedingalso freedom to monetary policy but it is a8 per cent and upto 9 per cent, as is beingcontextual and judgemental matter for policytalked - once we take demonstrably crediblemakers to determine when flexibility ends andactions for a very sound fiscal adjustment involatility begins.totality.Public debt is another important aspectFinally, I would touch upon theof macroeconomics of reforms, which hasimportance of the banking and financial sector.global linkages and global ramifications. It mayIndeed financial sector is important and, innot be a serious issue for many emergingparticular, banking is important. Howevercountries though for some it is a matter ofmuch, the capital market may develop,concern, either constraining growth orparticularly in the emerging markets, theundermining stability or both. However, givenlinkages are strong in regard to banks withthe demographics and the recent events, inthe real sector and hence banks are very316March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004special in their role in maturity transformation, to fiscal adjustment if we want our economypooling and monitoring of risks and in to grow and address issues relating toreducing information gaps or asymmetries. As poverty. Prof. Krueger has emphasised thebanks are special, the National Institute of importance of trade and capital liberalisationBank Management has a very important role and as you know, there have been significantto play. Nowadays it looks very often as announcements of trade liberalisation inthough the practitioners are forging ahead and India, in recent months. Trade and capitalthe research catches up in the financial and flows are interrelated in our country. I,the banking sector. We should, therefore, therefore, welcome the trade liberalisationattempt more and more of acquisition of measures in the current context of the capitaldomain knowledge and in spillovers of codified inflows.and tacit knowledge. Linkages withFinally, I would like to conclude with apractitioners is necessary to be able to graspstatement. There was a question from one ofand get back into the research. I am sure, inmy colleagues here about the difference inthe next Governing Council, Director Sahathe state of Indian economy in 1993 andand others would help us and I will do2003. The answer can be summed up thus:whatever I can in this regard.in the past, there was a very strongLet me conclude with the priorities consensus for a very weak economic reformindicated by Prof. Krueger (i) fiscal deficit and and the view now is that, there is a very(ii) capital flows. On fiscal deficit, we agree strong consensus for a reasonably strongwith Prof. Kreuger that we should give priority economic reform. That is good news.317
