1Public Debt Management: Reflections on Strategy & StructureI am thankful to the Centre for Public Policy, Indian Institute of Management, Bangaloreand Prof. Charan Singh in particular for inviting me to this conference. As suggested bythe organizers, I would like to share some thoughts on the strategy and structure ofpublic debt management in India with the experts and enthusiasts gathered here.2. Globally it is a well-recognised fact that countries need efficient and effectivepublic debt management as public debt portfolio is the largest portfolio in the economyand its impact could be felt across generations. This prompted Herbert Hoover toremark “Blessed are the young for they shall inherit the national debt”. Policy makersneed to bestow special attention on debt management as debt sustainability hasimplications for financial stability as well as well-being of future generations.3. The debt management in India has come of age from the phase of administeredinterest rates and high preemptions in the pre-reform period prior to 1990s. The reformsundertaken both in the debt management framework as well as in the Governmentsecurities (G-Sec) market has resulted successful management of large borrowingprogram with least market distortions or disruptions. From central bank funding budgetdeficits, we now have a system where all Government borrowings are funded throughauctions at market determined rates. Statutory pre-emptions were brought downsignificantly. The annual gross market borrowing of the Government of India and theState Governments increased from `122.83 billion in 1991-92 to ` 7602 billion in 2013-14. The amount of outstanding Government of India securities increased from `780.23billion in 1991-92 to ` 35,141 billion in 2013-14. Policy action was taken on fiscal frontby passing the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act in 2003,firmly setting targets for fiscal correction. Fiscal consolidation has both political andadministrative commitment.  G-Sec market has been developed through series ofdevelopmental measures. It is reasonably liquid and deep with diverse investor baseand instruments. Reforms, such as, introducing new instruments, expanding theinvestor base, strengthening market infrastructure, etc. have further strengthened theG-Sec market. As a result, we have a yield curve that spans for thirty years, world-classtrading and settlement infrastructure and keen foreign investor interest. On thesustainability front, the debt ratios are reasonable. Debt to GDP ratio has declined inthe past decade and stands at 39 per cent of GDP for the Central Government (49 percent of GDP for the total Central Government liabilities) in 2013-14 (RE). Interestpayments to revenue receipts ratio of the Central Government at 37 per cent in 2013-14(RE) was significantly lower than 51 per cent in 2002-03. In line with the renewed movetowards fiscal consolidation from 2012-13, GFD declined to 4.6 per cent of GDP in2013-14 (RE) from 4.8 per cent in 2012-13. It is budgeted to decline further to 4.1 percent in 2014-15.4. In this backdrop, I will share my thoughts on the debt management operations ofthe Reserve Bank of India with special emphasis on management of the Government ofIndia debt.1 thBased on the keynote address delivered by Shri Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 9Annual International Conference on “Public Policy & Management: Debt Management” at Indian Institute ofManagement, Bangalore on August 11, 2014. The contributions of Shri N R V V M K Rajendra Kumar and Km.Renuka Balakrishnan of the Reserve Bank of India are gratefully acknowledged.Role of Reserve Bank and the Government in Public Debt Management:Legal and Institutional Framework5. It is a sound practice to have appropriate legal framework and institutionalstructure/organizational arrangements in place for public debt and the entities givenpowers to borrow must be entrusted with clear responsibility and transparency. TheConstitution of India gives the executive branch of Government the powers to borrowupon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India.  Reserve Bank as an agent of theGovernment (both Union and the States) implements the borrowing program. TheReserve Bank draws the necessary statutory powers for debt management fromSection 21 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. While the management of UnionGovernment's public debt is an obligation for the Reserve Bank, the Reserve Bankundertakes the management of the public debts of the various State Governments byagreement. The procedural aspects in debt management operations are governed bythe Government Securities Act, 2006 and rules framed under the Act.6. External debt (bilateral and multilateral loans) is managed by the Department ofEconomic Affairs in the Ministry of Finance (MoF). All debt management functions formarketable internal debt are undertaken in the Reserve Bank. These functionscomprise formulation of a calendar for primary issuance, deciding the desired maturityprofile of the debt, size and timing of issuance, designing the instruments and methodsof raising resources, etc. taking into account government's needs, market conditions,and preferences of various segments while ensuring that the entire strategy isconsistent with the overall macro-economic policy objectives. Reserve Bank alsoundertakes the conduct of auctions and manages the registry and depository functions.7. Decisions on the implementation of the borrowing program, based on proposalsmade by the Reserve Bank, are periodically taken by the Monitoring Group on Cashand Debt Management. This is a standing committee of officials from the MoF and theReserve Bank. While this represents a formal working relationship between the MoFand the Reserve Bank, it is further complemented by regular discussions between theMinistry and the Reserve Bank.8. With regard to accountability and reporting, the operations of the debtmanagement functions in Reserve Bank are subject to the statutory audit, internal auditand concurrent audit. Recently, the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) havestarted a performance audit of debt management operations in the MoF and theReserve Bank focusing on three ‘E’s of process excellence viz. Economy, Efficiencyand Effectiveness. While the internal debt management activities are reported in theAnnual Report of the Reserve Bank, which is a statutory report and is placed before theParliament (through MoF), the external debt management functions are reported in theAnnual Status Report on External Debt presented to the Parliament by the FinanceMinister. Further, the MoF is publishing an annual report on Government Debt, theMiddle Office in the Budget Division is publishing quarterly reports on the debt issued.Therefore, a robust reporting of debt is in place in our country.Page2 of129. As can be seen, we have sound institutional mechanism with roles andresponsibilities clearly entrusted to the Reserve Bank and the Government. This hashelped in discharging our mandate effectively.Debt Management StrategyPolicy Objectives10. The main objective of debt management is to ensure that the government’sfinancing needs and its payment obligations are met at low cost over the medium tolong run consistent with a prudent degree of risk. Prudent degree of risk ensures that noproblems exist in rollover of debt. Further, the debt structure must be sustainable toensure financial stability across time periods. Another important objective is to promotedeep and liquid financial markets to minimize long term borrowing cost markets. Thedebt management policy must also be consistent with other macro-economic policiesincluding monetary policy.11. Debt Management Strategy (DMS) comprising objectives, various benchmarks &portfolio indicators and yearly issuance plan (external and domestic funding,instruments, maturity structure, etc.) provides requisite direction to the debtmanagement operations. Its articulation imparts information and transparency, certaintyand enables market participants (investors) to chalk out their investment strategy in theG-Sec market. Our DMS revolves around three broad pillars viz., cost minimization, riskmitigation and market development.Cost Minimisation12. Cost minimization is sought to be achieved over medium to long run byformulating appropriate issuance strategy and developing financial markets. Theborrowing needs are estimated and amounts are borrowed in timely fashion therebyminimising the opportunity cost. Proper demand estimation, planned issuance and offerof appropriate instruments would aid in lowering costs.  In India, the issuance calendarfor market borrowings is announced in advance for each half year with details of thequantum to be borrowed each week, maturity buckets, etc. A week prior to the auction,individual securities along with their issuance size is notified to public. This strategy ofsharing information about debt management has enhanced transparency of debtmanagement operations. The borrowings are planned keeping in view the investmentpreferences/horizons of various investors. As commercial banks are large investors inG-Sec and are interested in short/medium tenor bonds, substantial issuance is in thistenor. Longer tenor bonds are issued keeping in view demand from insurancecompanies and provident funds. It may be noted that cost minimisation objective refersto the planning horizon of debt management as minimizing costs at any point in time isdifferent from minimizing costs over a longer time horizon. What might seem cost-efficient today may prove rather costly over a number of years. It is exactly theacknowledgment of this distinction that would help mitigate the alleged “dilemma” ofminimizing costs while containing risks. The cost minimization attempted over short-term by the debt managers may create sub-optimal debt structures, which may createstress for issuer by enhancing refinancing risks as was seen during the recentEuropean sovereign debt crisis. Recognising the need for appropriate debt portfolioPage3 of12structure, we have desisted from issuance in short tenors as debt maturing in ten yearsconstitutes nearly 60 per cent of total debt.Risk Mitigation13. The sovereign debt portfolio is exposed to rollover risk, currency/exchange raterisks, sudden-stop risks and interest rate risks which need to be managed.Rollover / Refinancing Risk14. Elongation of maturity of the portfolio is preferred strategy to limit rollover risk.DMS in India has stressed on elongation of maturity whenever possible and, in turn,cost minimization over the medium term (Table 1). This is achieved by limitingissuances in short tenor bonds and increasing issuance of medium/long tenor bondstaking into account the investor preferences and shape of the yield curve. Though wehave issued short term bonds to meet the needs of market borrowings for fiscalstimulus in wake of global financial crisis, we have adopted a conscious strategy ofelongating maturity to lessen rollover risk. This is achieved by non-issuance in maturityof 1-5 years, moderating issuance in 5-9 years and increasing issuance in 10-14 yeartenor which sees robust demand from banks and other market participants. We havealso increased issuance of bonds in tenors more than 15 years to cater to needs ofinsurance companies and provident funds. Presently, weighted average maturity ofIndia’s debt portfolio at 10 years is one of the longest in the world. With an objective tosmoothen redemptions, switching of short-tenor bonds maturing at proximate years withlong-tenor bonds is also being attempted and is expected to reduce rollover risks.Table 1: Central Government Market Borrowing through Dated SecuritiesBorrowings Outstanding StocksWeighted Weighted Weighted WeightedYearaverage maturity average yield average maturity average coupon(Years) (per cent) (Years) (per cent)2001-02 14.30 9.44 08.20 10.842002-03 13.80 7.34 08.90 10.442003-04 14.94 5.71 09.78 09.302004-05 14.13 6.11 09.63 08.792005-06 16.90 7.34 09.92 08.752006-07 14.72 7.89 09.97 08.552007-08 14.90 8.12 10.59 08.502008-09 13.80 7.69 10.45 08.232009-10 11.16 7.23 09.82 07.892010-11 11.62 7.92 09.78 07.812011-12 12.66 8.52 09.60 07.882012-13 13.50 8.36 09.67 07.972013-14 15.05 8.45 10.00 07.99Exchange Rate Risks15. Achieving appropriate and stable mix of domestic and foreign currency debt inportfolio is essential. Raising debt in foreign currency could be cost effective andprovide a wide and varied investor base. A country with large foreign currencydenominated liabilities is, however, exposed to “currency/exchange rate risks” whichcould impact macro-economic stability. Further, dependence on foreign currency bondscould mean sharp volatility in interest rate and market volumes linked to the uncertaintyof external sovereign ratings. Hence, no sovereign foreign currency bonds have beenissued so far by India. Sizeable domestic currency bond issuances are necessary toensure supply of bonds in the domestic bond market which is a very critical ingredientPage4 of12for development of the domestic bonds market. As a conscious strategy, issuance ofexternal debt (denominated in foreign currency) is kept very low in India and externaldebt as percentage of Central Government’s public debt has come down from 6.4 percent in 2005-06 to 5.2 per cent during 2011-12 (Chart 1). The external debt in Indiancontext is entirely bilateral and multilateral loans.Chart 1: Composition of the Central Government's Public DebtSudden Stop Risk: Stable Investor Base16. Almost entire internal debt (i.e., more than 90 per cent) of the CentralGovernment (Chart 1) and all the market loans (which form more than 90 per cent ofinternal debt [Chart 2]) have been raised from the domestic bond markets. An importantfeature of investor profile of the G-Sec market is the dominance of domestic investorsand limited foreign investor participation. The ability of domestic markets to financegovernment operations is a source of strength of the debt portfolio which is insulatedfrom the currency risk. This is a consciously adopted policy framework. Investmentlimits for the Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPIs) have been enhanced in a phasedmanner to US$ 30 billion in G-Sec. The limits are apportioned to different categories ofinvestors with preference towards long term stable investors and investments in longermaturities keeping in view the sensitivity of foreign investors to global macro-economicfactors and possible sudden reversals which could potentially impact the systemicstability. Participation of foreign investor in the domestic bond markets also needs to beexamined in the light of our policy stance relating to calibrated approach to capitalaccount convertibility and the possibility of interest rate and exchange rate volatility dueto large scale reversal of capital flows.Chart 2: Share of market loans in internal debtPage5 of1217. The domestic investor base is dominated by banks in short to medium tenorsecurities and by insurance companies and provident funds at the long end. With theentry of co-operative banks, regional rural banks, pension funds, mutual funds and non-banking finance companies, the institutional investor base has been reasonablydiversified (Chart 3). There is very little retail participation in the G-Sec market as the G-Sec market has traditionally been an institutional market.Chart3: Investor profile of G-SecmarketFor diversifying the investor base, especially in context of calibrated reduction inmandated investments in form of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR), there is need to focuson new investors, such as, pension funds and retail investors. Reserve Bank has takenseveral steps to promote retail participation, such as, enabling non-competitive biddingin primary auctions to enable non-institutional investors to participate in auction,introduction of odd lot trading, permitting trading of G-Sec on stock exchanges;mandating retail/ mid-segment targets for primary dealers, web based trading access togilt account holders, etc. The process of developing the retail and mid-segment investorbase will be continued.Interest Rate Risk18. DMS involves issuance of variety of instruments of varying maturities to cater tothe preferences of different investors. For example, some investors (banks and financialinstitutions) like to invest in floating rate bonds (FRBs) for their duration management.Similarly, institutional investors, such as, insurance companies, provident funds,pension funds, etc. would prefer to buy long term bonds, zero coupon bonds andinflation indexed bonds (IIBs) for their liability management. Floating rate instrumentscarry interest rate risks on re-fixing. In India, although we have been raising funds byissuing variety of instruments, such as, fixed rate conventional bonds, FRBs, ZeroCoupon Bonds, CIBs, the contribution of linkers (FRBs, IIBs, etc.) has remained small,thereby limiting interest rate risk in the debt portfolio. There is, however, a need toincrease the share of variable rate bonds to further improve the breadth and width ofthe G-Sec market and enable market participants to diversify their portfolio. Towardsthis end, IIBs have been issued linked to the Wholesale Price Index (WPI). A newseries is being planned which is linked to Consumer Price Index (CPI).Developing the G-Sec markets19. Reserve Bank, as regulator of G-Sec market, has taken several steps to create adeep and liquid market for facilitating price discovery, reducing the cost of governmentdebt and serve as a benchmark for other debt instruments. Reserve Bank throughPage6 of12carefully and cautiously sequenced measures within a clear cut agenda for primary andsecondary market design, development of institutions, enlargement of participants andproducts, dissemination of market information, prudential guidelines on valuation,accounting and disclosure. Consequently, the G-Sec market has witnessed significanttransformation in various dimensions, viz., market-based price discovery, widening ofinvestor base, introduction of new instruments, establishment of primary dealers andelectronic trading & settlement infrastructure.20. For development of bond markets, Reserve Bank of India adopted a strategy forcreation of an efficient market infrastructure to enable safe trading. State of the artprimary issuance process with electronic bidding and straight through processingcapabilities, an efficient, completely dematerialized depository system within the CentralBank, Delivery-versus-Payment (DvP) mode of settlement, Real Time Gross Settlement(RTGS), electronic trading platform (Negotiated Dealing Systems - Order Matching)(NDS-OM) and a separate Central Counter Party (CCP) in the Clearing Corporation ofIndia Ltd (CCIL) for guaranteed settlement are among the steps that were taken by theReserve Bank over the years towards this end. The system makes G-Sec tradingpractically risk free and efficient.21. The system of Primary Dealers (PDs) was established to provide support to themarket borrowing programs of the Government and also to impart liquidity in thesecondary markets. Subsequent to the withdrawal of the Reserve Bank of India fromthe primary market, as mandated by Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act2003, the PD System has been underwriting the entire Government of India marketborrowing.22. To meet the diverse funding and hedging needs of the participants, there is needfor a wide array of instruments and products which would also offer benefits ofdiversification in the portfolio. Over the years, several instruments like  zero-couponbonds, capital-indexed bonds, floating rate bonds, Separate Trading of RegisteredInterest and Principal of Securities (STRIPs), bonds with call and put options, cashmanagement bills, inflation indexed bonds have been introduced after wideconsultations with market participants. Plain vanilla fixed coupon bonds, however,remain the mainstay of issuances.23. Reserve Bank has always focused on improving liquidity in the debt markets.Reserve Bank has constituted a Working Group (Chairman: Shri. R Gandhi) to examineways to improve liquidity in Government securities and interest rate derivatives marketwhich made several recommendations including suggestions for consolidation of debt.Many of the Working Group recommendations are being implemented. Therecommendations, such as, truncating the time window for bidding in the primaryauction; changing the settlement cycle of primary auctions in Treasury Bills (T-Bills)from T+2 to T+1; conduct of primary auctions in G-Sec as a mix of both uniform-priceand multiple price formats; re-issuances of existing securities in state developmentloans; and migration of secondary market reporting of OTC trades in G-Sec (outrightand repo) from PDO-NDS to NDS-OM and CROMS, respectively, have beenimplemented. Work is in progress with regard to recommendations on consolidation ofpublic debt.Page7 of1224. As a result of the DMS, all sustainability indicators, viz., level of debt, ratio ofinterest payments to revenue receipts, average cost and few floating rate instrumentspoint towards long term sustainability. To take the process further and improve stabilityof debt portfolio, Reserve Bank has been striving towards consolidation, both passiveand active methods. Passive consolidation is achieved through re-issuances and nearly95per cent of the bond issuance is through reissuance. We have also embarked onactive consolidation through switches and buy-backs, which is expected to reduce roll-over risks significantly.25. It is against this backdrop, I would like to make some comments on an issue thatis engaging attention of policy makers for a decade and half: the issue of separation ofdebt management from the central bank in India.Institutional Arrangements for Sovereign Debt Management26. To put the debate in its historical context, with regard to the location of sovereigndebt management functions multiplicity of arrangements exist around the world: in theministry of finance, central bank or autonomous debt management agency. Crosscountry experience shows that there is no international best practice and the adoptionof any particular model could depend on country specific circumstances. In the nineties,several OECD countries entrusted debt management to separate agencies with theobjective of providing monetary policy independence to central banks so that they couldconcentrate on inflation management and not impacted by the conflicting objective ofraising debt for the sovereign at low cost. It was also perceived that independent DebtManagement Office (DMOs) would improve operations of debt management throughimproved accountability and specialisation. Many developed nations have followed suit.27. In India, the genesis of the proposal could be traced back to variousCommittees/Working Groups, such as, Committee on Capital Account Convertibility(1997); Review Group of Standing Committee on International Financial Standards &Codes (2004), Percy Mistry Committee, Internal Working Group on Debt Management,MoF and finally Financial Sector Legislative Reforms Committee, which suggestedseparation of debt management from monetary management. During this phase theReserve Bank, while suggesting separation, has made it conditional on attainment ofthree milestones: development of the government securities market, durable fiscalcorrection and an enabling legislative framework. It is argued that separate DMO willhelp to establish transparency, and assign specific responsibility and accountability onthe debt manager and could lead to an integrated and more professional managementof all government liabilities, with a focused mandate.28. The public discourse also focused on three kinds of conflict in sovereign debtmanagement being done by the central bank:i. The objective of the Reserve Bank as a public debt manager may conflict withthe prevailing monetary policy stance and the market participants; the centralbank may not be increasing interest rates to keep borrowing costs low andthereby compromising on inflation management;ii. The central bank, being also a debt manager, could take government debt on itsbalance sheet to ensure successful government borrowing; andPage8 of12iii. The imperatives of the Government borrowing program may influence thedecision of the Reserve Bank, as regulator of banks, to reduce the SLRrequirements.29. In my view, the institutional arrangements for debt management must take intoview the country specific context and requirements. To set the context for this debate,we can examine the conflict of interest argument in Indian context. Even as thegovernment’s borrowings had gone up both in absolute and proportional terms,Reserve Bank has raised policy rates several times during the past five years; clearlyindicating its commitment to price stability. Inspite of a six-fold increase in the size ofthe net market borrowing of the Central and State Governments during the decade2000-10, the average weighted cost of borrowing declined by over 450 bps comparedto the previous decade. In 2009-10, during the global financial crisis, Reserve Bankcarried out government borrowing of about ` 4 trillion without disrupting the debt marketor elbowing out private sector’s credit requirement. Inspite of rising interest ratescenario, the Reserve Bank was able to complete the Government’s borrowing programin a non-disruptive fashion at a reasonable cost.30. The FRBM Act, 2003 which precluded the Reserve Bank from participating in theprimary auction of the Government bonds has resolved the conflict of interest with themonetary policy. Monetary signalling in India is now done by the repo rate (policy rate)under the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) and not the bond yields.31. As regards the SLR issue, it needs to be appreciated that the SLR has beenused by the Reserve Bank as an instrument of prudential regulation. This has ensuredthat at any given point of time, all the banks have a specific percentage of their liabilitiesin the form of risk-free, liquid instruments. In fact, such requirement for banks to hold acertain percentage of their assets in cash and cash like instruments is one of the keycorrective instruments being discussed internationally, and formed integral part ofliquidity risk management under Basel III capital framework. In any case, pre-emptivemandated investments are being scaled down as can be seen from SLR reduction frompeak levels of 38.5 per cent of NDTL of banking system to the present level of 22 percent.32. While theoretical formulations can conjecture conflicts of interest; the validity ofassumptions need to be tested by evaluation of experience/performance and on thatcount, conflict of interest cannot be established with regard to Reserve Bank.33. Another point that merits attention is that the proponents of separation, whileciting examples from countries which differ significantly with regard to institutional milieufrom India, pay little attention to nuances of debt management operations. For instance,domestic debt in the UK is managed by DMO, whereas external debt is theresponsibility of the Bank of England. The whole concept of an ‘all-in-one debt office’ isa theoretical construct than a real organisation.34. It is also important to note that sovereign debt management (SDM) is much morethan a mere resource raising exercise especially in a developing country context likeours. The size and dynamics of government market borrowing has a much widerinfluence on interest rate movements, systemic liquidity. An autonomous DMO, drivenPage9 of12by specific objectives exclusively focusing on debt management alone, may not be ableto manage this complex task involving various trade-offs.35. With regard to autonomous DMOs focusing on specific responsibilities, theexperience of European debt managers is instructive. The experience of DMO in theEuro area (especially Greece, Portugal and Ireland) has been less than satisfactory.The independent DMOs seemed to have been guided by perverse incentives andissued short-term/foreign debt in a disproportionate fashion, intensifying roll-over risk,sovereign risk and financial instability. The debt management strategy and operationshave resulted in a skewed maturity profile with balloon payments. For instance, Greecehas bunched maturities during 2010–19 with interest payments on public debtconstituting nearly 40 per cent of Greece’s budget deficit during 2009.  Large proportion(above 70 per cent) of debt of Portugal, Greece and Ireland was held by non-residents.As foreign investors turned risk averse and started withdrawing investments, ratingagencies downgraded the debt of these countries. The debt management strategy hasjeopardized the fiscal situation and financial stability. Therefore, autonomous DMOfocusing on specific objectives, such as, cost minimisation in isolation and not inconjunction with other macro-economic policies may result in sub-optimal debtmanagement outcomes.36. Persistent fiscal deficit warranting huge borrowings, often at the cost of flow ofreserves to the private sector, has been the predominant feature of the Indian economy.Increasing borrowings by the Government, both the Central and the StateGovernments, have to be strategically planned and tactically executed keeping in viewthe market conditions, liquidity situation and macro-economic implications. Thus, giventhe persistently large size of the market borrowings, there is a strong case forconfluence of interest between monetary policy and debt management in India. On theother hand, Government’s ownership of majority stake in public sector banks (whichown 70 per cent of banking sector assets) could be a source of conflict of interest withits role as debt manager, either directly or through an agency controlled by it.37. In a situation of excess capital flows requiring forex intervention from theReserve Bank and the consequent sterilisation through issuance of Governmentsecurities under the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS), the coordination of SDM withthese operations needs to continue. In 2007-08, the volume of MSS issuance wascomparable to that of the SDM issuance. With the reversal of capital flows in 2008-09and the large increase in Government’s market borrowing program, there wassignificant unwinding of the MSS and the Reserve Bank could manage the situationnon-disruptively as both the functions were entrusted to it and it could undertake thenecessary liquidity management measures seamlessly. During second half of 2013, theReserve Bank of India used cash management bills (CMBs) as a measure to containthe volatility in the foreign exchange market. Separation of SDM from the Reserve Bankwill make it very difficult to harmonise these operations as is done at present.Post-crisis lessons38. In the pre-crisis phase, the functions of monetary policy, financial stability andSDM used to be looked upon as an ‘impossible trinity’. Post-crisis, theirinterdependence is increasingly being recognised. Unlike in the past, central banks’Page10 of12operations are not currently confined to the shorter end but are carried out across theyield curve. Similarly, Government debt managers, opportunistically or undercompulsion, are increasingly operating at the shorter end. This has intensified theinteraction between monetary policy and SDM, warranting greater coordination in theinterest of policy credibility and financial stability. Internationally, there has been arethinking on the issue of debt management by Central Banks, with scholars likeCharles Goodhart articulating that debt management being a critical element in theoverall conduct of macroeconomic policy, central banks should be encouraged to revertto their role of managing the national debt.39. In this context, the cause of coordination is always better served under the sameroof than by a separation from central bank, accompanied by a closer inter-institutionalcoordination. There could be an argument that coordination mechanism could bedesigned between the central bank and the DMO, either by statute or executive order.The experience of coordination mechanisms between DMO and central bank, which arevital for economic management, is however, far from satisfactory and impacted debtmanagement. There has been instances of failed auctions, e.g., in the UK (March2009), causing reputation risk for both the authorities. In the above backdrop, it isstrongly felt that given the large size of the market borrowings, there is a confluence ofinterest between monetary policy and debt management in India.40. The significant impact of the Government borrowing on the broader interest ratestructure in the economy and, therefore, on the monetary transmission process infinancial markets, makes it a critical component of the macroeconomic managementframework. In such a scenario, central bank involvement in managing the marketvolatility and market expectations arising out of government debt borrowing becomesnecessary. The past experience, reinforced by the recent developments regarding hugemarket borrowing of the Government, has shown the necessity of this approach.  Suchwill be the case even if the central bank is disassociated from the operational aspects ofdebt issuance. This being so, it is much better for the central bank to have a hands-oninvolvement.41. It is, therefore, imperative that future course of action needs to be decided basedon ground realities of our country rather than from an ideological perspective, emergingpost-crisis international experience and the fact that the separation of debtmanagement from the central bank could compromise the effectiveness of monetarypolicy, efficiency of debt management and stability of financial markets. Therefore,there is a strong case for continuance of present system of Central Bank managingdebt management in India. In case, however, a decision is taken to move the debtmanagement function to a separate unit, it needs to be preceded by well thought outstrategy on timing of commencement of its operations, selection of personnel, theirincentive structure, performance evaluation benchmarks from the long term debtsustainability points of view and arrangements for perfect institutional and operationalco-ordination among the debt management unit, the Ministry of Finance & the ReserveBank of India.Concluding thoughtsPage11 of1242. I would like to conclude by adding that the process of managing public debt is anonerous responsibility, with implications for financial stability in the short to mediumterm and inter-generational equity in the long run. Our debt portfolio is reasonablystable and sustainable and due to our conscious strategy of elongation of maturity, lowlevel of foreign currency debt, large domestic investor base, risks are at low level. Thereis, however, an unfinished agenda of consolidation of public debt and we are movingtowards this goal by active debt management through re-issuances, buybacks andswitches. More efforts are needed to develop a deep and liquid G-Sec market thatallows the government to borrow more efficiently, different classes of investors to enter& exit the market freely and private sector issuers to price their offerings transparently.We are, therefore, committed to improving liquidity. Reserve Bank has discharged itsmandate of managing the public debt in an efficient and effective manner. There ismerit in continuance of present institutional arrangement. If at all, separation of debtmanagement from central bank has to be effected, it should be preceded by wellthought strategy focussing on perfect co-ordination among the Debt ManagementOffice, the Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India.Thank you.Page12 of12
