 DEVELOPMENT OF FOREX MARKETS IN INDIA:REVIEW AND PROSPECTS*thI am delighted to be in Colombo today to address the 15 National Forex Assembly. Indiaand Sri Lanka have had very close and friendly neighbourly relations especially culturally,for centuries - indeed millennia. On behalf of Reserve Bank of India, I bring greetings toyou all and express appreciation of the warm hospitality of the host country. RBI hasalways actively participated in the meetings of national Forex Assembly at Governor orDeputy Governor level. I am delighted to carry forward the tradition.  Being an exclusivegathering of Forex Market participants in the region, I thought I would use this forum toshare some of my thoughts on fora market developments in India. I am aware that eachcountry has unique situations and policies. But in forex such as these, we could exchangeexperiences for mutual benefit.My brief address has been structured as follows: First, I will trace the important landmarksin the evolution of forex market in India spanning over roughly three decades. Thereafter, Iwill proceed to dwell on measures for market liberalization and development includingdisclosure and transparency initiatives. Thereafter there would be a coverage ofinstitutional development. I will conclude this address outlining the tasks that lie ahead ofus and scope for further interaction among the participants.EVOLUTION OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET IN INDIAThe Indian forex market owes its origin to the important step that RBI took in 1978 to allowbanks to undertake intra-day trading in foreign exchange.  As a consequence, thestipulation of maintaining “square” or “near square” position was to be complied with onlyat the close of business each day. During the period 1975-1992,   the exchange rate ofrupee was officially determined by the RBI in terms of a weighted basket of currencies ofIndia’s major trading partners and there were significant restrictions on the currentaccount transactions.The initiation of economic reforms in July 1991 saw significant two-step downward,adjustment  in the exchange rate of the rupee on July 1 and 3 1991    with a view toplacing it at an appropriate level in line with the inflation differential to maintain thecompetitiveness of exports.  Subsequently,  following the recommendations of the HighLevel   Committee on Balance of Payments (Chairman:Dr C. Rangarajan)  the  Liberalised-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------* Key Note Address by K.J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor,  Reserve Bank of India atth15 Forex Assembly organized by Forex Association of India in Colombo, SriLanka on August 20, 2004Exchange Rate Management System(LERMS) involving dual exchange rate mechanismwas instituted in March 1992 which was followed by the ultimate convergence of the dualrates effective from March 1, 1993(christened modified LERMS).  The unification of theexchange rate of the rupee marks the beginning of the era of market determinedexchange rate regime of rupee, based on demand and supply in the forex market. It isalso an important step in the progress towards current account convertibility, which wasfinally achieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of theInternational Monetary Fund.The appointment of an Expert Group on Foreign Exchange (popularly known as SodhaniCommittee) in November 1994 is a landmark in the design of foreign exchange market inIndia. The Group studied the market in great detail and came up with far reachingrecommendations to develop, deepen and widen the forex market. In the process ofdevelopment of forex markets, banks have been accorded significant initiative andfreedom to operate in the market. To quote a few important measures relating to marketdevelopment and liberalisation, banks were allowed freedom to fix their trading limits,permitted to borrow and invest funds in the overseas markets up to specified limits,accorded freedom to determine interest rates on FCNR deposits within ceilings andallowed to use derivative products for asset-liability management purposes. Similarly,corporates were given flexibility to book forward cover based on past turnover and allowedto use a variety of instruments like interest rates and currency swaps, caps/collars andforward rate agreements in the international forex market. Rupee-foreign currency swapmarket for hedging longer term exposure has developed substantially in the last fewyears.MARKET PROFILEThe Indian forex market is predominantly a transaction based market with the existence ofunderlying forex exposure generally being an essential requirement for market users.Similarly, regulations in most cases require end users to repatriate and surrender foreignexchange in the Indian forex market.  All forex transactions of Government of India arerouted through the market except for aid transactions.The forex market is made up of Authorised Dealers (generally banks),  someintermediaries with limited authorisation and end users viz., individuals,  corporates,institutional investors and others. Market making banks (generally foreign banks and newprivate sector banks) account for a significant percentage of the overall turnover in themarket.2The average monthly turnover in the merchant segment of the forex market increased toUS$ 40.5 billion in 2003-2004 from US$ 27.0 billion in 2002-2003. In the inter-banksegment, the turnover has moved up from US$ 103 billion in 2002-2003 to US$ 134.2billion in 2003-2004. Consequently, the average monthly total turnover increased sharplyto US$ 174.7 billion in 2003-2004 from US$ 130 billion in the previous year. The inter-bank  to merchant turnover ratio hovered in the range of 2.9 –3.9 during the year.TRADE AND FINANCIAL LIBERALISATIONThere is large empirical literature suggesting that trade integration benefits a largernumber and helps promote economic growth. In contrast, recent empirical research isunable to establish a clear link between financial integration and growth.  There istherefore now a consensus among academicians and policy makers that tradeliberalisation should take precedence over financial liberalisation. The RBI approachmakes a distinction among the different participants in order to assess, on an ongoingbasis, the gains as well as the vulnerabilities of foreign currency exposures to the system.In the capital account, apart from the Government’s, there are three balance sheets thatwe take into account whether for residents or for non-residents : the balance sheet of thehouseholds, the corporates and the financial intermediaries.  Although in theory,everything may be integrated, in our phase of development, definitely these three aredistinct in terms of their immediate reactions to market forces. In particular, this approachrecognises the need to put in place appropriate prudential regulation in regard to thefinancial intermediaries in so far as foreign currency transactions are concerned. There isvirtual unanimity that the currency mismatches of financial intermediaries is a majorsource of risks of financial integration which has to be mitigated by monitoring andregulations and furthermore, that currency mismatches in the corporate sector can also bea source of risk to the financial sector. Hence the advice to banks to monitor unhedgedexposures of borrowers. I would rejig your memory a bit – at the Ninth Forex Assembly atGoa, the then Deputy Governor Dr.S.S. Tarapore had alluded to these risks saying “banks and FIs cannot distance themselves from the risks taken by corporates as theserisks can involuntarily devolve on the banks as their lendings to corporates can easily turninto NPAs”. Prudential regulations in the financial sector should not therefore be construedas capital controls.This approach has been reflected in the recent liberalisation of the policy on externalcommercial borrowings. The whole process of permitting such external debt may be eitherthrough the automatic route or non-automatic route, but slowly the automatic route is3being expanded and the non-automatic route reduced. The recent External CommercialBorrowing(ECB) policy makes clear distinction between corporates and financialintermediaries. Therefore, while corporates have been given freedom to borrow underautomatic route up to $500 million per year subject to certain conditions, a differentapproach has been adopted for financial intermediaries in the interest of financial stabilityby regulating access to overseas borrowings and issue of guarantees.Another example is in regard to overseas investments. To enable corporates to becomeglobal companies overseas investments up to their net worth is permitted under theautomatic route. They can also access ECBs under automatic route to invest overseas. Inregard to resident individuals, in order to provide a hassle-free facility to make remittancesoverseas to meet both current and capital account requirements, they have been allowedto remit on an annual basis US$ 25000/- on a mere declaration of the purpose.DISCLOSURE AND TRANSPARENCY INITIATIVESRBI has been transparent in making available, in public domain, appropriate data relatingto forex market and those resulting from RBI operations in the foreign exchange market.RBI disseminates the daily reference rate which is an indicative rate for market observersthrough its website. The movements in foreign exchange reserves of the RBI arepublished on a weekly basis in the Weekly Statistical Supplement(WSS). WSS alsocarries data on exchange rates of rupee against some major currencies. The monthlyBulletin of RBI gives data regarding purchases and sales of foreign currency undertakenby RBI against the rupee. The data regarding the Balance of Payments and the ExternalDebt profile of the country is put out on a quarterly basis. RBI has already achieved fulldisclosure of information pertaining to international reserves and foreign currency liquidityposition under the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS) of  IMF.With the concurrence of Government of India, RBI decided to compile and make publichalf-yearly reports on management of foreign exchange reserves for bringing about moretransparency and also for enhancing the level of disclosure in this regard. The first suchreport with reference to September 30, 2003 was put in public domain through websites ofboth the Government of India and RBI in February 2004. The second report on foreignexchange reserves with reference to March 31, 2004 is now available at RBI website.INSTITUTIONAL DEVELOPMENTIt has been well documented that the vast size of daily foreign exchange trading,combined with the global interdependencies of the forex market and payment systems4involves risks stemming from settlement of forex trades on gross basis.  Settlement offorex transactions spans  different time zones and payment systems.  As a result,counterparties assume various types of risks in the course of settlement.  As suggestedby the Sodhani Committee, RBI took the initiative to establish CCIL in 2001 to mitigaterisks in the Indian financial markets.  As India’s first centralised clearing and settlementsystem for the financial sector, CCIL’s  role in facilitating  settlement of both debt andforex transactions is perhaps unique.CCIL undertakes settlement of forex trades on a multilateral net basis through a processof novation and all trades accepted are guaranteed for settlement. On an average, CCILdaily settles over 3500 deals covering an average gross volume of around US$3.5 billion,representing  over 80% of the market. CCIL has been able to offer netting advantageconsistently.  In addition to benefits of risk mitigation, CCIL’s intermediation also providesto its members other tangible benefits such as improved efficiency, lower operational costand easier reconciliation of accounts with correspondents.  CCIL has improvedoperational efficiency with  a zero failure rate. We will be happy to share our experiencewith our Asian friends.Since it started its operations, CCIL has consistently endeavoured to add value to theservices, and has gradually brought the entire gamut of forex transactions under itspurview. It has also, over time, added more and more functionalities enhancing the valueof its product.  Similarly, CCIL has also launched a Forex Trading Platform to facilitate USDollar /Rupee deals by banks in India.  This platform has been given to members free ofcost.  The platform offers both Order Matching and Negotiation modes for dealing. TheUSP of the platform is its offer of Straight-Through Processing capabilities as it is linked toCCIL’s settlement platform. RBI encourages the authorised dealers to take full advantageof this and intends monitoring the use of this platform to make it more user friendly andwidely used.In India, the Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India as a self-regulatoryorganisation formed by authorised dealers plays a constructive  role in marketdevelopment by initiating debates on important issues, organising training programmesand providing technical expertise on various matters. We expect the FEDAI to enhance itscatalytic role in market development in the years ahead.To further the participatory process in a more holistic manner by taking into account allsegments of the financial markets, the ambit of the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC)5on Money and Securities Markets set up by RBI in 1999 has been expanded in 2004 toinclude forex markets and the Committee has been renamed as TAC on Money,Securities and Forex Markets.TASKS AHEADThe Reserve Bank will continue to adopt an approach characterised by gradualism inrespect of future liberalisation of forex  markets.  In terms of sequencing, forex marketshave to be aligned to external sector reforms and development of financial markets aspart of overall reform. There are several aspects of reform in external sector and forexmarkets is one of them. Therefore, further liberalisation in forex markets have to beharmonised with progress in other areas.As you are aware, all major reforms in the market have been brought about after solicitingthe opinions of market participants and thus the system of participatory process in marketdevelopment is very much in place and will continue.  In order to further the participatoryprocess, I am happy to inform you that yesterday I had discussions with my colleague Dr.Rakesh Mohan and Governor Dr. Reddy. It has been decided that  RBI  will immediatelyset up a   Committee  to undertake a comprehensive review of the liberalisation processset in motion in the last decade, study recent international experience and identify variousoptions for future forex market development in India. The Committee will interact withmarket participants and experts for this purpose.  The Committee will prepare a reportwithin three months which will be placed before TAC. The report will then be placed  in thepublic domain for nviting suggestions.  On the basis of the suggestions received, a roadmap will be drawn up for further liberalisation to reach global standards. No doubt we willbe associating, as usual, the Forex Association to assist us in this endeavour.Let me conclude by thanking the Assembly for giving this opportunity. Our officers arealso participating in the deliberations and we will get a feedback from them. Wish you allthe best in your endeavours.Grateful acknowledgement for inputs provided by Smt. Shyamala Gopinath, ExecutiveDirector and Shri. G. Mahalingam, General Manager, Department of External Investmentsand Operations6
