Mr. Patil and friends,I am happy to be with you today at this seminar organised by the National Stock Exchange(NSE) and the International Securities Market Association (ISMA). The NSE needs nointroduction to this audience. Mr.Patil has been, at our request, working closely with the ReserveBank of India (RBI) on various issues and we value his advice. The NSE also has representativesISMA has been performing the role of an effective Self Regulatory Organisation (SRO)and the rules framed by ISMA have become a benchmark for the fixed income securities market.Hence, the expertise and experience that ISMA has gained over the years would be valuable toThe objective of this Seminar is to assess recent changes in the Indian fixed incomemarket, review the international experience in the development of this segment of financialmarkets and flag the agenda for future action.Major reform measures in the financial sector have been undertaken by the Reserve Bankof India since the beginning of the nineties. Reform in the Government Securities market isimportant in view of its role in setting benchmarks in the rest of the financial markets. It is alsocrucial for bringing about an effective and reliable transmission channel for the use of  indirectinstruments of monetary control. A notable change was the switch from administered lowcoupon borrowings of government to auctions in government securities at market related rates.Introduction of Primary Dealers has to some extent improved the liquidity in the secondarymarket. Innovative financial instruments were introduced, such as zero coupon bond, floatingrate bond, capital indexed bond, security on which payment is made in installments, etc. Inaddition, 14, 91 and 364-Day T-Bills presented investment avenues for deployment of short termfunds to investors. Counterparty risk in securities settlement has been eliminated with theintroduction of Delivery versus Payment system (DVP).I had, in an earlier speech a couple of months ago, on debt markets, presented an agendafor further action, which covered among others, technology, regulatory and legal issues, and theneed for standardisation of practices in the debt markets. In fact, only a couple of weeks ago, Ispoke at length on reforms in the money market also. So, perhaps there is no need to go into theI observe that today’s seminar is structured in three sessions – transparency in fixedincome markets, nature of regulation in repo markets and issues in regulation under an integratedmarket environment. These issues are of critical importance in the development of the debtmarkets and it may be useful to quickly review what we have achieved so far and what needs tobe done. I will, therefore, address only those issues that are receiving specific attention in theSeminar today.details of either reform measures or agenda for action in these markets today.us in RBI also as we continue to develop our markets.on a number of committees looking into different aspects of the market.Issues in fixed Income Markets*It is widely recognised that weaknesses in the provision and use of information played amajor part in the development and spread of recent international financial crises. A number ofinternational groups have since been examining issues relating to the stability of the financialsystem. One such working group of The Willard Group examined transparency andaccountability issues. This Group has defined transparency as a process by which informationabout existing conditions, decisions and actions is made accessible, visible and understandable.Undeniably, transparency contributes to the efficient allocation of resources by ensuring thatmarket participants have sufficient information. This information is meant to enable them toidentify risks and to distinguish one firm’s circumstances from another’s. Moreover,transparency helps to inform market expectations. In turn, this helps to stabilise markets duringperiods of uncertainty and also contributes to the effectiveness of announced policies. However,admittedly, there are limits to transparency. Some categories of information are costly tocompile. In such cases, infrequent disclosure may be justified. Further, confidentiality may beIn determining the appropriate degree of transparency, the benefits must be balancedagainst costs. Transparency should not mean that there will be a one-size-fits-all code on this. Ofcourse, in the final analysis, transparency will be with reference to factors considered relevant,which itself depends on the model for analysis that is considered useful. Also, transparency givesfacts, but inference is a different matter and a judgment based on such inference is yet anothermatter. Personally, I believe that transparency is primarily the best test of our good intentions.Hence, the Reserve Bank of India is disseminating exhaustive information relating toactivities, both in the primary and secondary markets, especially Government Securities market.For instance, detailed results of auctions of T-bills and dated Governments securities includingweighted average price, devolvement on Primary Dealers and RBI, and information on fixed raterepos are issued through regular press statements. The RBI also issues a daily press releasegiving details of secondary market transactions in the Government securities markets. In additionto information on T-Bills and dated Government Securities, the monthly RBI Bulletin and theWeekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin contains information relating to open marketoperations and repo transactions of the RBI. The RBI website, which has been appreciated bymany, as emulating international standards in excellence, also contains uptodate information onUntil 1994, the debt market was purely a telephone market meaning that all trades arenegotiated and concluded directly by investors. The NSE introduced screen based trading systemwith the objective of increasing transparency in the market. But, the general experience is thatwhile actual trade is still negotiated over the counter, mere reporting is done through suchsystem. However, greater use of on-line trading system is required rather than a mere reportingof trades in order to enhance transparency. The success would  depend mainly on the increase innumber of transactions. A large number of transactions would help in successful continuousorder book for matching the trades. If the negotiated telephone deals are moved to a screen basedsystem, full information about volume and price of transacted security would be available online. This would help in better price discovery and promote transparency and efficiency in the2Transparency in Fixed Income Marketsmarket.financial markets.warranted in some circumstances.Currently, the daily available information to the market regarding secondary market tradeis based on actual settlement through Subsidiary General Ledger on a particular date. This maynot necessarily reflect a deal concluded on the same date as SGL transfer form has to be lodgedwithin 24 hours of the contract but not necessarily of the date of actual deal. Thus, aninformation gap exists between the deal date, contract date and actual settlement date. Screen-The RBI is actively coordinating with the Primary Dealers Association in developing anElectronic Dealing System to facilitate dealing in money market, Government Securities andother debt instruments. This will lend transparency and efficiency to market operations. It willRBI has embarked on computerisation of its Public Debt Offices. This would link PublicDebt Offices in RBI with treasury offices of banks. Hopefully, Primary Dealers/Satellite Dealers,other SGL account holders and stock exchanges will also be linked.There is enormous advantage in providing member terminals to SGL account holders asthis will enable them to view RBI announcements regarding fresh auction, floatation of issue,conversion of loans, repo auctions, interest rate resets for floating bonds and other suchinformation. Market participants will also be able to tender bids in auctions of dated GovernmentSecurities, T-Bills and repos from all centres. The entire auction process, including allotment,determining and communicating payment amount, and advising successful and rejected bids tobidders, would be on line. The list of successful bidders and the consideration amount payable While the link up has advantages, it can be made operational only through electronicSGL forms. Early enactment of the new Government Securities Act replacing the Public DebtAct, 1944, is essential since it will provide RBI with substantive powers to design and introduceelectronic SGL transfer forms.In our market, interbank repos are permitted under regulated conditions. After theirregularities in securities transactions in 1992, eligible participants and instruments havegenerally been restricted but subsequently liberalised in a gradual manner. Now, all GovernmentSecurities have been made eligible for repo. Besides banks, PDs are allowed to undertakerepo/reverse repo transactions. Non-bank participants have also been allowed recently to lendmoney through reverse repo to other eligible participants. In terms of instruments, repos havealso been permitted in PSU bonds and private and corporate debt securities, provided they areheld in dematerialised form in a depository and the transactions are done through a recognisedstock exchange. However, this can be operationalised after Government issues a clarificationAdmittedly, the interbank repo market in India needs to be made more transparent andbetter standardised. I have, time and again, been encouraging market participants to evolve codeof best practices in the repo market through the Primary Dealers Association or FIMMDAI. The3regarding applicability of stamp duties on transactions in dematerialised instruments.Regulation in the Repo Marketwould form the input to the settlement and servicing system.also enable the RBI to monitor developments in the market on line.based trading would obviate this shortcoming.RBI has also been actively pursuing this issue in the Advisory Committee on GovernmentSecurities market and the Standing Committee on Money Market. Issues relating to evolving acode of best practice such as eligibility of participants and their requirements, eligibility ofinstruments for repo, general standards, systems and documentation, legal agreement, margin,deal confirmations, and default scenario were discussed in the recent meeting of the StandingCommittee on Money Market held on February 3, 1999. In fact, pursuant to the discussions onthe same subject in the meeting of Technical Advisory Committee on Government SecuritiesMarket held in November 1998, an internal sub-group of that committee is already looking intovarious aspects of expansion of repo market, including issues comprising legal status, regulatoryframework, standardisation of repo contracts and accounting system and introduction of tripartiterepos. The sub-Group is expected to complete its report by mid-March 1999. We expect that astandard repo agreement will emerge very soon from the recommendations of the sub-Group. WeIn this connection, I wish to recall that the RBI has announced in the October 1998review of monetary policy that call/notice/term money market should purely be an interbankmarket with additional access only to PDs. This implies that non-bank players have to beencouraged to deploy their short-term surpluses in other money market instruments. For instance,they can be allowed to borrow and lend freely through repos in both Government and non-Government securities. Thus, development of repo market assumes increased significance in theIssues in Regulation under an Integrated Market EnvironmentIn an integrated market, the regulatory framework should ensure that there are noregulatory overlaps or regulatory gaps in the financial system. The Deshpande Committeehighlighted these gaps and overlaps and recommended amendment to Section 29A of theSecurities Contract (Regulation) Act 1956 to enable the Government to provide jurisdiction toRBI also in regulation over money and debt markets. With this, the respective regulatory roles ofRBI and SEBI in the debt market will be formalised. The proposed change in the SCRA is boundto pave way for a much more active repo market.In the PSU and corporate bond market, an important issue relates to large resourcesraised through private placement. No doubt, private placements offer a number of advantages.However, this market remains largely unregulated. Healthy development of the privateplacement market calls for more transparency, better disclosure and protection of investorA liberalised and integrated market environment also means that risks get transmittedfrom one segment of the market to another more rapidly. Market participants have to ensure thatproper risk management systems are in place. In India, banks are the major players in thefinancial markets. The RBI has already circulated draft guidelines for ALM for banks, whichindicates prudential limits for call borrowings. These guidelines will be operative from April 1,1999.4interests.interest of further reforms in the financial markets.also expect the participants to adopt them once it is considered appropriate by the RBI.ConclusionAs I mentioned at the beginning, I have flagged some issues that are currently engagingour attention in the fixed income market. I trust that these and other issues would be deliberatedupon later during the day. I would be happy to have feedback from the organisers about theThank you. Inaugural address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, at Seminar on Fixed Income Markets, organised byNational Stock Exchange and ISMA at Mumbai on February 11, 1999. I am thankful to Dr.A.Prasad for his valuableassistance .5*outcome of the seminar.
