January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Retail Banking : Challenges Ahead in Distribution*Channels in Urban/Rural IndiaVEPA KAMESAMThe promise of lower transaction costs, strategy. Although banks may invest heavilyincreased sales productivity, and more in new delivery channels, the success andconvenient service has lured banks into sustainability of these channels critically liesetting up new delivery channels. Earlier, vast in the ability to convert that investment intobrick and mortar branch network has been lower distribution costs. The steps to beconsidered as an inherent advantage of followed in making a new distribution channelestablished banks and new entrants were at successful:huge disadvantage vis-à-vis the established(a) Understand customers’ currentplayers in terms of customer reach. However,channel/transaction behaviour andpost 1990s new players are effectively takingtheir underlying attitude;on the branch network advantage of the(b) Use sophisticated experimentalestablished players by optimally leveragingcustomer research to assess thetechnology and cost-effective deliveryeconomic impact of tactics designedchannels.to change that behaviour;The goal for banks’ senior management(c) Develop an integrated channelis to turn today’s “all things to all people”migration plan which blendsbranch network into highly differentiatedeconomic and non-economicsystem for delivery of multiple products. Theincentives to ensure that rightfoundation for creating such deliveryinitiatives are targeted at the rightchannels is superior insights into customercustomers;behaviour. These can come in many forms,(d) Protect sales effectiveness bybut at their most basic they entailutilising the ability of non-branchunderstanding customer needs for thechannels to select amongstdelivery of different products, how theseprospects and differentiate theneeds vary by customer types (includingmarketing message;small businesses), current customer(e) Design non-branch channels tobehaviour (especially as it relates to channelemphasize personalised interactionusage), and customer profitability. It is thisto counteract decreased loyaltymultifaceted understanding of customers thatamong remote customers;yields actionable implications for distribution* Remarks by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Twenty-Fifth Bank Economists’Conference – 2003 at ITC Grand Maratha Sheraton Hotel, Mumbai on December 12, 2003.103January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004(f) Develop tracking mechanisms toand sharing of ATM services and this trendallow you to assess and revise yourwill gather momentum in near future. As thismigration strategy on an ongoingdelivery channel gains mass acceptability andbasis.is user friendly, the bank can use it to cross-sell its as well as others’ products. ForTurning our attention to deliveryexample, banks have already startedchannels used by banks in India, indispensing railway tickets, movie ticketscomparison with their internationalthrough their ATMs. In future a bank’s ATMcounterparts, it is observed that the bankswould function like a kiosk delivering moreare yet to exploit the delivery channels to theof non-cash transactions, therebymaximum extent technology permits.simultaneously reducing the fixed andIncrease in off-site delivery channels has ledoperating cost of ATM.to new product development, speed oftransaction processing and reduction in Internet Banking-an emerging deliverytransaction costs. In India the major issue channel-offers significant cost advantage toabout new technology related delivery banks. A net-based transaction costs thechannels is their impact on the processing bank only around Rs. 4 and costs perof information, which lies at the core of transaction are even lower than those of anbanking business. Inspite of their ATM, mainly due to savings on prohibitiveadvantages, reliance on technology based real estate costs. Internet Banking has faileddelivery channels often exacerbates to take off due to a combination oftraditional risks: operational risk (since it psychological, legal, technological and socio-requires changes in procedures), reputational economic factors. Lack of critical mass ofrisk (if the bank fails to deliver secure, early adopters, lack of a strong trustaccurate and timely service) and legal risk environment, slowness in adoption of the(uncertainty about which legislation applies internet, low penetration of PCs and accessto e-banking transactions), besides to internet are some of the impediments inemergence of other risks (business and the adoption of internet banking in India. Withcredit risks). ATMs still remain the most drastic fall in cell phone tariff and emergencesuccessful delivery channel followed by of seamless connectivity between fixed andtelephone banking and internet banking. With mobile lines, mobile banking is set to emergeabout 9000 off-site and on-site ATMs as one of the cost-effective delivery channelsinstalled, banks are effectively reaching out in near future. Toll-free-numbers would alsoto a large customer base at a substantially gain popularity as an important deliverylower cost. Typically, it costs close to Rs.50 channel. Although banks abroad are usingper transaction if conducted in a branch and call centre as a delivery channel for somethe same if done through ATM costs about time, banks in India have just begun toRs.15. In order to reduce the cost of exploit it as an effective non-branch deliverytransaction banks have started out-sourcing channel.104January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Systems should be developed in such aThe bankers will have to take away that a customer can use his ATM cardcomprehensive view about their deliveryand his own ATM PIN (Personal Identificationchannels. Till now delivery channels wereNumber) for customer authentication in a Webviewed in terms of cost and technology.transaction, which is normally not done in aDelivery channels were devised focussingWeb-based transaction or in any othermainly on time and place advantage to thedelivery channel.customers. However, with the continuingadvances in wireless technology, flexibility inThe process cycle of the above singledelivery channel device would be the forte of‘Signon’ should be that once the customerbanks. Successful adoption of wirelessinitiates the transaction by entering the PINtechnology would help banks to offer not onlyfrom any of the delivery channels, the PINany time, anywhere, but also any deviceentered by the customer is verified with thebanking. Further, banks will have to buildPIN details of the customer and once theintegrated delivery channels with both verticalverification yields a positive response theand horizontal integration. In order to do socustomer will be allowed to perform thethe banks should install an enabling andtransaction. The PIN, which the user enterscompatible multi-channel platform whichto perform the transaction, should be a uniqueshould support and seamlessly integrate bothPIN that can be used by the customer tothe existing and future delivery channels.perform the transaction across any deliverychannel. In short, the banks should have a In today’s distributed computingcomprehensive system which will allow themenvironments, retail users sign onto manyto deliver dynamic end-to-end customerdifferent applications and systems includingservice that can reshape customer base,email, networks, databases and Web serversmaximise cross-selling opportunities andeach typically requiring its own securitygenerate a positive ROI (Return onprocedure. The more systems users mustInvestment) in the changing businessnavigate, the more IDs and passwords theyeconomy.must remember.105
