Basel II Accord and its ImplicationsLadies and gentlemen, it is my pleasure to share my thoughts with you on asubject which is currently engaging the attention of the banking community, notjust in India but worldwide. Let me first admit upfront that although I am at themoment wearing the regulator’s hat, yet I have been a commercial banker formost part of my professional career. So, the banker in me still goads me to putmyself in bankers’ shoes before evaluating any regulatory options. I can betterappreciate some of nuances from a practical stand point, and therefore shall tryto put them more from a banker’s perspective rather than that of a regulator.Managing risk is increasingly becoming the single most important issue for theregulators and financial institutions. These institutions have over the yearsrecognized the cost of ignoring risk. However, growing research andimprovements in information technology have improved the measurement andmanagement of risk. It’s but natural therefore, capital adequacy of a bank hasbecome an important benchmark to assess its financial soundness and strength.The idea is that banks should be free to engage in their asset-liabilitymanagement as long as they are backed by a level of capital sufficient to cushiontheir potential losses. In other words, capital requirement should be determinedby the risk profile of a bank.The initial capital accord of 1988 was hugely successful with more than 100countries accepting it as a benchmark. One of the major reasons for the successof this framework was its being simple. It brought in uniformity and attempted tomake regulatory capital requirement consistent with the economic capital.Reserve Bank of India introduced risk assets ratio system as a capital adequacymeasure in 1992, in line with the Basel accord of 1988, which takes into accountthe risk element in various types of funded balance sheet items as well as non-funded off balance sheet exposures. In fact, RBI norms on capital adequacy at9% are more stringent than Basel Committee stipulation of 8%.Shortcomings in the present accordHowever, the present accord has been criticized as being inflexible due to itsfocus on primarily credit risk and treating all types of borrowers under one riskcategory regardless of credit worthiness. The major criticism against the existingaccord stems from its• Broad brush approach – irrespective of quality of counter party or credit• Encouraging regulatory arbitrage by cherry picking• Lack of incentives for credit risk mitigation techniques• Not covering operational riskSpeech delivered by V. Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bankers’ Club,Mangalore on March 11, 2005As time passed, some of the major international banks began using sophisticatedmodels to measure risk. This was when a need was felt to upgrade the Baselframework. Therefore, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision thought itdesirable that the present accord is replaced by a more risk-sensitive framework.Three pillarsThe new Basel Accord has its foundation on three mutually reinforcing pillars thatallow banks and bank supervisors to evaluate properly the various risks thatbanks face and realign regulatory capital more closely with underlying risks. Thefirst pillar is compatible with the credit risk, market risk and operational risk. Theregulatory capital will be focused on these three risks. The second pillar gives thebank responsibility to exercise the best ways to manage the risk specific to thatbank. Concurrently, it also casts responsibility on the supervisors to review andvalidate banks’ risk measurement models. The third pillar on market discipline isused to leverage the influence that other market players can bring. This is aimedat improving the transparency in banks and improve reporting.Issues and ChallengesHaving given you a brief overview of the current and proposed new framework, Ishall now move on to the implementation challenges for the banks especially in adeveloping country like India. Here, I would skip the methodological details andtechnical nitty-gritty associated with the new accord, and concentrate instead onmore profound implications for the banking industry.ISSUES AND CHALLENGESWhile there is no second opinion regarding the purpose, necessity andusefulness of the proposed new accord - the techniques and methods suggestedin the consultative document would pose considerable implementationalchallenges for the banks especially in a developing country like India.Capital Requirement:  The new norms will almost invariably increase capitalrequirement in all banks across the board. Although capital requirement for creditrisk may go down due to adoption of more risk sensitive models - suchadvantage will be more than offset by additional capital charge for operationalrisk and increased capital requirement for market risk. This partly explains thecurrent trend of consolidation in the banking industry.Profitability:  Competition among banks for highly rated corporates needinglower amount of capital may exert pressure on already thinning interest spread.Further, huge implementation cost may also impact profitability for smaller banks.Risk Management Architecture:  The new standards are an amalgam ofinternational best practices and call for introduction of advanced riskmanagement system with wider application throughout the organization. It wouldbe a daunting task to create the required level of technological architecture andhuman skill across the institution.Rating Requirement:  Although there are a few credit rating agencies in India,the level of rating penetration is very low. A study revealed that in 1999, out of9640 borrowers enjoying fund-based working capital facilities from banks, only300 were rated by major agencies. Further, rating is a lagging indicator of thecredit risk and the agencies have poor track record in this respect. There is apossibility of rating blackmail through unsolicited rating. Moreover rating in Indiais restricted to issues and not issuers. Encouraging rating of issuers would be achallenge.Choice of Alternative Approaches:  The new framework provides foralternative approaches for computation of capital requirement of various risks.However, competitive advantage of IRB approach may lead to domination of thisapproach among big banks. Banks adopting IRB approach will be more sensitivethan those adopting standardized approach. This may result in high-risk assetsflowing to banks on standardized approach, as they would require lesser capitalfor these assets than banks on IRB approach. Hence, the system as a wholemay maintain lower capital than warranted and become more vulnerable. It is tobe considered whether in our quest for perfect standards, we have lost the onlyuniversally accepted standard.Absence of Historical Database: Computation of probability of default, lossgiven default, migration mapping and supervisory validation require creation ofhistorical database, which is a time consuming process and may require initialsupport from the supervisor.Incentive to Remain Unrated:  In case of unrated sovereigns, banks andcorporates, the prescribed risk weight is 100%, whereas in case of those entitieswith lowest ratting, the risk weight is 150%. This may create incentive for thecategory of counterparties, which anticipate lower rating to remain unrated.Supervisory Framework:  Implementation of Basel II norms will prove achallenging task for the bank supervisors as well. Given the paucity ofsupervisory resources, there is a need to reorient the resource deploymentstrategy. Supervisory cadre has to be properly trained for understanding ofcritical issues for risk profiling of supervised entities and validating and guidingdevelopment of complex IRB models.Corporate Governance Issues:  Basel II proposals underscore the interactionbetween sound risk management practices and corporate good governance. Thebank's board of directors has the responsibility for setting the basic tolerancelevels for various types of risk. It should also ensure that managementestablishes a framework for assessing the risks, develop a system to relate riskto the bank's capital levels and establish a method for monitoring compliancewith internal policies.National Discretion:  Basel II norms set out a number of areas where nationalsupervisor will need to determine the specific definitions, approaches orthresholds that they wish to adopt in implementing the proposals. The criteriaused by supervisors in making these determinations should draw upon domesticmarket practice and experience and be consistent with the objectives of Basel IInorms.Disclosure Regime:  Pillar 3 purports to enforce market discipline throughstricter disclosure requirement. While admitting that such disclosure may beuseful for supervisory authorities and rating agencies, the expertise and ability ofthe general public to comprehend and interpret disclosed information is open toquestion. Moreover, too much disclosure may cause information overload andmay even damage financial position of bank.Disadvantage for Smaller Banks:  The new framework is very complex anddifficult to understand. It calls for revamping the entire management informationsystem and allocation of substantial resources. Therefore, it may be out of reachfor many smaller banks. As Moody's Investors Services puts it, "It is unlikely thatthese banks will have the financial resources, intellectual capital, skills and largescale commitment that larger competitors have to build sophisticated systems toallocate regulatory capital optimally for both credit and operational risks."Discriminatory against Developing Countries:  Developing countries havehigh concentration of lower rated borrowers. The calibration of IRB has lesserincentives to lend to such borrowers. This, along with withdrawal of uniform riskweight of 0% on sovereign claims may result in overall reduction in lending byinternationally active banks in developing countries and increase their cost ofborrowing.External and Internal Auditors:  The working Group set up by the BaselCommittee to look into implementational issues observed that supervisors maywish to involve third parties, such a external auditors, internal auditors andconsultants to assist them in carrying out some of the duties under Basel II. Theprecondition is that there should be a suitably developed national accounting andauditing standards and framework, which are in line with the best internationalpractices. A minimum qualifying criteria for firms should be those that have adedicated financial services or banking division that is properly researched andhave proven ability to respond to training and upgrades required of its own staffto complete the tasks adequately.With the implementation of the new framework, internal auditors may becomeincreasingly involved in various processes, including validation and of theaccuracy of the data inputs, review of activities performed by credit functions andassessment of a bank's capital assessment process.CONCLUSIONImplementation of Basel II has been described as a long journey rather than adestination by itself. Undoubtedly, it would require commitment of substantialcapital and human resources on the part of both banks and the supervisors. RBIhas decided to follow a consultative process while implementing Basel II normsand move in a gradual, sequential and co-coordinated manner. For this purpose,dialogue has already been initiated with the stakeholders. A steering committeecomprising representatives of banks and different supervisory and regulatorydepartments is taking stock of all issues relating to its implementation. Asenvisaged by the Basel Committee, the accounting profession too, will make apositive contribution in this respect to make Indian banking system stronger.
