Exchange Rate Management: An Emerging Consensus?thI am very happy to be here with you on the occasion of the 14 National Assembly.This annual gathering of our Forex specialists is a very special occasion for everyoneinterested in the evolution of forex market in India – not only the dealers and marketparticipants, but also the RBI, Government and outside experts interested in appropriatemacro-economic management for higher growth and the greater good of our people.  Itprovides all of us with an opportunity to review recent developments  in forex marketsagainst the background of global developments in a fast changing world economic scenarioand modify our own policy and approach.  I am, therefore, delighted to be with you onceagain.2. As you know, RBI is in regular touch, formally and informally, with your associationto review market developments.  My senior colleagues and I  have also benefited from youradvice and, as you are aware, a large number of measures have now been put in place toliberalise our regulations in respect of foreign exchange transactions.  With your permission,today, on this special occasion, I would like to deal briefly with some of the longer termpolicy issues in respect of exchange rate and reserves management.  Several of these issueshave also been debated in various international fora. In the context of upsurge in our reservesin recent years and the appreciating trend in the external value of the rupee, there has alsobeen considerable domestic discussion of these issues.3. You will recall that the last time I had addressed your Association was in Decemberst2000 -  nearly 2 ½  years ago – on the occasion of the 21 Asia Pacific Forex Congress.  Thatmeeting was taking place against the background of the Asian crisis in 1997-98. The Asianregion had just come out of the forex crisis of a very destabilising kind.  I had used thatoccasion to review the on-going debate on management of the external sector, particularly theappropriate exchange rate systems, the appropriate intervention policy, and the foreignexchange reserve policy. Soon after the Asian crisis, these subjects had figured veryprominently in the  discussions on International Financial Architecture in various fora, suchas IMF, the World bank, G20, Financial Stability Forum and the Bank for InternationalSettlements.4. At that time, while reviewing the state of the debate,  I had mentioned  that aworldwide consensus on several issues was still evolving.  Today,  while “consensus” may betoo strong a word, I believe that there is a fair degree of convergence in the dominantinternational opinion among experts and various specialised institutions on many of theseissues.  Let me summarise some of the main conclusions which have emerged in the last 2 or3 years on the management of the external sector.  Once again, I should  emphasise that,given widely different economies of the world that we are talking about, there is no globalconsensus as such or unity of views.  However, at present, as I see it, there is certainly a“dominant” view of what is right and appropriate, which is increasingly commandinginternational acceptance.5. Thus, on the question of the appropriate exchange rate regime, a fixed exchange rateregime (even with a Currency Board) is clearly out of favour.  The Brazilian and Argentiniancrisis, after the Asian crisis, came as a rude shock.  Even strong Currency Board typearrangements of a fixed peg vis-à-vis dollar were found to be unviable.  You will recall that,soon after the Asian crisis, the widely accepted theoretical position was that a country had thechoice of either giving up monetary independence and setting up a Currency Board or givingup the stable currency objective and letting the exchange rate float freely so that monetarypolicy could then be directed to the objectives of inflation control.    There is a shift in thisparadigm.  The possibility of having a viable fixed rate mechanism has been generallydiscarded,  and the dominant view now is that, for most countries floating or flexible rates arethe only sustainable way of having a less crisis-prone exchange rate regime.6. In regard to the desirable degree of flexibility in exchange rates, opinions andpractices vary.  But a completely “free” float, without intervention, is clearly out of favourexcept perhaps in respect of a few global or reserve currencies.  And, in respect of thesecurrencies also (say, Euro and Dollar), concerns are expressed at the highest levels if themovement is sharp in either direction – recently, for example, when Euro was strengtheningat a fast pace.  Studies by the IMF and several experts also  show that by far, the mostcommon exchange rate regime adopted by countries, including industrial countries, is not afree float.  Most of the countries have adopted intermediate regimes of various types, such as,managed floats with no pre-announced path, and independent floats with foreign exchangeintervention moderating the rate of change and preventing undue fluctuations.  By and large,barring a few, countries have “managed” floats and Central Banks intervene periodically.This has also been true of industrial countries.  In the past, the U.S., the EU and the U.K.have  also intervened at one time or another.  Thus, irrespective of the pure theoreticalposition in favour of a free float, the external value of the currency continues to be a matter ofconcern to most countries, and most central banks.7. The reason why intervention by most central banks in forex markets has becomenecessary from time to time is primarily because of two reasons.  A fundamental change thathas taken place in recent years is the importance of capital flows in determining exchangerate movements as against trade deficits and economic growth, which were important in theearlier days.  The latter do matter, but only over a period of time.  Capital flows, on the otherhand, have become the primary determinants of exchange rate movements on a day-to-daybasis.  Secondly, unlike trade flows, capital flows in “gross” terms which affect exchange ratecan be several times higher than “net” flows on any day.  These are also much more sensitiveto what everybody else is saying or doing than is the case with foreign trade or economicgrowth.  Therefore, herding becomes unavoidable.  I am sure you will agree that all dealersprefer to be wrong with everyone else rather than being wrong alone!8. A related issue, which is a corollary of the prevalent intermediate regimes in respectof exchange rates, concerns the need, if any,  for foreign exchange reserves.  In a regime offree float, it could be argued that there was really no need for reserves.  If demand for foreignexchange is higher than supply, exchange rates will depreciate and equilibrate demand andsupply over time.  If supply exceeded demand, exchange rates will appreciate and sooner orlater, the two will equalise at some price.    However, today in the light of volatility inducedby capital flows and the self-fulfilling expectations that this can generate, there is now agrowing consensus that  emerging market countries should, as a matter of policy,  maintain“adequate” reserves.  How adequacy is to be defined is also becoming clearer.  Earlier, therule used to be defined in terms of number of  months of imports.  Now, increasingly it is feltthat reserves should at least  be sufficient to cover likely variations in capital flows or the“liquidity-at-risk”.  (However, there is as yet no consensus on the upper limit for reserves.Even after an “adequate” level is reached, reserves may continue to increase if capital inflowsare strong and central banks decide to intervene in order to moderate the degree ofappreciation.)29. To sum up, it seems that the debate on appropriate policies relating to forex marketshas now converged around some generally accepted views.  Among these, as I mentioned are:(a) exchange rates should be flexible and not fixed or pegged;  (b) countries should be able tointervene or manage exchange rates – to at least some degree – if movements are believed tobe destablising in the short run; and (c) reserves should at least be sufficient to take care offluctuations in capital flows and “liquidity at risk”.10. Let me now briefly deal with some issues of practical importance in the managementof forex markets in India, which have figured prominently in the media and expertcommentary. I will first take up 2 or 3 matters which are rather straight-forward and on whichour policy stance is also equally “unambiguous” and clear-cut. Then I will move to, andconclude with, a discussion of the appropriate exchange rate policy for India in the currentsituation.11. A frequently discussed question is about Capital Account Convertibility (CAS), i.e.when is India going to move to full CAC? As you are  aware, we have already liberalized andderegulated a whole host of capital account transactions. It is probably fair to say that formost  transactions which are required for business or personal convenience, the rupee is, forall practical purposes, convertible. In cases, where specific permission  is required fortransactions above a high monetary ceiling, this permission is also generally forthcoming. Itis also the declared policy of the Government and the RBI to continue with this process ofliberalization.  In this sense, Capital Account Convertibility continues to be a desirableobjective for all investment and business related transactions and India should be able toachieve this objective in not too distant a future.12. There are, however, two areas where we would need to be extremely cautious – one isunlimited access to short-term external commercial borrowing for meeting working capitaland other domestic requirements. The other area concerns the question of providingunrestricted freedom to domestic residents to convert their domestic bank deposits and idleassets (such as, real estate), in response to market developments or exchange rateexpectations.13. In respect of short-term external commercial borrowings, there is already a stronginternational consensus that emerging markets should keep such borrowings relatively smallin relation to their total external debt or reserves. Many of the financial crises in the 1990soccurred because the short-term debt was excessive. When times were good, such debt waseasily accessible.  The position, however, changed dramatically in times of external pressure.All creditors who could redeem the debt did so within a very short period, causing extremedomestic financial vulnerability. The occurrence of such a possibility has to be avoided, andwe would do well to continue with our policy of keeping access to short-term debt limited asa conscious policy at all times – good and bad.14. So far as the free convertibility of domestic assets by residents is concerned, theissues are somewhat more fundamental. It has to do with the differential impact of “stock”and “flows” in determining external vulnerability.   The day-to-day movement in exchangerates is determined by “flows” of funds, i.e. by demand and supply of spot or forwardtransactions in the market. Now, suppose the exchange rate is depreciating unduly sharply(for whatever reasons) and is expected to continue to do so for the near future. Now, furthersuppose that domestic residents, therefore, decide – perfectly rationally and reasonably – thatthey should convert a part or whole of their stock of domestic assets from domestic currency3to foreign currency. This will be financially desirable as the domestic value of their convertedassets is expected to increase because of anticipated depreciation. And, if a large number ofresidents so decide simultaneously within a short period of time, as they may, this expectationwould become self-fulfilling. A severe  external crisis is then unavoidable.15. Consider India’s case, for example.  Today, our reserves are high and exchange ratemovements are, by and large, orderly.  Now, suppose there is an event which creates externaluncertainty, as for example, what actually happened at the time of the Kargil or theimposition of sanctions after Pokhran, or the oil crises earlier.   Domestic stock of bankdeposits in rupees in India is presently close to US $ 290 billion, nearly three and a half timesour total reserves.  At the time of Kargil or Pokhran  or the oil crises, the multiple of domesticdeposits over reserves was in fact several times higher than now.  One can imagine whatwould have had happened to our external situation, if within a very short period, domesticresidents decided to rush to their neighbourhood banks and convert a significant part of thesedeposits into sterling, euro or dollar.16. No emerging market exchange rate system can cope with this kind of contingency.This may be an unlikely possibility today, but it must be factored in while deciding on a longterm policy of free convertibility of “stock” of domestic assets. Incidentally, this kind ofeventuality is less likely to occur in respect of industrial countries with  internationalcurrencies such as Euro or Dollar, which are held by banks, corporates,  and other entities  aspart of their long-term global asset portfolio  (as distinguished from emerging marketcurrencies in which banks and other intermediaries normally take a  daily long or shortposition for purposes of currency trade).17. Another issue, which has figured prominently in the current debate, relates to foreignexchange reserves.  As is well known, India’s foreign exchange reserves have increasedsubstantially in the past few years and are now among one of the largest in the world.  Thefact that most of  the constituents of India’s balance of payments are showing positive trends– on the current as well as capital accounts – is a reflection of the increasing competitivenessof the Indian economy and strong confidence of the international community in India’sgrowth potential.  For the first time after our Independence 56 years ago, the fragility of thebalance of payments is no longer a concern of policy makers.  This is a highly positivedevelopment and regarded as such by the country at large.18. Nevertheless, there are two concerns that have been expressed by expertcommentators – one is about the “cost” of additional reserves, and second concerns theimpact of “arbitrage” in inducing higher inflows.  So far as the cost of additional reserves isconcerned, it needs to be borne in mind  that the bulk of additions to reserves in the recentperiod is on account of non-debt creating inflows.  India’s total external debt, including NRI(Non-Resident Indian) deposits, has increased relatively slowly as compared with theincrease in reserves, particularly in the last couple of years.  In fact, India pre-paid more than$ 3 billion of external debt earlier this year.  It may also be mentioned that rates of interestpaid on NRI deposits and multilateral loans in foreign currency are in line with or lower thanprevailing international interest rates.19. On NRI rupee deposits, interest rates in the last couple of years have been in line withinterest rates on deposits by residents, and are currently even lower than domestic interestrates.  So far as other non-debt creating inflows (i.e., foreign direct investment, portfolioinvestment or remittances) are concerned, such  inflows by their very nature are  commercial4in nature and enjoy the same returns and risks, including exchange rate risk,  as any otherform of domestic investment or remittance by residents.  The cost to the country of suchflows is the same whether  they are added to reserves or are matched by equivalent foreigncurrency outflow on account of higher imports or investments abroad by  residents.  On thewhole, under present conditions, it seems that the “cost” of additional reserves is really a non-issue from a broader macro-economic point of view.20. Indian interest rates have come down substantially in the last three or four years.They are, however, still higher than those prevailing in the U.S., Europe, U.K. or Japan.  Thisprovides an “arbitrage” opportunity to holder of liquid assets abroad, who may takeadvantage of higher domestic interest rates in India leading to a possible short-term upsurgein capital flows.   However, there are several considerations, which indicate that “arbitrage”per se is unlikely to have been a primary factor in influencing remittances or investmentdecisions by NRIs or foreign entities in the recent period.  Among these are :• The minimum period of deposits by NRIs in Indian rupees is now one year, and theinterest rate on such deposits is subject to  a ceiling rate of 2.5 per cent over Libor.  Thisis broadly in line with one-year forward premium on the dollar in the Indian market(interest rates on dollar deposits by NRIs are actually below Libor).• Outside of NRI deposits, investments by Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) in debtfunds is subject to an overall cap of only $ 1 billion in the aggregate.  In other words, thepossibility of arbitrage by FIIs in respect of pure debt funds is limited to this  low figureof $ 1 billion (excluding investments in a mix of equity and debt funds).• Interest rates and yields on liquid securities are highly variable abroad as well as in India,and the differential between the two rates can change very sharply within a short timedepending on market expectations.  It is interesting to note that the yield on 10 yearTreasury bills in the U.S. had risen to about 4.4 per cent as compared with 5.6  per centon Government bonds of similar maturity in India at the end of July  2003.  Taking intoaccount the forward premia on dollars and yield fluctuations, except for brief period,there is likely to be little incentive to send  large amounts of capital to India merely totake advantage of the interest  differential.21. On the whole, it is likely that external flows into India have been motivated by factorsother than pure arbitrage.  Figures on sources of reserve accretion available upto the end oflast year (2002-03) confirm this view.  It is also pertinent to note that domestic interest ratesamong  industrial countries also vary considerably.  For example, in Japan, they are close tozero.  In the U.K., they are above 4 per cent, and in the U.S. about 1.5 per cent.  There is noevidence that capital has been moving out of U.S. to U.K. or Europe merely on account ofinterest differential.  Within a certain low range, capital flows are likely to be moreinfluenced by outlook for growth and inflation than pure arbitrage even among industrialcountries with full CAC.22. Another point which has been forcefully put forward by several experts in the contextof rising reserves, is that India should use its reserves for increasing investment for furtherdevelopment of the country rather than  keep them as liquid assets.  It is argued that it isparadoxical for a developing country to have a current and capital account surplus, andthereby add to its reserves, rather than use foreign savings to enhance the rate of investmentin the economy.523. In principle, this point is valid.  There is no doubt that in our present situation,maximum support has to be given to increasing the level of investment, particularly in theinfrastructure sector.  It is for this reason that RBI in the recent period has been following asoft interest rate policy in an environment of low inflation.  However, at the same time, itmust be emphasized that there is very little that RBI, (or, for that matter,  Government) candirectly do to use additional reserves for investment.  The equivalent rupee resources havealready been released by the RBI to recipients of foreign exchange, and equivalent rupeeliquidity has already been created.  The decision on whether to invest, consume or depositthese additional rupee resources lies with recipients, and not with the RBI.  By all means, letus urge them to invest, but there is not much of a case for pointing a finger at additionalreserves as a “cause” of lower than desirable level of investment activity in the economy.24. Let me now come to my  last point, which is of considerable present-day interest inIndia in the context of high and rising reserves, easy liquidity, low interest rates and theweakening dollar, i.e.,   what should be the correct or right policy stance for the managementof  exchange rate in India in the present environment? In RBI’s periodic credit policystatements,  as well as other public statements, RBI has highlighted the main pillars of itsstrategy for the management of the exchange rate. These are: RBI does not have a fixed“target” for the exchange rate which it tries to defend or pursue over time; RBI is prepared tointervene in the market to dampen excessive volatility as and when necessary; RBI’spurchases or sales of foreign currency are undertaken through a number of banks and aregenerally discreete and smooth; and market operations and exchange rate movement  should,in principle,   be transaction-oriented rather than purely speculative in nature.25. It is perhaps fair to say that the actual results of the exchange rate policy followed  bythe RBI, since the Asian crisis in particular, have been highly positive so far.  In addition tosharp increase  in reserves and generally “orderly” movements in exchange rates with lowervolatility, the confidence level of domestic and foreign investors in the Indian external sectorpolicies is strong.  India’s policies have also been described by the IMF as being “comparableto the global best practices” in a recent study of 20 select industrial and developing countries.Interestingly, a leading global news agency, in an international journal, has recently describedIndia’s currency model as being “ideal” for Asia.  India is now one of the very fewdeveloping countries which has set up its own clearing house for dollar-rupee transactionwith the concurrence of the Federal Reserve System, New York.26. In the last few months, however, when the dollar has been depreciating against majorcurrencies, and rupee has been appreciating against the dollar (albeit slowly), a number ofsuggestions have been made by experts and others calling for a  shift in RBI’s exchange ratepolicies.    There are, in the main, three alternative approaches that have been suggested forconsideration:• One view advanced  by several distinguished economists, including Prof. Kenneth Rogoffof IMF during his recent visit to India, is that rupee should be allowed to appreciate freelyin line with market trends.  According to this view, there is no strong case for RBI’sfurther intervention as reserves are already very high.  RBI’s purchases create substantialadditional domestic liquidity, which may be destabilising  in the long run.  There is alsono evidence, in their opinion, that unconstrained appreciation or volatility would affectgrowth prospects or lead to any other macro-economic problem.6• An exactly opposite view, which, among others,  has been   recently articulated by animportant all-India industry association, is that RBI should intervene more aggressively inthe market to further reduce the degree of appreciation.  The main argument in favour ofthis view is that India must maintain its  global “competitiveness”, particularly in relationto China which has a fixed  exchange rate with the dollar and whose currency  has beendepreciating along with it.• A third view, which has been recently put forward by a leading economic journal, amongothers, is that RBI should pursue what it has referred to as a policy of “calculatedvolatility”.  It has been argued that the present policy of  controlled volatility has providedvirtually risk-less gain to market participants since the rupee has been expected toappreciate substantially and continuously over the past few months.  According to thisview, in order to prevent excessive capital inflows during this period, RBI should haveallowed the exchange rate to “overshoot” quickly the targeted exchange rate of, say,Rs.46.20 (or any other number) to, say, Rs.45.50.  Thereafter, it should have allowed therupee to depreciate slowly, but not necessarily smoothly, to the above targeted numberover a period of next few months.  In essence, this proposal is akin to a policy of(announced or unannounced) fixed exchange rate  within a wider band.27. The RBI welcomes the current debate.  Reserves, at present,  are certainly at a levelwhich is more than enough to meet any foreseeable contingency.  It is also clear that, in thepresent period,  capital inflows and remittances have been strong, requiring continuousdomestic liquidity management.  In principle, therefore, it would be nice if an alternativeviable exchange rate management system could be put in place which would avoid excessivebuild-up of reserves and domestic liquidity and, at the same time, maintain India’s externalcompetitiveness with low inflation and low interest rates.28. In theory, each of the above alternative approaches has some merit.   However, it isnot entirely clear that they can be put into practice without causing substantial instability oruncertainty and possible emergence of macro-economic problems which are worse than whatthey are trying to solve.  An implicit assumption in two of the above  alternatives is that thereis a level at which, after initial fast appreciation, the exchange rate will either stabilise or turnaround.  A further implicit assumption is that the level (whatever it is) is either alreadyknown or will become known to the market as it is approached.29. RBI’s past experience does not suggest that these assumptions are valid.  It would berecalled that there have been periods when rupee exchange rates have been relatively morevolatile and movements have been sharper.  However, during periods of sharper appreciation,instead of inflows declining and demand for foreign currency rising, it was noticed that actualmarket behaviour was the opposite.  The opposite was true during periods of sharpdepreciation.  Exchange rate expectations had  their own momentum and  were often self-fulfilling.  There must, of course, be a level where these expectations will reverse.   However,if that level, because of “momentum” trading in imperfect and thin markets happens to besignificantly out of line with “fundamentals”, considerable  instability and substantialovervaluation (or under valuation) may result.  Such an outcome may do more harm thangood to continued confidence in a country’s exchange rate system.30. The third suggestion to hold the rates at current levels, and not to allow it toappreciate any further, even if inflows are strong, is also likely to be unsustainable over anylength of time.  It virtually  amounts to adopting a “fixed” or a near-fixed exchange rate7system with a floor.  Past experience suggests that this system can work well, as it did in EastAsia prior to the crisis, when the economy is doing well and inflows are strong,  but it comesunder extreme pressure when there are unfavourable domestic or external developments.Abandonment of a system of “fixed” exchange rates (or a system with a known floor) thenbecomes unavoidable.  Such a change, when it occurs under pressure, can result inconsiderable instability which is likely to be spread over a fairly long period.  At the end ofthis process, the country then has no option but to revert to a more flexible exchange ratesystem.31. It is by no means a mere coincidence that all countries affected by external crises inthe 1990s had a fixed or near-fixed exchange rate systems.  China at present is an exceptionto the rule in view of its persistent trade surpluses over a long period combined with veryhigh levels of foreign direct investment.  It is not certain how long into the  future thissituation will prevail.  In any case, China’s special characteristics  are difficult to replicate inother emerging markets with lower volume of trade and foreign investment.32. The desirability of maintaining the-overall competitiveness of an economy  can hardlybe questioned.  However, the long-run competitiveness of an economy needs to be measuredin relation to a multiple currency basket, and in relation to major trading partners over areasonably long period of time.  Exchange rate fluctuations among major currencies are nowan everyday fact of life, and it is important for all entities with foreign exchange exposures toresort to “hedging” with appropriate risk management of assets and liabilities.33. On balance, the benefits of the suggested alternatives to the present system are notvery clear.  The present system is by no means an ideal one.  However, like the old clicheabout virtues of democracy, it is probably better in the long run than all the availablealternatives.  In view of behavioural and market complexities in this area, as well as multipleeconomic policy objectives, solutions which seem “ex ante” optimal may turn out to bedisastrous “ex post” -  after the event – as happened in Argentina recently and East Asia andMexico some years ago.34. Nevertheless, as I said a while ago, RBI welcomes the present debate.  As acontribution to this debate, I have tried to deal with some relevant issues, and indicate ourpresent views on them.  These views are, of course, subject to change in the light of domesticand international experience and further academic insights.35. We look forward to your deliberations and hope to benefit from them.thAddress by Dr. Bimal Jalan at 14 National Assembly of Forex Association of India 14.8.20038
