Pension System in India :*At the outset I wish to compliment the Asian Development Bank Institute andothers who are sponsoring this policy Conference. The Conference is rightlyaddressing the policy issues as well as practical skills involved in examining andsharing of experiences and views among South Asian countries and, with multilateralinstitutions is commendable. My comments today will be in two parts. The first partwill contain a description of initiatives taken and involvement by Reserve Bank ofIndia (RBI) in the recent past, say the last three years, in matters relating to PensionSystem in India.  The second part will narrate issues that are required to be addressedRBI’s InterestsWhile pension system as well as its regulation is not of  direct concern to RBI,there are several areas of interest to the RBI.  In fact, RBI as far back as 1996-97encouraged a resident consultant of RBI to undertake a study of the pension systemand this pioneering but comprehensive study highlights the dimensions of theSecond, RBI in its contribution to recommendations of the Working Group onDomestic and Foreign Savings for the consideration by the Steering Group onFinancial Resources for the Ninth Plan emphasised the importance of contractual“The Group was of the view that increase in contractual saving is essential andshould be ensured by appropriate policy actions and the estimates of domesticsavings are based on the premise that there would be a significant increase incontractual savings and if this did not , the domestic savings are likelyto be significantly lower and they would affect investment and overall growth”.The Report further states “The household sector saving rate is contingent on asignificant increase in contractual saving and that necessary policy actions duringthe Ninth Plan would be taken to ensure that the targetted saving rate of theIn this regard, RBI has also articulated the importance of contractual savings inThird, RBI was associated with Project OASIS both during the preparation ofthe report in 1999 and in consideration of it at later stages.  It is an excellent reportand perhaps no other report has contributed as positively to the debate on the issue ofpensions. The RBI Board had expressed interest in the subject and noted the report inview of its criticality for the developments in the financial sector.  The RBI had alsorendered some advice to Government on the fiscal implications of this report.Fourth, RBI has been active in developing financial markets, mainly moneyand government securities markets.   The Provident Funds have special interest inGovernment securities for well-known reasons.  Development of funded or privatepension systems need to be supported by a simultaneous strengthening of the financial1funding infrastructure from time to time.household sector is achieved”.materialisesavings of which pension system is an important element.problem, though RBI does not necessarily share the solutions offered by the study.in the context of pension reform, from the perspective of a central banker.improving the pension systems in South Asian countries.  The approach of enabling ofMr. Chairman and friends,A Central Banker’s Perspective market infrastructure, since the ability of the pension funds to take care of theIt will be useful to place on record the measures taken by RBI in the last twoyears in this regard that should be of interest to Provident Funds ( PFs).  ProvidentFunds are now allowed to have constituent Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL)Accounts with banks, Primary Dealers, Depositories, etc., all of whom are havingSGL accounts with RBI.  Bidding in the primary auction of government securities canbe done by PFs through such entities or even directly.  Non-competitive bids can bePFs in auctions of Treasury Bills.  For many years, the maturity structure ofmarket loans had shortened. Using skilful debt management, the RBI was able toplace longer-term issues of 15 and 20 year Government paper. On the open marketwindow, we have been making available papers of different maturity including thosewith tenor longer than 10 year paper and of late this has attracted interest from .Zero coupon bonds and inflation (capital) indexed bonds, which ought to be of specialinterest to  have been issued.  Tax Deduction at Source on government securitiesThere are several other initiatives under contemplation, the most importantbeing the satellite linkage as part of computerisation of the RBI’s Public Debt Office.With such a linkage, it should be possible for a PF anywhere in the country to put in abid at any office of RBI in a primary auction or buy from the open market windowfrom any place ,  as also  be able to transact with  intermediaries like Primary Dealersand banks. It is also proposed to introduce order driven trading with guaranteedsettlement for small lots and PFs should be able to take advantage of this facility.Further, the legal changes proposed by the RBI in regard to Public Debt combinedwith the institutional developments already put in place by the RBI should help buildvibrant markets, thereby enabling PFs to actively manage their portfolio in order toFifth, the RBI has received the  Report of the Informal Group to Study theRole of Bank Deposits in Savings Mobilisation (Chairman Shri .  Thereport is under examination but I will share with you an observation in the report thatwhile all saving instruments showed wide year-to-year variations during 1990-91 to1998-99, not surprisingly, contractual savings showed relatively less fluctuations.There has also been some steady improvement in the relative importance ofcontractual savings.  RBI intends to explore further measures for increasing theSixth, A study of Public Accounts in India under the ageis of Research Group of the RBI was presented at the seventh meeting of State FinanceSecretaries on  November 3 and 4, 2000 convened by RBI.  The stark realities ofgrowing liabilities under the existing Provident Fund arrangements was of greatanxiety to State Finance Secretaries, but it was  that it is really an All-Indiaphenomenon and indeed a national level problem warranting an in-depth study and aIt is not my intention to go into the issues relating to the less than activemanagement of Provident Funds in India or even inadequate incentives to do so.Similarly the relative advantages of funded as against pay-as-you-go or the dangers ofprivately managed funds etc. are not addressed here.  There are also vital issuesrelating to supervision and administration of the provident funds in India, though2Issuesviable approach chalked out by the Government of India.recognisedDevelopmentattractiveness of contractual savings.A.P.Kurien)maximise returns.has been abolished.PFsPFsplaced by interests of contributors depends on the performance of the financial markets.these are not of direct concern to the RBI. As a central banker, however, issuesrelating to macro-economic stability and growth, savings, especially contractualsavings, development of financial markets to enable pension funds to investefficiently, tax treatment pertaining to different forms of savings, fiscal implicationsof pension system and the overall regulatory framework in the financial sector are ofThere are five dimensions to a comprehensive approach to reform of thepension system in India.  They are (a) social dimension in terms of inter-equity and humanitarian considerations (this needs to be discussed as some analystsclaim that this is only an  issue); (b) economic dimension in termsfavouring contractual savings; (c) fiscal dimension in terms of the fiscal impact ofpayment of pensions to government employees ,   financing the borrowingprogramme, payment to poor as part of social safety net, and contingent liabilities thatmay arise due to the nature of regulatory prescriptions pertaining to provident fundsand pensions; (d) financial dimension in terms of the functioning of financial marketswhich enables appropriate safety and return for savings meant for payment ofpensions in future; (e) the regulatory dimension in terms of prescriptions governingoperation of pension funds in particular and, overall financial sector in general. Theregulatory dimension will have to encompass issues relating to regulatory gaps andoverlaps.  It may be desirable to consider pension fund regulatory issues in thisbroader perspective also, and priorities in policy actions should reflect the importanceof each dimension in the specific country context.In any comprehensive review of social security, especially pension system inIndia, it will be useful to differentiate various segments, since the workforce issignificantly segmented at the current stage of development and may remain so,though in a less differentiated way in the near future.  The first segment is theemployees in the government system ( centre, state and local), where the stock ofliabilities is huge and it is a fiscal problem and an “overhang” which can at best beinsulated from perpetuating itself in future.  The second consists of employees in thepublic enterprises in industry, who are mostly covered by Central Provident FundScheme or Employees Provident Fund Scheme.  The third comprises  employees inthe private corporate sector and related entities.  A significant part of this work forceis also covered under Central Provident Fund and pension schemes.  All the abovethree categories of workforce account for about fifteen per cent of total workforce inthe country.  Of the remaining 85 per cent, about one-third are too poor to afford anycontributory scheme. The rest have several avenues, but only few among them,forming about one per cent of workforce, currently use the avenues of individualprovident fund instruments. Most of these are in effect subserving the major objectiveof funding the debt of public sector, especially government through postal savings,It is essential to recognise the implications on the pension system, of  relevantrealities of current reform process in India.  First, lifetime employment which wasvirtually a legal requirement and a moral norm is yielding place to contracted tenuresand outsourcing.  Second, labour markets are becoming more flexible, which impliesthat institutional arrangements for individuals seeking financial security must beprovided.  Third, mobility of labour is increasing and pension systems should removepenalties or irritants in regard to such mobility.  Fourth, self-employment is increasingrelative to employment in organisations, especially when services sector is growingvery rapidly, which again calls for a review of the institutional arrangements.  Fifth,3public provident funds/small savings and life insurance.of implications for growth and stability, especially with regard to incentive frameworkintra-generationalgenerationalconcern to RBI and relevant to the pension systems.marketisation of pension system by itself will thus be an inadequate response to theproblem.  In fact, existing stipulations under the prevailing schemes need to bereviewed on a priority basis to enable them to cope with new realities. There is aperception that the provident fund/pension schemes are serving primarily theobjective of funding fiscal deficit and a review of guidelines is sought.  of reviewing and redesigning is feasible in the immediate future, is necessary and inany case a pre-condition for any reform.  In doing so, we should recognise that thisFiscal dimension is perhaps the most critical in pension reform in manyrespects.  First, the pension liability as per present pay-as-you-go is very difficult tosustain in the medium to long term.  The Finance Secretaries of States ,  in a meetingearlier this month, described it as an explosive situation and the problem forGovernment of India is not any less severe.  Merely changing the systems ofadministration of liabilities will not solve the problem of “overhang” though a reviewis useful for the future.  Second, the government budgets are dependent to asignificant degree on sources such as small savings, and these are not part of marketborrowings.  Third, “involuntary” contribution to market borrowings is currentlyavailable to government through regulatory prescriptions on banks and providentrationalisation of taxes and financial sector reformwould require elimination or at least significant reduction in such involuntaryprogramme.  Thus, reduction in fiscal deficitwould be essential as an enabling factor for effective reform of the pension system.Finally, any relief for large sections of the poor and the vulnerable in regard topension is possible mainly through budgetary support and unless the fiscal positionimproves no succour is possible to large sections of the poor.  Indeed, allsubsidisation, and even acceptance of contingent liabilities as part of any pensionsystem on a contributory basis to those who can afford will seriously undermine thecapacity of governments to take care of pension needs of the vulnerable sections.Thus, fiscal reform and prioritisation of pension expenditures (including taxexpenditures) are essential for meaningful pension reform.  Where proposals forcontributory pension system involve contingent liabilities on the government, as acentral bank, the RBI has advised against them.  The RBI had cautioned about theneed for realism in estimating the returns on investments and the need to avoidcontingent liabilities through pension assurances by Government in respect of privateThe long-term objective of RBI in regard to financial sector is to ensure thatsavers have a range of institutions and instruments to choose from to suit theirrisk/return preferences. In fact, in the interests of financial stability, excessivedependence of financial intermediation through the banking system needs to beavoided in the medium to longer-term, while recognising that banks will continue tobe special.  In this regard, mutual funds and pension funds will have a greater role toplay  in financial intermediation.  In pursuance of the objective of multiple types offinancial intermediaries providing larger choice and competition, RBI would seekreductions in  of banks resources and level playing field among theintermediaries, and such a level playing field would necessitate appropriate equitabletax treatment, as explained separately, and more importantly appropriate equitableregulatory induced financial burden such as differentiated reserve requirements.Thus, a comprehensive review of the regulatory induced financial burdens, includingon the savings schemes, may be needed as part of medium term actions, that wouldclearly set apart pension funds and contractual savings on the one hand and all other4preemptionspension sponsors in regard to the design of any new pension system.subscriptions to government’s borrowing funds.  Reform of pension systems, approach of redesigning existing schemes is only one element of the pension reform.This approachmarket based financial  with level play on the other.  While contractualsavings could have preferred-status in tax-treatment, all others ought to have anTax treatment is an important aspect of pension system.   As explained in theKurien Committee report, an important explanatory factor in movement of householdsavings from one category, say banks, to another, say mutual funds has been taxexemptions.  The host of tax concessions tabulated in the report show that theyaddress different sets of priorities, which are also changed very frequently dependingon specific problems of institutions.  Tax exemptions are given depending on entitiesor end-use or instruments.  There is need for an immediate review of all taxes relatingto financial intermediation, and announcing a time bound plan to remove all taxconcessions except those relating to long term contractual savings, essentiallycovering life insurance, pensions and provident funds.  RBI has a direct interest in thissubject of tax reform and involuntary subscriptions to government borrowingprogramme in the context of the overall reform of the financial sector, and the needsof pension systems should be recognised in the reform of relevant tax system andfinancial sector.Among the tax measures that ought to be reviewed in the interest of promotingcontractual savings and avoiding misuse of facilities are those already highlighted byDave Panel.  The foremost relate to abolition of tax on earnings of over 12 per cent inProvident Fund and levy of tax, at least of a 10 per cent tax, on early withdrawal fromA few words on the regulatory framework for the pension system in Indiawould be in order.  It has to be recognised that there are four broad areas that needattention.  First, given the magnitudes, pension system for  government employeeswhich is linked to fiscal management needs to be tackled separately though in themedium to long run, there can be shift from pay-as-you go to funded system.  Second,pension system for the vulnerable sections which has significant fiscal implicationswould also need to be addressed separately though in the medium to long run, therecan be a funded system with some governmental support.  Third, and an area cryingfor reform relates to the current provident fund/pension schemes - both and decentralised  - covering organised labour. Although a legal framework andinstitutional arrangements exist, they appear to be somewhat outdated.  The mainemphasis would have to be on focussed reform of the existing systems.  Fourth,relates to devising pension systems that synchronise with the changing needs oflabour markets, labour mobility, self-employment and service sector growth.  Newsystems would  have to be put in place for this area and this may require an enablingregulatory framework that encourages pension funds.  It must be recognised that anew regulatory framework does not necessarily mean a new regulator or additionalBriefly stated, from the view point of RBI, we advocate (a) increasedmandatory contractual savings from the  sector, both public sector includinggovernment, and private sector; (b) enabling environment and regulatory frameworkfor voluntary contributions to contractual savings, especially pension funds; and (c)changes in the tax regime and regulatory prescriptions in financial sector to promotecontractual savings with  treatment to them and less favourable but inter seequal treatment to all non-contractual savings.  This approach coupled withimprovements in fiscal management and financial markets provides perhaps an5optimal approach.favourableorganisedbureaucracy.centralisedProvident Funds.assured level playing field.intermediationPerhaps, my comments would be incomplete without a reference to the casefor and against mega-regulator or super regulator.  If a view is taken in favour ofmega regulator, regulation of pension system gets subserved in mega approach.  If wepersist with separate regulators, two issues would arise viz., whether there should be aseparate regulator for pensions and, a much broader issue of handling regulatory gapsor overlaps.  In August 1999, I had given a keynote address on Universal Banking inwhich I had referred to the issue of new bureaucracies as well as “Since there is no point in creating new bureaucracies, there are practicaldifficulties in massive redeployment of personnel, and expertise for regulationcannot be created overnight, some ways of filling up the regulatory gaps andoverlaps should be found without disrupting the existing regulatory structures.The proposal is to explore the feasibility of an umbrella  regulatory legislationwhich creates an apex regulatory authority without disturbing the existingjurisdiction.  The features of the proposal are : The Board for FinancialSupervision of the RBI can continue to supervise banks and non-banks but withthe Deputy Governor as Chairman : the insurance regulating authority willsupervise insurance companies and Securities and Exchange Board of India willcontinue with its regulatory jurisdiction.  The apex financial regulatory authoritymay be constituted, by statute with the Governor of the Reserve Bank of India asChairman and the members could be Chairmen of the three regulatory agencies.The apex body should also include some outside experts on a part-time basis.Finance Secretary could be a permanent special invitee or a regular memberwithout voting rights as in the case of the RBI Board.  The apex authority couldhave by law, jurisdiction to assign regulatory gaps to one of the agencies ; arbitrateon regulatory overlaps and ensure regulatory co-ordination.  The apex authoritycould be serviced by a part-time secretariat of the RBI.  In a way, the proposalimproves and formalises the present informal arrangement into a legislative basedLet me conclude by emphasising the importance of enhancing contractualsavings for growth, improving fiscal situation and bringing about financial sectorreforms in the context of pension reform.  An optimal approach from RBI’s point ofview has been articulated here. There is a need and scope for improving  the existingprovident fund and pension schemes in the country.  Caution is advocated againstinstituting any large-scale changes in the pension system or regulatory regimeswithout ensuring appropriate reforms in other areas.  In particular, the introduction ofof regulation and supervision or accounting standards or risk management systems,but also financial market infrastructure, including clearing and settlement systems,and the microstructure for trading in securities. We are still in the process ofdeveloping financial market infrastructure. Above all, fiscal impact, including dangersof assuming contingent liabilities should be assessed in devising pension reform* Comments by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the Session onGovernance and Regulatory Issues in Pension Reforms in South Asia, of the Pension System Reforms6orgnaised by Asian Development Bank Institute at New Delhi on November 24, 2000. Conference, measures.private sector in managing funded pension should take into account not merely systemauthority.”coordination.  Let me reproduce what was stated then.regulatory
