PROSPECTS I am very happy to participate in this workshop and to deliver the inaugural address. I thank theVarious measures of financial sector reform were initiated in India since 1991 and it is amplyclear that these measures have now started producing durable results. In particular, thesemeasures enabled the banking sector to face a number of challenges boldly. The prudential andsupervision norms which we are following today are internationally comparable and Indianbanks are reasonably sound. The very fact that Indian banks are not affected by the contagiondue to South East Asian crisis is a clear testimony to this. With a view to proceed further, it isimportant that cooperative banks are also placed on sound footing. Having said this, it is mostappropriate to evaluate the progress of structural reforms in Agriculture and Rural DevelopmentBanks in India and to plan the future course of action with a view to place them on sustainablegrowth. In this context, the conduct of this workshop is very timely and I congratulate theThe importance of agriculture sector in the Indian economy can hardly be over-emphasised. Thecooperative banks play an important role in the rural credit delivery system. They account forabout 30% of total rural deposits and a little over 44% of loans and advances outstanding foragriculture and rural development in the country. The rural credit system needs to meet thegrowing requirements of agriculture which is becoming input-intensive and getting diversified.The demands on the system are enormous. At the same time, the requirements of the poorersections to create productive assets have to be met. Obviously, the strategy and approach of thecredit delivery system to meet the needs of the various segments have to be different even whenThe role of credit and credit institutions in augmenting production and productivity is wellrecognized. The main thrust of Indian public policy towards rural credit has, therefore, been toensure that sufficient and timely credit, at reasonable rates of interest, is made available to aslarge a segment of the rural population as possible. The strategies followed have undoubtedlyhelped to build up a broad-based institutional infrastructure for the delivery and deployment ofThe financial sector reform that is currently underway encompasses the institutional rural creditdelivery system as well. The essence of these measures is to improve the efficiency andproductivity of all credit institutions including rural credit institutions, where a good number ofcases do not enjoy satisfactory financial health. Institutional development is an evolutionaryprocess. Continual self-assessment and adaptation are crucial. The progress of the rural financialinstitutions (RFIs) will have to reflect the trends towards greater efficiency and effectiveness.The specific measures needed to improve the organisational effectiveness will vary from oneEvolution Let me briefly mention the evolution of Agriculture and Rural Development Banks (ARDBs).The evolution of Land Development Banking in India can be put into three distinct phases. Thefirst phase is the Land Mortgage Banks (LMBs), which were established and mainly confined toprovision of long-term credit to farmers for redemption of debts or acquisition of ownershiprights on lands against mortgage of land based securities which continued upto mid 1950s. The1*:type of institution to another.credit.the same institution is required to cater to all the segments.organisers.organizers for this opportunity.Mr. Chairman, Ladies & Gentlemen,ARDBS : ISSUES AND STRUCTURAL REFORMS IN second phase virtually started after the findings and recommendations of the All India RuralCredit Survey Committee (1954), recommending the need for a separate Long-term CooperativeCredit Structure and also the establishment of Land Mortgage Banks in all States. TheCommittee suggested that the LMBs segment of the cooperative credit system should berestructured to broad-base its activities to provide finance to the farmers for acquisition of assetsneeded for improving the agricultural productivity. Accordingly, steps were taken by theerstwhile Agricultural Credit Department (ACD) of RBI in consultation with the Government ofIndia for implementing these recommendations and allowing Land Mortgage Banks (LMBs) toundertake financing for investments in productive purposes related agricultural activities likesinking of wells, purchase of pumpsets and other agricultural implements and equipments. Afterthe recommendation of the All India Rural Credit Review Committee, there was a distinct shiftin the disbursement of credit from the conventional function, viz., debt redemption andownership rights towards granting of loans for meeting credit requirements of agriculturists forinvestment purposes. It is in this context, the RBI had also set up in 1963 a separate body, i.e.,Agricultural Refinance Corporation (ARC) for supplementing resources of the banks. Initially, itwas extending refinance support to the Land Mortgage Banks for meeting financial requirementsof the Central Land Mortgage Banks (CLMBs). Later on, the role of LMBs was further amplifiedto cover various non-land based activities allied to agriculture like, dairy, poultry, fishery,piggery, sericulture, etc. Thus, the advances for productive purposes, which were as good as‘Nil’ in 1950-51, had risen enormously in 1970-71. It is, at this time, with the emphasis ondevelopmental lending , the LMBs had acquired the nomenclature of Land Development Banks(LDBs). With a view to enlarge the function of ARC, RBI had constituted in 1975, AgriculturalRefinance and Development Corporation (ARDC). The aim was to provide not only the requiredfinancial assistance to the Land Development Banks (LDBs), but also other needed support forupgrading the quality of their loans. The present phase can be construed as the third phase inwhich the Land Development Banks’ (LDBs’) operations cover virtually all rural economicactivities including those in the non-Farm sector like cottage & village industries, handicraft,village artisan, etc., with the formation of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development(NABARD) in 1982. With the shift in the overall functions and coverage of LMBs and laterLDBs, to the role of encompassing virtually all rural economic activities, the LDBs came to beOrganisational Organisational structure of long-term cooperative credit institutions differs from state to state.There are at present mainly three structures apart from one State, i.e. Andhra Pradesh, where thestructure is integrated. Eight States, viz., Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir, Maharashtra,Manipur, Pondicherry, Tripura and Uttar Pradesh, are operating with unitary structure where theAnother 8 States, viz., Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthanand Tamil Nadu, are operating with federal structure in which the SCARDBs operate at the apexlevel and the PCARDBs operate as independent units at the base level affiliated to theThree states, viz. Assam, Himachal Pradesh and West Bengal, are operating with mixed structurein which at the apex level the SCARDB operates through its branches. There are also PCARDBsIn the state of Andhra Pradesh, the short-term and long-term cooperative structure have beenintegrated for the last 5/6 years. Similarly in smaller states like Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya,2operating at the base level affiliated to the same apex bank at state level.SCARDBs of the State concerned.operations are carried out by the apex SCARDB through its branches.Structure :known as Agricultural and Rural Development Banks.Mizoram, Nagaland, Goa, Delhi and Union Territories like Chandigarh and Andaman &The SCARDBs have been playing a significant role in extending credit for capital formation inagriculture and rural development. The ground level disbursement by SCARDBs have beengrowing substantially from Rs.400 crore in 1983-84 to around Rs.10443 crore by March 1999.The role of SCARDBs in credit dispensation in the years to come is likely to further expand withdiversification of various investment activities in farm and non-farm, rural housing sector, etc.The flow of credit at ground level for investment activities through floatation of SpecialThe NABARD refinance to SCARDBs in the last 16 years has increased from Rs.1633 crore in1982-83 to Rs.2168 crore in 1998-99 and the cumulative disbursement of refinance to SCARDBsststood at Rs.16470 crore as on 31 March 1999. Thus, the finance support to SCARDBs towardsschematic lending revealed a compound growth rate of 15 per cent for the years between 1982-83 to 1998-99. There had been a steady rise in the floatation of Special Development Debentures(SDDs) from Rs.1 ,222 crore in 1993-94 to Rs.2,429 crore in 1997-98. As regards the flotation ofOrdinary Debentures, the same was at Rs.86.48 crore during 1993-94, which had declined toRs.83 crore during 1995-96 with marginal increase in the subsequent year (1996-97), which hasreached a level of Rs.99 crore during 1997-98. The major chunk of refinance from NABARDduring 1998-99 is for farm mechanisation (31%) and minor irrigation (18%) , dairy developmentAs per the data available in the LT structure, 10 SCARDBs (constituting 53% of the totalSCARDBs) and 433 PCARDBs (45% of the total PCARDBs) incurred loss in 1997-98,amounting to Rs.153 crore and Rs.186 crore respectively as against 8 SCARDBs (Rs.57 crore)and 383 PCARDBs (Rs.51 crore) during 1996-97. The accumulated losses range from Rs.0.14crore in Pondicherry to Rs.286 crore in Maharashtra and in case of PCARDBs, this ranges fromssuesEven though the success stories of co-operatives vary from state to state, they, nevertheless,provide hope for the future. Although a structure exists, we should create an environment inwhich it can function efficiently. We should be bold enough to identify where things have gonewrong and we should be willing to adopt measures that are necessary to correct them. In thiscontext, issues such as a better appraisal of applications for lending, stress on mobilisation ofrural savings, greater autonomy on the decision-making process, restoration of the democraticprocess, freedom from bureaucratic controls and financial and operational diversification should(a) Regarding resources, SCARDBs depend on borrowings from NABARD and with a view tostrengthen their resource base , they were permitted to mobilise fixed deposits for period not lessthan 12 months subject to aggregate deposits outstanding not exceeding net owned funds of thebank in the previous year’s balance sheet. Further, PCARDBs have been allowed to mobilisedeposits only as agents of SCARDBs. It is important to recognise that any further relaxation is tobe viewed from supervisory and regulatory angle. The recent RBI Discussion Paper entitled“Harmonisation of role and functions of Development Financial Institutions and banks”3,Let me elaborate them.be the elements of any future programme of action. : I0.41 crore in Punjab to Rs.183 crore in Karnataka.(15%) and non-farm sector (14%).Development and Ordinary Debentures has been increasing steadily.Disbursements : Credit Nicobar, the two tier SCBs are catering to the long term credit needs of farmers.adequately addressed this issue. The ARDBs are akin to DFIs which mainly cater to the longterm funds requirements. It is our endeavour to maintain a level playing field for institutions(b) One of the important reasons for the recent turmoil in South East Asia was the absence ofproper disclosures in the balance sheets of financial intermediaries. The transparency of thebanking and financial system is an issue related to sound financial infrastructure. In fact, the lackof transparency results in incentive to ‘evergreen’ loans, thereby impacting on the performanceA major element of the financial sector reforms in India has been the application of prudentialnorms and regulations introduced in 1992 aimed at ensuring safety and soundness of thefinancial system and at the same time encouraging markets to play increasing role. Prudentialnorms serve two primary purposes – first they reveal the true position of the bank’s loanportfolio and secondly, they help arrest its deterioration. Prudential reforms introduced in Indiarelate to income recognition, asset classification and provisioning for bad and doubtful debts andPrudential norms were introduced during the year 1997-98 in SCARDBs/PCARDBs with theobjective of making full provisions. As ARDBs (both Primary and State levels) have expresseddifficulties in following the norms, they have been advised to make 100 per cent provision forloss assets and not less than 30 per cent in case of sub-standard and doubtful assets during 1997-98 and full provisioning from 1998-99 onwards. I am happy to note that SCARDBs andPCARDBs are making all efforts to implement provisioning norms in respect of doubtful andstThe NPAs as on 31 March, 1998 constituted 18.63 per cent for SCARDBs and 16.53 per centfor PCARDBs. It is worth mentioning that SCARDBs for Punjab and Haryana had no NPAs.Capital to risk weighted asset ratio is an important element in the prudential norms. Althoughthere is no prescribed ratio for SCARDBs and PCARDBs, attempt must be made to maintain a(c) Contrary to the principles of cooperatives, the elected boards were superseded in many statesand they are not in a position to function in a democratic way as a result, the professionalism inits management is affected. It is important to activate steps to restore the democratic boards at(d) Cooperatives suffer often on account of excessive state government interference leading toslow pace of changes in cooperatives including achievement of adequate governance comparedto other RFIs. There is a need to give a boost to cooperative spirit to achieve a transparentcooperative policy. This would enhance the opportunity for co-operatives to function as a(e) The Second Narasimham Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (1998) urged thatconsideration be given to delayering of the cooperative credit system with a view to reducing theintermediation costs and providing the benefit of cheaper NABARD credit to ultimate borrowers.(f) To provide transparency, authenticity and accountability of the management to the ownersand share-holders, timely statutory audit by an external professional is a must. In this direction,entrusting the statutory audit of co-operatives to Chartered Accountants on the lines of4This needs a close look before a final view is taken since the issues are somewhat complex.`business enterprise’ with social mission.the earliest to enable active participation of elected members.minimum capital adequacy ratio of 8 per cent in the near future.sub-standard assets on these lines.capital adequacy.of assets.performing similar functions.commercial banking system will not only clear the arrears in audit, but will also set the system in(g) A more conducive climate for recovery has to be built. In this, the major initiative of therecovery of dues has to come from the RFIs themselves. Innovative schemes must be drawn upincluding giving due weightage to recovery performances in staff appraisal. On the legal side,State Governments must assist the RFIs by instituting mechanisms for expeditious disposal ofthe cases filed. The Union as well as State Governments will have to resolve that no across-the-(h) The provision of credit and the way in which credit is tailored to suit the requirements of thepoor are equally important. The objective is not only the financial transfer of resources to therural borrower but also the creation of an enduring and a responsive financial system which cancontinue to provide access to credit. This implies, among others, the establishment of a system ofcredit distribution and supervision whose costs are consistent with sustainable operations. Themarginal transaction costs incurred by banks in delivering credit to the rural sector should fall.(i) Significant strengthening of human resources needs to be carried out in the RFIs. There is aneed to review the deputation system with a view to make the system more effective andresponsive to meet the growing needs of the rural sector. Rural lending requires a specific type oforganisational ethos, culture and attitude. At present, this is the weakest organisational elementin the growth and development of the RFIs. Appropriate and adequate attention by all concerned(j) The exercise of development action plans (DAPs) for every ARDB and the consequentmemorandum of understanding (MoU) signed among the NABARD, the State Government andthe state land development bank have been the most significant institutional interventions in therecent period. Strict adherence to the agreed covenants and targets of its MoUs should helpcontribute in strengthening the organisational base and the operating practices of the concerned(k) The grassroot tiers of co-operative credit structure are the weakest and to have an efficientand vibrant co-operative credit system, revamping of the base-level institutions needs to be(l) The recent South East Asian crisis clearly emphasised the need for adequate and timelyavailability of data. Unless necessary basic data are available, it is very difficult to assess thedevelopment and also to suggest timely remedial policy measures. In this context, I may mentionthat basic relevant data pertaining to cooperative banks are available after a considerable time-gap as compared to commercial banks. To site an example, all relevant basic data for the period1998-99 are available for scheduled commercial banks whereas similar data are not available forco-operative banks. Attempt must be made to expedite this process and in this respect I hope allthe offices, to the extent possible, are computerised so that ARDBs could derive full benefits ofinformation technology. Transparency and availability of timely information facilitate markets toScope of business potentialHaving gone over the issues facing ARDBs, and before concluding my address, let me mentionthe new areas where largely untapped business potential lies for PCARDBs and SCARDBs. Thiswould not only augment their business but would also enable them to achieve diversification.5form their own expectations in a more rational and realistic manner.attempted on a priority basis.RFIs.will have to be paid to training of personnel and technical upgradation.This would also help to bring about improved profitability of the ARDBs.board waivers will be announced which vitiate credit dispensation.the right path for sustainable development.With the modernisation of agriculture and improved technologies, capital investment is alsoescalating. This will give enough opportunities for SCARDBs to intensify financing. The otherareas where SCARDBs can explore the possibility of providing credit is for food processingactivities. There is huge potential for business in the agriculture and agro processing sector in oureconomy. Furthermore, enough scope is available for financing hi-tech agriculture likeSCARDBs can also undertake consultancy services at the apex level. It is, however, important toensure that SCARDBs are in a position to develop necessary expertise for the purpose and attainConclusion :* Speech delivered by Shri Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor, RBI at Workshop on Structural Reforms inCooperative Agriculture & Rural development Banks on 16 August 1999 at Kathmandu.6I thank you once again for inviting me here and wish success in your deliberations.a viable status.floriculture where export prospects are huge.
