Contemporary and Future Issues in Indian Banking*Banking scenario has changed rapidly since 1990s. The decade of 90s haswitnessed a sea change in the way banking is done in India. Technology hasmade tremendous impact in banking. ‘Anywhere banking’ and ‘Anytime banking’have become a reality. The financial sector now operates in a more competitiveenvironment than before and intermediates relatively large volume ofinternational financial flows. In the wake of greater financial deregulation andglobal financial integration, the biggest challenge before the regulators is ofavoiding instability in the financial system.Economic outlook and banking sector’s performanceKeeping in mind the impact of real sector shocks on financial stability, anyassessment of the banking sector needs to be done in the backdrop of nationalas well as international economic outlook. During the last couple of years, globalgrowth has been above the forecast in almost every region stimulated by strongmonetary and fiscal measures. The domestic economic outlook is also bright withthe real GDP growth rate surpassing 8% last year and estimated to be around7% in the current year. Industrial performance also improved considerably with astrong manufacturing growth for the second consecutive year. Inflation rate hasbeen under control, barring some hiccup for a short period.Aided by a good macro economic environment, banks’ bottom line has improvedsignificantly over the last two years. However, let us not forget that a majorcontributor to the windfall gains has been treasury profits fuelled by a seculardecline in interest rates during the three years period from 2001 to 2004 andconsequent profit booking on sale of government securities. From the currentyear, with the hardening of interest rates, this trading component of profits is nolonger going to shore up banks’ profitability. On the contrary, most banks havebeen required to provide for the decline in the market value of their investmentsportfolio. Thankfully, one offsetting factor has been the strong pick up in thecredit off-take due to buoyant demand in the economy and revival of industrialactivity, which have resulted in substantial increase in banks’ core interestincome.High capital inflows: an opportunity as well as a challengeAs you all know, liquidity position in the financial sector has been quitecomfortable in the recent times. The buoyant capital market coupled with anappreciating rupee vis-à-vis US dollar has been attracting large foreigninstitutional inflows during the last two years. While we have an all time highforeign exchange reserves of more than $130 billion, high capital inflows pose abig challenge to monetary and exchange rate management. In this context,operationalisation of Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) has given an additionalinstrument for liquidity and monetary management. To sum up*Speech delivered by V. Leeladhar. Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India to Kanara Chamberof Commerce and Industry, Mangalore on March 11, 20052the challenge, I would like to quote a statement of Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor,Reserve Bank of India, which he made at the annual meeting of Bank forInternational Settlement (BIS) on June 28, 2004. And I quote, “…..Specialdefences need to be put in place for ensuring financial stability in the case ofcountries like India that are faced with the prospect of volatile capital flows. Theissues relating to cross-border supervision of financial intermediaries in thecontext of greater capital flows are just emerging and need to be addressed.”Technology is the keyAs I mentioned in the beginning of my speech, technology has thrown newchallenges in the banking sector and new issues have started cropping up whichis going to pose certain problems in the near future. The new entrants in thebanking are with computer background. However, over a period of time theywould acquire banking experience. Whereas the middle and senior level peoplehave rich banking experience but their computer literacy is at a low level.Therefore, they feel the handicap in this regard since technology has become anindispensable tool in banking.Foreign banks and the new private sector banks have embraced technology rightfrom the inception of their operations and therefore, they have adaptedthemselves to the changes in the technology easily. Whereas the Public SectorBanks (PSBs) and the old private sector banks (barring a very few of them) havenot been able to keep pace with these developments. In this regard, one can citehistorical, political and other factors like work culture and working relations (whichare mainly governed by bipartite settlements between the managements and thestaff members) as the main constraints. Added to these woes, the PSBs werealso saddled with some non-viable and loss making branches, thanks to thesocial banking concept thrust upon them by the regulatory authorities in 1960s.Globalisation of financial servicesGrowing integration of economies and the markets around the world is makingglobal banking a reality. The surge in globalization of finance has also gainedmomentum with the technological advancements which have effectivelyovercome the national borders in the financial services business. Widespreaduse of internet banking has widened frontiers of global banking, and it is nowpossible to market financial products and services on a global basis. In thecoming years globalization would spread further on account of the likely openingup of financial services under WTO. India, as you know, is one of the 104signatories of Financial Services Agreement (FSA) of 1997. This gives India’sfinancial sector including banks an opportunity to expand their business on a quidpro quo basis.Indian Banks at the global stage: A Reality checkAs per Indian Banks' Association report ‘Banking Industry Vision 2010’, therewould be greater presence of international players in Indian financial system and3some of the Indian banks would become global players in the coming years. So,the new mantra for Indian banks is to go global in search of new markets,customers and profits. Let us not forget that the competition is not only on foreignturf but also in the domestic field as well from foreign banks operating in India.Now against these lofty objectives of Indian banks going global, let us see wherewe stand. Although, Indian banks have also made their presence overseas, yet itis limited. Only twenty Indian banks including private sector banks appear in thelist of “Top 1000 World Banks” as listed by the London based magazine “TheBanker”. What is even more revealing is that State Bank of India, India’s largestndbank, ranks 82 amongst the top global banks. Size is increasingly becomingimportant for the global banks as it is crucial to improved efficiency. However,th thIndia’s largest bank, SBI is not even  a 10 in size of the 9 largest bank,Sumitomo Mitsui, which has assets of $950 billion as against SBI’s assets of $91billion. Therefore, the notion that SBI or ICICI Bank can compete in theinternational arena seems far fetched at the moment.Is size the only constraint for Indian banks?The problem is not just one of lacking the necessary size; few Indian banks havethe necessary products or human resource capabilities. If anything, theimplementation of Basel II norms has raised the bar for Indian banks seeking aninternational presence. The top international banks can lower their capitalrequirements through the use of sophisticated risk management techniques andthus compete more aggressively than before.What is being done to prepare Indian banks to meet global challenge?Indian banking sector has already implemented internationally followedprudential accounting norms for classification of assets, income recognition andloan loss provisioning. The scope of disclosure and transparency has also beenraised in accordance with international practices. India has complied with almostall the Core Principles of Effective Banking Supervision of the Basel Committee.Some of the Indian banks are also presenting their accounts as per the U.S.GAAP. The roadmap for adoption of Basel II is also under formulation. All thesefactors give Indian banks much needed confidence for overseas operations. Butas I said earlier overseas operations is one thing and competing against theglobal players in the international market is quite another. And Indian banks havea lot of catching up to do before they can emerge as truly global players.Supporting Regulatory FrameworkSupporting institutional and regulatory framework at home is vital for domesticbanks aspiring for global operations. RBI has suitably changed the country’sregulatory framework from time to time to support Indian financial institutions towithstand the competitive pressures placed on them by increasing globalization.Proper steps have been taken to guide the banking sector to see that the bankspass through this transition phase by and large successfully. The reforms4initiated in the banking sector have now reached a crucial stage. Government’sstake in some PSBs is reduced and as a consequence public equity in thesePSBs is enlarged. This led to greater responsibility on the bank managementssince the level of accountability has increased. Pressures of performance andprofitability will keep them on their toes all the time as the public shareholdersexpect good performance along with good returns on their equity. Many PSBshave already started the exercise of cleaning up of their balance sheets byshedding the excess baggage. The VRS scheme in the recent past in some ofthe banks was aimed not only at downsizing the manpower but also at cuttingdown the staff costs and increasing the performance levels of the staff in the longrun. Some of these banks are able to run the show to certain extent by low costfunds that are available thanks to the branch network spread over the length andbreadth of the country.Consolidation and move towards Universal BankingWe are slowly but surely moving from a regime of “large number of small banks”to “small number of large banks.” The new era is going to be one ofconsolidation around identified core competencies.  Mergers and acquisitions inthe banking sector are going to be the order of the day.  Successful merger ofHDFC Bank and Times Bank earlier and Stanchart and ANZ Grindlays threeyears ago has demonstrated that trend towards consolidation is almost anaccepted fact.  We are also looking for such signs in respect of a number of oldprivate sector banks, many of which are not able to cushion their NPAs, expandtheir business and induct technology due to limited capital base.Coming times may usher in large banking institutions, if the developmentfinancial institutions opt for conversion into commercial banking in line with therecommendation of Narasimhan (II).  In India, one of the largest financialinstitutions, ICICI, took the lead towards universal banking with its reversemerger with ICICI Bank coming through a couple of years ago.  Another megafinancial institution, IDBI has also adopted the same strategy, and has alreadytransformed itself into a universal bank. Now the process of its progeny IDBIBank merging itself with the parent IDBI is underway, and is likely to becompleted soon. This trend may lead logically to promoting the concept offinancial super market chain, making available all types of credit and non-fundfacilities under one roof or specialised subsidiaries under one umbrellaorganisation.  Consolidated accounting and supervisory techniques would haveto evolve and appropriate fire walls built to address the risks underlying suchlarge organisations and banking conglomerates.Will the stable conditions continue for the banks?The big question we have to ponder is whether these stable conditions markedby all round improvement in banks’ performance can continue into 2005 onwardin the light of potentially dramatic changes that include, among others, a slidingdollar, rising interest rates, introduction of Basel II accord and international5accounting standards, and the possible flattening of consumer lending boom.Hopefully, the banking industry in tandem with the regulatory authorities will riseto the occasion, and collectively face the challenges and opportunities that lieahead.Thank you.
