, respected Dr. I may quote Dr. control "out of borrowed funds.1Wadhwani On the specific issue of whether inflation is dead, I would readily agree with Dr. , of Course, revenue deficit and financial returns on assets created immediate and critical issues arebanker, the chances of their running into any unanticipated problem are relatively less. The mostborrowings are approved by the Centre and Reserve Bank of India is their debt-manager andtheir domestic Governments, since they are not allowed to resort to external borrowings, strong as in many other countries. Similarly, with regard to the fiscal deficit of Stateat floating rates. Hence, the link between fiscal deficit and external sector is not as direct and asthrough domestic saving and Government does not resort to external commercial borrowings oraccount deficit of less than 2 per cent of GDP. Over 90 per cent of our investments are financedHowever, the fiscal deficit must be viewed in the context of high domestic saving and a currentpolicies is critical, since fiscal dominance is evident although GDP is high and inflation rate is low.coordination between monetary and fiscal some fiscal constraints. At our stage of development the Reserve Bank of India to pursue its legitimate objective of price stability of course, withinIt is a matter of satisfaction that government has been extending necessary support to enableinstitutions that entrench low inflation remains an important part of the policy agenda."to take the sometimes difficult decisions necessary to achieve that end. Hence, designinga monetary phenomenon and keeping inflation low depends on whether there is the political willus here and with which I readily agree, for understandable reasons is that "Inflation is, ultimately,Another important point made in the conclusions of the paper which is of special relevance toinflation hurts the poor the most. There can be no better anti-poverty programme than inflationIn a society in which a very large segment of the population has no hedge against inflation,Rangarajan that "Price stability as an objective also has social justice dimensions.In fact, our current approach to monetary policy reflects the same sentiment. In this context,where monetary policy has kept inflation low and aggregate demand stable." (1998) - "On average, the poor are much better off in countries Romer and Romer concluded (see inflation for its own sake, but because it might help boost growth - a recent cross-country study says: "Of course, we do not desire low Wadhwani I will start with the conclusion where Dr. selective, basically relating to Indian situation relevant to some of the points made by him.combination of theory and practical policy are impressive. My comments would therefore beInflation dead' is bound to be another landmark speech. Its breadth and depth as also the'Currency Puzzles' in September won wide acclaim. Needless to say, his presentation today on 'IsWadhwani, whose lecture in London School of Economics on satisfaction to me to meet Dr. I am thankful to Dr. Rakesh Mohan for giving me this, opportunity. It is a matter of personalMohan and friends.Wadhwani, Director General Rakesh Sushil Singhji Jaswant Honourable Shri "Is Inflation Dead" - Some Comments* Dr.  on role of2actual inflation rates were consistent with the ranges indicated in the policy.inflation rate would be less than the last year's level, i.e., 4.8 per cent. In the last 5 years, theyear, it was indicated in April at 5 per cent and in the October Review it was indicated that theindicated explicitly or implicitly an acceptable level or a range of inflation rate. For the currenttrends towards lower inflation. The statements of monetary policy from time to time havecent till two years ago, appear to be veering round now to 3 to 5 per cent, recognising the globalview among intellectuals on tolerable levels of inflation in India which centred round 5 to 6 perThanks to these developments and promise of domestic regulatory reforms, the consensusof similar pressure, for example, in telecommunications area.have led to rather more competitive product market conditions." In India also, we see beginningsof industries including gas, water, telecom, electricity, airports, rail, the docks and broadcastingGovernment action in price stability, i.e., "Privatisation and/or regulatory changes in a whole hostWadhwani In addition I would invite your attention to a statement by Dr. domestic market."competitive pressures might be contributing to improved price competition of industries in theindustries". I also said: "positive productivity shocks in the post liberalisation period due totechnologicial innovation and reduced mark up in domestic inflation through cost saving with sharp decline in world manufacturing prices could be contributing to lower manufacturingin August 1999. Let me quote: "Increased import competition due to trade liberalisation coupledto subdue inflationary pressures. I had made a reference to some of these in a lecture on inflationintensified product market competition". We find similar competitive pressures operating in IndiaWadhwani's paper on "The role of Of particular interest to India is the section in Dr. consider them.inflexibilities in the context of lowered inflation should be initiated. I hope NCAER would Wage Our labour markets in India are admittedly very different but some studies on labour markets, andWadhwani has also elaborated the structural improvements in the U.K. Labour market.in China. Briefly stated, we in RBI cannot afford to be complacent on the inflation front.in most parts of Asia, except a leading business newspaper indicates that inflation is seen as risingReuters poll of Thursday in and dampen relatively higher inflationary expectations. Incidentally, a We, in India, are still in the task of ensuring price stability essentially to consolidate the gainsavoid increase in inflation are different from fight to lower inflation.Wadhwani to preemptive actions such as those mentioned by Dr. However, it is obvious that nations are sacrificing increasing amount of economic growth in their fight to lower inflation.and the conduct of monetary policy in conditions of low inflation'. The study argues that industrialcontext, it is useful to refer to a BIS Working Paper No.82 of November 1999 on 'Sacrifice ratiosin this year, have been aimed at preventing an increase in inflation rather than reduction. In thispreemptive rate increases, three not believe that inflation is dead. Similarly, the Federal Reserve's occasions in the spirit of early, pre-emptive action; suggesting that the committee, at least, doesmentioned by him, in the United Kingdom, interest rates were raised by 25 basis points on twothat one cannot be complacent about inflation and that central bankers still have a job to do. AsSmart Cards. 3However, the success may not be attributed only to our superior knowledge or wisdom andconduct of monetary policy.competition in the economy and reform measures in the financial sector, particularly successfulkind of durable reduction in the inflation rate is to be seen in the light of both increasedin the first half of 1998-99, the average inflation rate increased to 6.9 percent in 1998-99. ThisDuring 1997-98, this rate declined further to 4.8 per cent. However, due to some supply shocksrate was brought down significantly from 10.9 per cent in 1994-95 to 6.4 per cent in 1996-97.of high growth during 1994-97 where the output growth exceeded 7 per cent, average inflationsuccessful on both growth and inflation fronts, it is important to mention that even during the factI cannot help but place on record the fact that in recent years we have been reasonablybenefit from scholarly presentations such as these.inflation-targeting. We in RBI will Continue to analytically on approaches to core inflation and we have put out a discussion paper on universal banking last year. On inflation, we are workingaggregates relating to money, credit and liquidity. As regards banks, recognising the global trend,constituted a third working group last year and we have redefined and enlarged the relevantdefinitions and the RBI is no exception. On the meaning and measurement of money, wethese need to be dealt with in the specific context. Of course, central bankers keep revising thesebanking business and vice versa? How do we measure inflation? Do we include asset prices? Allelectronic and now 'e' banking. Similarly, what is a bank when banks do non-are : what is money and how is it measured, given becoming contextual to the country. Questions Inflation. Scope and meaning of each of these three is changing and they are in some waysCentral bankers all over the world are concerned with three things, money, banks andinflexibilities and rigidities in the financial sector. fiscal situation, interest rate in our context, due recognition must be given to the risks and trade-off in sequencing, given theand inflation targeting. On the specific issue of inflation targeting, which appears to be preferred,since mid-nineties. At an analytical level, we in RBI are studying both the issues of core inflationshift in focus is undoubtedly an outcome of the progress achieved in reforming financial sectorgreater integration of various markets to facilitate the use of instruments of monetary control. TheRBI in the management of liquidity in the economy. Secondly, the shift is also to bring aboutmaneuverability for the shift is towards institutional changes aimed at securing greater degree of Jalan, the focus of monetary policy is shifting. Firstly, unchanged, as indicated by Governor Dr. Further, in the recent years while the stance of monetary policy has remained by and largeof capital flows has also emanated as a major concern of policy.neutralising the inflationary impact of growing fiscal deficit, management of liquidity arising outMarch 1999. While in the earlier regime, monetary policy had to address itself to the task oftotal reserve money during 1991-94 (average of end-March figures) to 53.2 per cent at end-emerged as the dominant source of reserve money expansion rising from about 21.4 per cent ofdetermined exchange rate system the net foreign exchange assets (NFA) of the Reserve Bank hasWith a gradual opening up of the economy and switchover to a market reserve money. In the context of monetary policy, we must recognise a recent development in regard toperhaps an above-average dose of luck, to get our forecasts right."* Comments on the paper "Is inflation Dead" by Dr. Sushil Bank of England at National Council of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi on December 17, 19994Wadhwani, Member, Monetary Policy Committee,Thanking you.sure that the markets will continue to challenge us and we will need all our collective skill and when he said in an earlier lecture "I am Wadhwani in this context, I cannot help agree with Dr. 
