STATE FINANCES AND RBI INITIATIAVES*It is a great honour, and pleasure to be with you all here, on this important occasion. Do I have achoice, when the distinguished Advisory Board of Data News Features summons me? Mr.Hanumantha Rao has been collecting, collating, consolidating and marketing data on AndhraPradesh economy for decades. He is a pioneer in recognising the importance of data disseminationand in particular data consolidation and analysis at the state level. Perhaps, this is the firstcompilation of its nature in our country focussing on data at State level, spanning 50 years sinceindependence.I believe it is customary to say a few words on an occasion like this. Since the book is yet to bereleased, I cannot say anything on it. Since Mr. Rao is known to most of you, I cannot add much.On the substance, I see here an array of Athirathulu, Maharathulu, Guruvulu, with Shri Bhishmacharya of AP economy at the lead, and so I will not venture into it either. I would,therefore, take this opportunity to say a few words, on the RBI's role, and initiatives in regard toState EconomiesWe all know that in our country, states are of varying sizes and are at different levels of economicand social development. Many states are larger, in terms of population than half the countries in theworld. Some states have progressed very well in terms of social development, a few have also donewell in rapid economic development. Thus, individually some of these states are world-classperformers in some respects. Yet there is a lot more to be done in all the sates of our country. Tothis end, there is virtual unanimity on the two most critical areas for further progress in our countryviz. social infrastructure and physical infrastructure.In social infrastructure, we should emphasise primary education, primary health, social security and In physical infrastructure, we should emphasise water supply (both for drinking and irrigation)drainage, roads, power supply, medium and minor ports etc. These have a commercial element butare proving to be serious bottlenecks for further progress. These are also mostly under the domainof states. one of the main differences of opinion on economic policy is whether we should focusmore on social or on physical infrastructure. In either case, the play is essentially in the theatres ofthe States. The very justification for current process of reform is lost if these areas do not get The tasks before states in reform process are very very complex because we are dealing withreforms in delivery of services - quantitatively and qualitatively as also appropriate pricing orsubsidies. Building a road or finalising a Power Purchase Agreement is far more complex, thanSpeechsignificantly more attention than they did in the past. Today,to some extent law and order. These activities are in the State's domain.state economies in general, and state finances in particular.Vittal,abolition of licensing or, quantitative restrictions on imports or exports, or fast-track method ofState Finances There is a supplement on Finances of State Governments to the RBI Bulletin of February 1998,giving a detailed account and so I will only mention a few highlights from concludingobservations:(a) The stress on the finances of the state governments became evident when their revenue accountstarted showing deficits in the late `eighties. The steady deterioration in the revenue account caused(b) The curtailment in Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD) could be achieved through deceleration incapital expenditure which would, however, have adverse implications for growth. Theimprovement in GFD should, therefore, be achieved through the revenue account.(c) The last few years have witnessed a more or less stagnant tax receipts to GDP ratio and declining non-tax receipts to GDP ratio.(d) Most of the States' Public Sector Undertakings ( ), particularly State Electricity Boardsand State Road Transport Corporations have been showing persistent losses, and therefore, their(e) Similarly, several irrigation projects in the States reflect negative contribution due to(f) On the expenditure side, the rigidity in the non-Plan non-developmental expenditure is a matterof concern as it adversely affects the financial health of the states. This is due to committedexpenditures on interest payments and administrative expenditures on salaries and pensions. Thishas led to non-developmental revenue expenditure absorbing a greater proportion of revenue(g) The problem of subsidies also needs pointed attention. Here the emphasis should be squarelyon implicit subsidies, which deprive states of scarce resources. Given the above picture of finances of states, we should assess the massive effort needed toimprove social infrastructure and strengthen physical infrastructure to the levels desired. The limitsto dependence on financial transfers from the Centre are recognised and, there is a feeling in somestates that access to external assistance or capital markets is an easy way-out to finance governmentand its enterprises. I would submit that it is not an easy way out but desirable option to be exercisedwith a combination of skill and caution. We, in fact, addressed these and other issues in a meetingwith Finance Secretaries early this month and I will elaborate on this after presenting a briefaccount of role of Reserve Bank of India in regard to states.Role of RBI Bank of India's major concerns are price stability and ensuring adequate credit toproductive needs of a growing economy. Price stability provides a national economic environmentconducive to growth with justice - to all States. Reservereceipts.uneconomic user charges.contribution to the State exchequer is negative.PSUsaenlargement of states' Gross Fiscal Deficit.investment clearance. These tasks demand more than finances, but finances are also essential. Credit flows to agriculture and, infrastructure are emphasised and enabled but actual absorption ina particular state would depend on the infrastructure as well as other enabling environment. As aresponsible Central bank, the RBI can persuade but cannot force credit flows to states which are yetto provide productive as well as congenial credit culture. So, RBI and States do work together onthis through institutional mechanisms such as SLBCs (State Level Bankers Committees). I mustadmit that Andhra Pradesh has the tradition of being one among the best in ensuring cordial andeffective co-ordination between banks and government. The RBI also performs the functions of a Manager of Public Debt. While in the past, it waspossible to pre-empt financial resources of banks, in a liberalised environment, the RBI would soonfind it difficult to ensure success of debt issues of states whose finances are perceived to be notwell-managed. We are already alerting the states on this issue. The RBI also functions as a banker to states. It is out duty to perform services efficiently. Forexample, we have launched Electronic Fund Transfer of salaries of State Government Employeesin Andhra Pradesh, thanks to the progressive initiatives taken by the Chief Minister. We are takinginitiatives to render advice to states on matters such as cash management. That leads me to theRecent Initiatives RBI had two rounds of discussions with State Finance Secretaries, based on a number of technicalpapers prepared by both RBI and state Governments. As a result of the latest round, a consensuswas reached on many issues. These do reflect initiatives already taken and flag areas of mutualconcern. Let me share with you some of the major issues addressed.Cash Management and Ways and Means Advances the states recognised the importance of cash management as a medium-term objective, butnoted that there is limited scope for cash management on the expenditure side. However, each statewould make a standard analysis for monthly requirements so that even at the margin, the scope forits management would improve. In the light of such an exercise, it would be possible for each StateGovernment to work out the seasonality in the expenditure and their borrowing requirements could,if possible, be appropriately adjusted. This information would be used by the Reserve Bank as aninput in deciding the timings of floating tranches of the borrowing programme for the StateGovernments in conjunction with other factors, such as, conditions of liquidity in the market,interest rate determination and  On Ways and Means Advances (WMA), the Reserve Bank agreed to consider changes such asdual limits and advance warning system. Finance Secretaries wanted the Reserve Bank to continueto manage the investment of their surpluses, but change the mechanism in such a way that they geta return close to what they pay for their drawals from the RBI, say, under WMA. The ReserveBank has agreed to continue to invest the surpluses of the State Governments, introduce 28-DaysTreasury Bills as an additional instrument and to review the present systems to enable the StateGovernments to obtain a better return than now on investment of their surpluses.synchronisation with Central Government borrowings, etc. First,initiatives taken recently.Public Debt Second, while some States favoured the establishment of a formal ceiling on public debt by law,others felt that the more important requirement is greater transparency in the matter of public debtand awareness of its implications. Further, the States unanimously felt that the focus should also beon revenue deficit. It was decided that State Governments should be encouraged by the RBI toconsider both greater transparency and a legal ceiling on public debt. The Reserve Bank was requested to actively pursue with the Government of India the consensus ofthe State Finance Secretaries for permitting freedom in the range of 5 to 35 per cent to access themarket outside the consolidated tranches of borrowing. While there was a general agreement that Consolidated Sinking Fund is a good idea, many felt thatit would not be desirable to consider this at a stage when revenue deficits persist and when scopefor return on investments made in CSF is not very clear. Some State Governments, however,Guarantees Third, recognising the importance of guarantees and their implications on the finances, it was(a) Hidden liabilities, including especially the letters of comfort, which have the consequence of a(b) The level of guarantee fee.(c) The implications of linkage with the value of any foreign currency, where it exists in regard tosuch contingent obligation, especially in the guarantees offered in the power sector.(d) (e) (f) Discouraging the public sector entities from insisting on guarantees; and(g) Prohibition on seeking or giving of guarantees for working capital needs of enterprises. A concern was expressed about the guarantees at State level for various projects from internationalinvestors in foreign currencies. While, at present, the magnitude of such exposures to foreigncurrency obligations may not be large, its assessment and some mechanism to gauge effects of suchdollarisation would be necessary to mount hedging mechanisms. It was agreed that the study onthis subject should be encouraged by the RBI, particularly, in the context of power sector, whereStudy of Public Accounts Fourth, a suggestion was made that the complexities of pension, provident fund and small savingliabilities are such that they are required to be analysed by the Reserve Bank. More important, therewas a unanimous suggestion that transactions in public accounts which are in the nature of bankingtransactions by the State Governments require to be closely scrutinised by the Reserve Bank due toits responsibilities as lender of last resort and due to the systemic implications. It was also indicatedguarantee.the power tariff may be linked partly to the domestic value of the foreign currency.The importance of attaching weights to risks and arriving at risk weighted guarantee limits.The possibility of prescribing a legal ceiling on all guarantees and criteria for fixing a ceiling.decided to include the following in terms of a Working Group on State Guarantees:requested the Reserve Bank to detail the modalities of such a CSF for immediate consideration.that a study on public account transactions by the Reserve Bank should ideally cover both theCentre and States. The Reserve Bank agreed to take up such a study in regard to the States,initially, as a part of its Development Research Group by Studies by utilising the services of bothInter- generational Equity Fifth, considering the prospects of the burden on the future generation on account of the risingpublic debt, contingent and other liabilities, and with a view to increasing the awareness of thisissue, it was decided that, accounting mechanisms should be adopted, to depict inter-equity considerations in managing public finance. The Reserve Bank agreed to the request that itshould develop a model of accounting practice for this purpose by obtaining necessary informationon best practices in the world. Stabilisation and Restructuring FundSixth, while some progress has been made in regard to fiscal reform at the State level with theassistance of World Bank and Asian Development Bank, many states felt that a fund to beadministered by the Reserve Bank should be considered. Such a fund can provide additionalresources on the basis of progress in the reform and thus encourage the State Governments toundertake reforms. The package so designed should be realistic and made suitable to the individualStates. It was agreed that the Reserve Bank would consider such a fund initially at the senior levelHealth Card Seventh, there was a consensus on the usefulness of assessment of the financial health of eachState as an important means to encourage fiscal responsibility. It was suggested that theresponsibility of assessing the financial health should be undertaken by the Reserve Bank. ReserveBank agreed that they would consider the relevant data, the periodicity and the parameters forworking out such a health card. Prima facie on the basis of the information in RBI's study onFinances of State Governments some financial indicators can be evolved and these can be releasedalong with the annual volume on the finances of State Governments, as in the case of the financialratios for individual banks  in the Report on Trend and progress of Banking in India.Some more work is needed to arrive at the most appropriate ratios for such a health card. The RBIwould, no doubt, seek advice from select Finance Secretaries or other experts on the relevant data,Conclusion In conclusion, let me reiterate the importance of States in furthering reform. Indeed, positiveelements of redefining the relationship between the State and the market have to occur in India atthe State level even more than at the Central level and that is no easy task. Such a reform has to bebased on reliable data and sound analysis. The present volume on Andhra Pradesh withcontributions from the best and brightest on the subject in the State is a good model. Other statescould emulate. I commend this book to all researchers, policy makers and senior students.periodicity, detail, etc. before launching such an exercise.publilshedinternally and later in consultation with the Government of India.Fiscal generationalin-house expertise and outside talent.* Speech delivered by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Administrative Staff College ofIndia, Hyderabad on February 28, 1998. I have great pleasure in releasing the volume.
