1Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughts1. It gives me great pleasure to be with you in this beautiful city of Cape Townthfor the 9 Annual Conference of the Foreign Exchange Dealers Associationof India (FEDAI). Cape Town is a celebrated tourist destination, particularlyat this time of the year. The place and time are ideal for mixing business withpleasure. For me, speaking to you, the pleasure is mixed with sometrepidation because we are living in times when there is uncertainty all roundnot only in the unfolding of events but also in the way we think about them.You may be aware that close to this place is a great tourist attraction whichis called ‘The Cape of Good Hope’ for as many as 300 years because itprovided a sea–route to India and the East Indies. But, only till opening of theSuez Canal in 1869 when the complexion of East-West sea faring changed.There are thus many events in the course of human history which changedramatically our approach to issues and problems. The events of the pastfew years – both in the domestic as well as in the global arena - have madeus think afresh about many of our approaches to public policy relating toregulation. I intend to discuss some of the current issues relating to ourapproach to capital account management as it has evolved over time and Ibeg your indulgence if some questions come up to which answers are notyet as clear as we would wish them to be.2. The FEDAI, set up in 1958 as a section 25 company, has been a multi-faceted organization, playing an important role in each of its functionaldomain. It has had immense contribution in development of the interbankforex market, promoting uniform bank-client business practices, training bankpersonnel working in foreign exchange desks, and most importantly, actingas an interface between the Reserve Bank and the Authorised Dealers.During the last 56 years of its existence it has seen, rather played a majorrole in, the transition from a fixed exchange rate regime to almost floatingexchange rate one; from a non-existent or at best a shallow interbank forexmarket to one whose activity not infrequently causes the regulator to sit upand take notice, and sometimes act; and from an era when every non-tradeforex transaction with a client required a ‘Exchange Control Permit’ to a timewhen the Authorised Dealers (ADs) have more power and freedom than theyare perhaps willing to exercise.Capital controls: old paradigms & new realities3. The evolution of the foreign exchange market in India has been shaped bythe exchange rate regime and the changing degrees of control. With fullconvertibility on the current account since 1994 and enactment of ForeignExchange Management Act, 1999 (FEMA), controls on the capital accounthave been the principal theme of foreign exchange management during thelast two decades. The motivation for imposing controls and restraining thefreedom of the residents to transact with non-residents stems from one majorconcern: addressing the structural imbalances in the balance of payments.1Inaugural address delivered by Shri Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India delivered at theth9 Annual Conference of FEDAI in Cape Town on April 12, 2014. Contributions of Shri H S Mohanty & ShriSurajit Bose of Reserve Bank of India are gratefully acknowledged by the speaker.Regulating Capital Account: Some ThoughtsBut the philosophy and the form of controls have evolved over time. Let megive an example. India has had two major devaluations following severebalance of payment crisis: in 1966 and in 1991. Post 1966 devaluation, wehad moved in an inward looking direction with the help of a very stringentexchange control regime. Post 1991 devaluation, however, we moved in theexactly opposite direction: towards more openness on current and capitalaccount and in due course, a legislation with a different objective and adifferent orientation. This approach has in a sense stood us in good stead.Counterintuitive as it may seem, is it then that greater external openness,particularly capital account openness, provides a more stable solution tobalance of payments problems? As Robert Aumann says, though in adifferent context, in his Nobel Prize Lecture: “You want to prevent war. To dothat, obviously you should disarm, lower the level of armaments. Right? No,wrong. You might want to do the exact opposite.” Let me give anotherinstance of how the thinking changes. In the 1990’s it was a widely heldnormative belief, though not uncontested, that capital controls ought to beavoided and free flow of capital promoted. In the aftermath of the Asian crisisof the late 1990’s, the substantive argument did not undergo any change, butwas only tempered to the extent that removal of capital controls has to keeppace with strengthening of domestic financial sector. Post the global financialcrisis, capital controls have come to be seen as an active tool of macro-prudential policy albeit in difficult situations.4. Why have any controls on capital account? The history of capital accountopenness has been chequered. It may be recalled that capital controls werea part of international milieu throughout the Bretton Woods era and it wasonly in the 1970’s that the advanced economies started dismantling them.This was followed by several emerging economies, particularly in LatinAmerica and East Asia. The argument in favour of opening up of the capitalaccount was mainly based on ‘allocative efficiency’: the capital-scarce butprojects-rich developing countries can surely improve their welfare and bettertheir lot with the help of capital inflows. The crisis in several Latin Americancountries and the East Asian countries in the late 1990’s pointed out thedestabilizing effect of capital account openness and raised many questionabout its desirability. Subsequent literature has shown, on the one hand, thatcapital account openness by itself may not induce growth in absence ofappropriate institutions and on the other, capital controls can indeed be usedas a macro-prudential tool to restore or promote stability. In the Indiancontext, we have had two committees – at a gap of about a decade - lookinto the issues relating to a possible roadmap for fuller capital account2convertibility. The macroeconomic preconditions emphasized by theseCommittees, viz., sustained, low inflation and strong fiscal position have notyet materialized. As mentioned earlier, the issue of free capital flows versuscapital controls have evoked a wide range of response over time and theacademic literature does not provide clear and consensus view in the matterexcept some stylized themes, such as, need for capital inflows foraugmenting domestic investment, possible destabilizing impacts of free2 Unfortunately, both these Committees’ report preceded financial crises, the East-Asian and the GlobalFinancial Crisis, and hence their recommendations were not pursued as seriously as they would have beenotherwise.Page2 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughtscapital/financial flows, improvement in domestic conditions to enable betterutilization of capital flows and lessen the possibility of instability, need forcapital controls in extreme situations, and need for coordinated capital flowsmanagement policy across nations. Considering our state of affairs andrealizing that there is no certainty on the consequence of full CAC, we havecommitted to progressive opening up of the capital account in a calibratedmanner for several reasons including greater integration with the globaleconomy, need to finance the persistent current account deficit, and aboveall to mobilize resources for the investment needs of a growing economy,particularly the infrastructure sector. At the same time, the vulnerabilities ofan open emerging economy and the problems of extreme volatility in theexchange rate informs and guides our approach.Stability in exchange rates: means & mechanics5. The proximate problem that a central bank faces is maintaining a reasonablystable exchange rate, a variable that captures not only the external sectorimbalances but also the future expectations of the relevant fundamentals.Empirical studies show that, in the short run, exchange rates behave asasset prices and follow a ‘random walk’. Even so, any sharp depreciation inthe exchange rate is likely to see large scale capital exodus by the short-term investors before the value of their investment is further eroded. At thesame time, through the instrument of derivatives, it is possible for exporters,importers and others to adjust their inter-temporal demand for foreigncurrency: to either postpone the present demand to a future time or advancethe future demand to the present time. Like any other asset price, a sharplyfalling exchange rate has the tendency to gather quick momentum. Theproblem of an appreciating currency in the face of surging capital inflowsposes a separate set of problems, principal amongst which is loss of exportcompetitiveness.6. The question then is that whether such situations should invite regulatoryresponse? An influential line of thought in this context is to solve the problemof the impossible trinity by leaving the exchange rate out of reckoning: lettingthe exchange rate find its own level depending on the market process.Though the merit in this position cannot be logically denied, it may not be anoptimal solution in real life because though exchange rate behaves as anasset price, it is an important macroeconomic variable that influences optimaldecision making of a large number of economic agents in an economyprogressively integrating with the rest of the world. Secondly, sharpmovements in the currency capture as well as breed expectations for future,often in a self-fulfilling spiral, and perhaps need to be addressed in the samespirit as sharp and persistent rise in the general price level needs to beaddressed lest it entrenches inflationary expectations.7. The most obvious and immediate tool for dealing with heightened volatility orsharp movement either way is the central bank’s intervention operations. Forinstance, in the face of sharp appreciation, the intervention is directed atmopping up the excess supply of foreign currency in order to preserve exportcompetitiveness. Such operations obviously do have monetary implicationsPage3 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughtsand steps to neutralize these involve a cost. On the other hand, interventionin the face of sharp depreciation is a difficult choice for several reasons,including loss of reserves, particularly in a country like India where theexternal liabilities far exceed the official reserves.8. As an aside, let me add that the importance of a sufficiently large kitty ofofficial reserves to deal with sudden flow reversals has been underscoredtime and again. In fact, the large reserves that many emerging marketeconomies have built up post Asian-crisis is often viewed as a bulwarkagainst contagion effects of global crises and risk aversion. Therefore,accumulation of reserves as an objective by itself rather than a byproduct ofmarket actions of the central bank to stabilize the exchange rate is a themethat cannot be dismissed out of hand, more so when there is no assured andeasy access to any collective insurance for the EMEs like India.9. Coming back to our discussion, given the problems with sustained oraggressive intervention in the face of sharp movements in exchange rate–leaving aside its optimality or desirability - what tools do we have to deal withit? Mainly two: modulate capital controls appropriately and restrain thefreedom of market participants to carry out derivative transactions which canbe used to speculate on the currency and camouflage capital flows. Duringthe periodic bouts of volatility in the Rupee since late-2011, we have used amix both tools, to which I now turn. You will recall that the Rupee hadexhibited relative stability after the post-Lehman volatility of 2009 and tradedin a narrow band during most of 2010 and 2011. The volatility started in thesecond half of 2011 on the wake of US downgrade and related problems.Since then we have had three different spates of volatility: end-July 2011 tomid-December 2011 (about 18% depreciation of INR against USD), end-February 2012 to end-June 2012 (about 12%) and end-April to end-August32013 (about 19%) . Most emerging market currencies also fell in valueduring the period and this elicited varying response from the respectiveauthorities which included capital controls on the one hand and takingmeasures to attract relatively longer term flows on the other.Capital inflows & outflows: hierarchy of choices10. Let me now make some comments on capital controls. Our framework ofcapital account management, has been more inclined towards capital inflowsthan capital outflows. In a, capital scarce growing economy with largeinvestment needs, it has been our long-standing policy to encourage capitalinflows to augment domestic savings with a bias towards flows that arestable, long term and those that are least prone to sudden stoppages andreversals. Here I would like to highlight our approach to some of the criticalelements of capital flows.Foreign Direct Investments11. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), characterized by lasting interest and somedegree of management control by the investor, is positioned high in the3Source: BloombergPage4 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughtshierarchy of capital inflows not only because of it is resource augmenting butalso because it usually brings in better technology and more efficientmanagement and business practices. The framework for FDI, which getslegal sanctity under the regulations notified by the Reserve Bank underFEMA, is set by the Government of India in consultation with the ReserveBank of India, and the only restriction on FDI pertains to sectoral investmentlimits - the degree of control that can be ceded to a non-resident- motivatedby strategic or socio-economic considerations. The rest of the regulatoryframework is a matter of procedural detail, and we have been continuouslytrying to rationalize and streamline the regime to make it as investor friendlyas possible. To illustrate the point, one can cite some of our recentmeasures, such as, doing away with the regulatory prescription of pricingmethodology, introduction of optionality in inward FDI, etc.Foreign Portfolio Investors12. There is a tendency to see inflows on account of foreign portfolio investmentas ‘hot money’ which can cause sudden stoppages or reversals. Over twodecades of experience as well as recent studies show that this fear isperhaps exaggerated. Portfolio investment flows do exhibit some volatilityand surge either way, but at an aggregate level there is a fair degree ofstability. Since its introduction in 1992, the regulatory regime for portfolioinvestment has evolved over time. You are all aware of the recentsimplifications and liberalizations brought about in the scheme in sync withregulations notified by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)wherein the FIIs and QFIs have been merged into a single class of investorsknown as Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI) and simplified the KYCverification norms have been prescribed for opening of bank accounts for theportfolio investors. Foreign portfolio investors were granted access to theGovernment securities segment of the domestic debt market in 1999. Overthe years the scope of their investment has been expanded to includecorporate debt and the limits for investments in Government securities andcorporate bonds have also been progressively increased. As we have seen,our cautious approach is based on perception of potential risk of suddenstops & swift reversals during periods of uncertainty. The investor appetite inthis segment has been biased towards the securities of short term maturity:treasury bills, commercial papers, and bonds maturing in less than a year.Both with a view to developing the market as well as encouraging long termflows, the current policy priority is to encourage investment in bonds ofrelatively longer duration. Accordingly, we had created, and subsequentlyexpanded, a separate window for long-term foreign investors. We haverecently moved towards restricting incremental access to treasury bills andgovernment securities with less than one year residual maturity segments tothe foreign portfolio investors. The less than expected response of theforeign investors to the debt instruments even in relation to relatively smalllimits available to them has presumably also to do with the lack of liquidity inthis segment. This is an important goal for us and several steps have beentaken and are being contemplated to deal with this problem, particularly inthe light of the recommendation of the Working Group on EnhancingLiquidity in the Government Securities and Interest Rate Derivatives Markets(Chairman: Shri. R. Gandhi).Page5 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some ThoughtsExternal Commercial Borrowings13. In contrast with foreign investment in rupee-denominated marketabledomestic debt securities, External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) are bi-partite loan contracts denominated in foreign currency and initiated by thedomestic borrowers. The approach here has been that since the externalliability of the economy should not be allowed to expand excessively, theECBs need to be allocated, as it were, to their most productive use. Thisobjective is sought to be achieved through a regulatory regime comprisingrestrictions in regard to quantum of loan, end use, tenor, lender credentials,and cost of borrowing. The last, the ceiling on cost of borrowing, may seemto be superfluous in view of the restriction on the quantum of borrowing. Butit has to be appreciated that there is an automatic route for ECB, and it isnecessary to address the adverse selection problem so that ECBs do notflow into risky projects. In recent years, keeping in view the need for capitalinflows as well as the investment needs, particularly for those in theinfrastructure sector and those having forex earning capabilities to serviceECBs, we have relaxed the regulatory framework for ECB in severalrespects.14. In this context, let us examine the motivation for firms resorting to ECB. If afirm has a foreign currency revenue stream it is optimal for it to borrow inforeign currency as well so that its balance sheet does not carry anycurrency risk. But if its revenue is all in Rupees, it ought to fully hedge itsforeign currency liability and a fully hedged ECB should offer no arbitrage inideal market conditions. Unhedged foreign currency liability poses a currencyrisk, potentially explosive in volatile times, and also a risk to its other stake-holders, particularly the domestic lenders. Individual corporate vulnerabilitycould easily aggregate to systemic stability risks. The issue then is: do thedomestic lenders assess this risk price it appropriately while granting variousfacilities to the firms concerned?  We are not sure. Hence the regulatoryprescription for incremental provisioning and capital requirements has beenintroduced for bank exposures to firms with unhedged foreign currencyliability.Non-Resident Deposits15. Incentivised deposit accounts for diaspora Indians was one of the earliestmeasures to strengthen capital inflows. It has served us well when the otherforms of capital flows were either non-existent or at best, weak. Though theimportance of NRI deposits has relatively declined over time, we still have afairly friendly set of schemes to encourage the diaspora to use the Indianbanking system for their banking as well as savings needs. In fact, in therecent periods of currency volatility, more incentives were offered to suchNRI depositors to attract long-term flows.Rupee bonds abroad16. So far, because of non-convertibility of the Rupee on the capital account, wehad been averse to the idea of Rupee-denominated bonds in overseasmarkets. Such an instrument, to replicate a Rupee-pay-off, will need anonshore Indian asset and further, the investor will require access to thePage6 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughtsonshore derivative market to hedge her currency risk. Both of these wererestricted. Approached by the International Finance Corporation (IFC), andrecognizing that there are keen offshore investors with Indian interest whichcan be tapped, we have permitted Rupee-linked bond to be floated abroadfor US$ one billion and proceeds invested in Indian assets. This is a pilotproject and the experience, including market impact, will guide us in furtherexpanding such issuances. In fact, some other multilateral institutions arealso now evaluating the option of similar bond issuances.Regulations on capital outflows17. In a capital scarce economy like ours, it is perhaps logical that there shouldbe close monitoring of out-bound investments. The case for overseas directinvestment (ODI) rests on permitting Indian entrepreneurs to exploit avenuesfor profitable investment abroad. With this in view, we have progressivelyliberalized the regulatory regime for ODI. But as in case of any investment,ODI must also yield returns over time. Notwithstanding not very satisfactoryexperience so far in respect of inflow of income from our investmentsabroad, an investor friendly regulatory regime continues in place. Recentchanges in the ODI regulations no way seeks to dent globalization efforts ofIndian investors but only that under extraordinary circumstances investmentsbeyond a threshold, other than financing by ECBs, have been moved to theapproval route. Going forward, as stability in forex markets becomes wellestablished, we shall be unwinding them partially or fully. The case forportfolio investment by individuals rests on affording an opportunity to Indianresidents to diversify their portfolio. We have been progressively liberalizingthe facility till the last bout of Rupee volatility when we had to take steps tomoderate it. It may be recalled that it was raised substantially toUS$ 200,000 per annum when we had massive inflows. Such limit under theLiberalised Remittance Scheme (LRS), used widely for current accounttransactions and also some capital account transactions, includingacquisition of property abroad, was brought down when there wereapprehensions of large scale transfers in the face of currency volatility. Itmust be noted that as a measure of further liberalization setting up ofcompanies abroad by resident individuals now has been permitted under therevised LRS.18. This brings me to an important issue in foreign exchange regulation, or anyregulation for that matter. Any regulatory framework first and foremost has tobe predictable and time-consistent. Investment and business is a matter oftrust and investors and firms can plan and execute their strategies only ifthey believe that the regulatory regime will not change in the midway. Sincethe external factors in the today’s world change rapidly, there will be greattemptation to adjust the regulatory framework as well. Let me give anexample. During 2007-08, we faced an unprecedented surge in capitalinflows. Sharp appreciation of the Rupee, Reserve Bank’s marketoperations, consequent liquidity impact and the fiscal cost of sterilization areall in recent memory. Several measures were taken in this milieu, such as,increase in the limits for LRS, allowing foreign companies to raise capital inIndia through Indian Depository Receipt (IDR), introduction of currencyfutures, etc. The situation changed rapidly post onset of the Global FinancialPage7 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some ThoughtsCrisis (GFC), and, after some lull during 2010-11, again post US downgrade,EU crisis, etc. Do we unwind all the decisions and measure taken duringtimes of plenty? This, in a way, justifies the approach of cautious gradualismthat we have been adopting so far.Regulating derivative contracts: onshore & offshore19. Now I come to the other tool I mentioned about for controlling Rupeevolatility: restriction on derivatives. Our view of derivatives has been to treatthem as a tool of risk management and as an instrument of hedging foreignexchange risk. This is reflected in the regulatory regime for forex derivativesin the OTC market which has the following two distinguishing characteristics.First, the ability of a firm or an individual to execute a derivative contract isbased on an underlying exposure embodying risk. Second, these contracts,at least those involving Rupee, are predominantly to be executed by physicaldelivery. Over the years, to enable the firms to manage their foreignexchange risk flexibly and efficiently, several relaxations have beenintroduced, such as, carrying out derivative transactions on the basis of pastperformance rather than on the basis of individual underlying contracts,cancelling derivative contracts even as the underlying exposure exists (andgetting the benefit or bearing the loss thereof) with scope to rebook thecontract against the same exposure, etc. These relaxations can potentiallybe used to take a view on the Rupee when expectation of sharp depreciation(or appreciation), rightly or wrongly, is strong. This aggravates the marketconditions. We have often resorted to curtailing the freedom of marketparticipants in respect of booking derivative transactions both to curb panicas well as to stem speculative view taking on the Rupee.Non-Deliverable Forward markets20. The issue of forex derivatives has become complex because of two reasons.First, there has come to exists a large offshore market in Rupee. Rupeefutures are now traded in some of the international exchanges. There is asizeable Non-Deliverable Forward (NDF) market in Rupee in severalinternational financial centers. This market is opaque and the exact size ordetails of participants is not known. Our interaction with market participantstend to indicate that the figures published by the Bank for InternationalSettlements (BIS) in the last two triennial surveys may have been over-estimated, but surely they are large enough to impact the domestic market,particularly during periods of heightened volatility. Notwithstanding absenceof any clear link between the onshore and offshore markets, it cannot beruled out that some arbitrage may be happening.21. What is the reason for an NDF market to exist? The increasing global linkageof the Indian markets on the trade, capital and financial account on the onehand and inadequate or cumbersome access of international agents withRupee exposure to the onshore domestic market on the other seems to bethe obvious answer. There are many investors – mostly portfolio investors –who hold Rupee assets but are either not allowed to hedge their risk in theonshore market, or if allowed, the regime, with restrictions on rebooking ofcancelled contracts, may not suit their hedging strategy. There may also be alarge home country bias inasmuch as they would prefer an entity in theirPage8 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughtsplace or jurisdiction of residence as counterparty rather than an AD in analien place. The same set of logic holds also for many multinational firms inIndia who use transfer pricing and/or have centralized treasury. There is alsothe question of economic/potential exposures in a rapidly globalizing world,where one without explicit foreign exchange exposure, could still be affectedby exchange rate movements. Be that as it may, NDF has now warrantedcloser attention of the regulators.Exchange Traded Derivatives22. The second issue relates to the on-shore Exchange Traded Derivative (ETD)market introduced in 2008 when the external situation was quite different.The objective was to afford real sector agents - particularly the small entities- an easy, safe, transparent and cost-effective instrument to hedge theircurrency risk. This market is very different from the OTC segment in respectof the two characteristics we mentioned earlier: (a) there is no requirement ofunderlying exposure for accessing this market and as such, entry as well asexit is unrestricted and (b) contracts are cash settled. In other words, it maybe used for hedging, but it is also a perfect instrument for speculation for itmakes trading in exchange rate just like trading in any other financial asset.The question that arises is: how can the two markets – the OTC with theregulatory restrictions and the ETD without – coexist? More importantly, willthe restrictive measures in the OTC market to control rupee volatility not berendered completely ineffective if market participants are free to migrate tothe ETD segment? With this perspective, at the height of Rupee volatility,we, and, at our request SEBI, were constrained to take several measures inrespect of the ETD segment including putting a ceiling on individualpositions/open interest, restricting arbitrage between the two marketsthrough banks and increasing the margin requirements. Here I would like toadd that with return of stability in the exchange rate, we have alreadyunwound some of the restrictive measures in the OTC/ETD market and, infact, gone further for hegding in the OTC markets (e.g. permitting hedgingupto US$ 250,000 without any documentation requirements). Similarly somemore relaxations in the ETD segment, including permitting participation offoreign investors are under consideration.23. The emergence and growth of NDF market as well as its possible impact onthe domestic market poses two important questions. Should attempts not bemade to bring the offshore market in Rupee onshore and thereby add depthto our markets and also possibly, income and employment? Secondly, sinceNDF market is often seen to be affecting the domestic markets, implyingthereby the possibility of arbitrage, should domestic banks be allowed toparticipate in this market? Let me add here that in some countries, thecentral banks are reported to have intervened in the NDF market of theirrespective currencies to curb the volatility at its root.24. If the answer to both questions is positive, it requires some fundamentalrethinking on the regulatory framework for foreign exchange derivatives.Already, as mentioned above, we are committed to allowing foreign investorsaccess to the ETD segment with minimal restrictions. But will this access beinviting enough to the investors if the futures prices are not tightly linked withPage9 of10Regulating Capital Account: Some Thoughtsthe spot prices? But this is possible only by permitting frictionless arbitragebetween the two markets. Secondly, if we are to allow access to the offshoremarkets to domestic entities, it may not serve any purpose if arbitragebetween the offshore and onshore markets is blocked. If we are to pursue itto its logical end, this leads us to a situation where there is no restriction onforex derivative transactions in domestic markets and across the borders –either on eligibility, entry and exit of participants or on settlement.25. Here, what tempers our thinking is the principle I mentioned earlier: theimperative of regulatory consistency and irreversibility over time. Do we havethe appetite and wherewithal to tide over any possible future spate ofvolatility without undoing any relaxations we contemplate bringing about?This consideration argues in favour of moderation, gradualism and pacingour steps. The challenge is to hit an optimal middle path between throwingcaution to the wind and allowing excessive caution to prevent any forwardmovement.Concluding thoughts26. Having outlined some of our policy dilemmas in respect of capital controlsand forex market development and regulations, let me now in conclusion turnto the role FEDAI and its member foreign exchange dealers can play inappreciating the challenges and actively engaging with the regulators.Between the world where they just had to execute a transaction according toan RBI permit and the world where a foreign exchange transaction will belike any other inland rupee transaction except the currency risk falls a largeterritory where the foreign exchange dealers will have to facilitate externaltrade and investment related transactions keeping in view the genuine needsof the real sector without losing sight of the prudential requirements.Authorised Dealers will have to constructively engage themselves inappreciation of the evolving regulatory dispensation and, more importantly,provide a friendly, efficient and transparent interface with the end-users.Regulatory framework, of course, has to evolve, amongst others, keepingpace with the way business is done and it is important for Authorized Dealersto be conversant with the purpose and principle behind change in regulatoryregime not only for effective implementation but also for providing aconducive atmosphere for doing business. We find many violations ofregulations occur not intentionally but due to ignorance or lack ofappreciation. There is surely enough scope for bringing in improvement inthis regard. The well thought out sessions planned for this conference, in asense, will provide many insights to our understanding of some of the currentissues relating to our financial markets. Lastly, I wish to emphasize that thereis a need for establishing highest standard of code and ethics of doingbusiness and guarding against temptations of perverse incentives,particularly in the financial sector. The financial markets and institutionssurvive and thrive on trust and it must be our constant endeavor to continueto deserve that trust.Thank you very much for your attention.Page10 of10
