November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Agricultural Credit in India:Status, Issues and Future Agenda*RAKESH MOHANINTRODUCTION: H ISTORICAL O VERVIEW OF EARLY ATTENTION TO AGRICULTURAL CREDITAGRICULTURAL CREDIT IN INDIAThese problems began to engage the attention of eventhe British colonial government as early as the 1870s:RISK IN INDIAN FARMINGthe practice of extending institutional credit to agricultureSettled agriculture in India has had a long historycan be traced back to that period when farmers werebecause of the fertile plains of Northern India irrigatedprovided with such credit by the Government duringby the Indus, the Ganga-Jamuna river systems and thedrought years. Thinking to do with credit cooperationBrahmaputra in the East. Southern India has its ownbegan in the latter part of the nineteenth century. Finally,river systems and has, moreover, been characterised bythe Cooperative Societies Act was passed in 1904 andits impressive history of sophisticated water managementcooperatives were seen as the premier institutions forsystems: perhaps among the most developed historically.disbursing agricultural credit. “For some decades, thatAs a consequence of this natural fertility and abundantis, since long before the organisation of the Reserve Bank,availability of water, ironically, population density grewgreat faith has been placed in India in the potentialitiesearly in India, and along with that different degrees ofof the cooperative organisation to serve the credit needspoverty.of the country, especially of the rural sector” (ReserveDespite the existence of these river systems,Bank of India, 1970, p.68). The early years of theagriculture in India has always been heavily dependenttwentieth century were characterised by continuouson the monsoons and has hence been an inherently risky official attention to the provision of rural credit: a newactivity. At different times we have also had onerousAct was passed in 1912 giving legal recognition to creditrural tax systems under different empires, most recentlysocieties and the like (a precursor of micro-finance);under the British. Indigenous systems of credit had tothe Maclagan Committee on Cooperation in India issueddevelop as a consequence of seasonal needs anda report in 1915 advocating the establishment of provincialfluctuations in order to facilitate smoothing ofcooperative banks, which got established in almost allconsumption pattern of farmers over the year. With provinces by 1930 thus giving rise to the 3-tierthe intermittent failure of the monsoons and othercooperative credit structure; the Royal Commission oncustomary vicissitudes of farming, rural indebtednessAgriculture further examined the program of rural credithas been a serious and continuous characteristic ofin 1926-27; Sir Malcolm Darling submitted another reportIndian agriculture. Because of the high risk inherent inon cooperative credit to the Government of India in 1935,traditional farming activity, the prevalence of highjust before the founding of the Reserve Bank of India.interest rates was the norm rather than an exception, This continuing concern reflected the intrinsic problemsand the concomitant exploitation and misery that oftenof extension of rural credit which, to some extent, findresulted. Development of rural credit systems hasresonance even today. It was then reported that in manytherefore, been found to be intrinsically very difficultprovinces credit overdues to these credit cooperativeand, as we will see, an issue of continuing officialinstitutions constituted 60 to 70 per cent of theconcern for over a century.outstanding principal due.* Lecture delivered by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, the then Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India on February 5, 2004 at the17th National Conference of Agricultural Marketing, Indian Society of Agricultural Marketing, Hyderabad. He isgrateful to Dr. Y.S.P. Thorat, then Executive Director, Asha P. Kannan, A. Prasad, Partha Ray, T. Gopinath and ArunVishnu Kumar of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance.993November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004It was in 1935 that the Reserve Bank was founded: co-operatives had a vital role in channelling credit tothe Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 is unusual among the farmers and therefore summed up that, “Co-central banks to have specific provision for attention to operation has failed, but Co-operation must succeed”.agricultural credit. Section 54 of the Act enjoined theThe Committee, apart from visualising cooperativesReserve Bank to set up an Agriculture Credit Departmentas an exclusive agency for providing credit towhich was to have an expert staff to advise the centralagriculture, urged a well defined role for commercialgovernment, state governments, state cooperative banks,banks in delivering credit for agriculture in specialisedand other banks; and to coordinate RBI functions forareas, such as marketing, processing, storage andagricultural credit. Section 17 of the Act empowered itwarehousing. Towards this end, it recommendedto provide agricultural credit through state cooperativeestablishment of the State Bank of India and throughbanks or any other banks engaged in the business ofit, extension of commercial banking facilities to ruralagricultural credit.and semi-urban areas. Thus, concern with theAmong the first activities of the Reserve Bank in inadequate extension of agricultural credit had aagricultural credit were two studies in 1936 and 1937. significant role in the founding of both the ReserveIt was found that almost the entire finance required by Bank of India and transformation of the Imperial Bankagriculturalists was supplied by money lenders and that of India into the State Bank of India.cooperatives and other agencies played a negligible part.THE P ERIOD OF SUBSTANTIAL C HANGE: 1960S TO THEDuring the period between 1935 and 1950, the Reserve1980SBank was very active in continuing the attempt to re-invigorate the cooperative credit movement through aThe inadequacy of rural credit continued to engagevariety of initiatives. Besides providing financialthe attention of the Reserve Bank and the Governmentaccommodation to the cooperative movement, the RBIthroughout the 1950s and 1960s. The Agriculturalplayed a central role in the task of building theRefinance Corporation (ARC) was set up by thecooperative credit structure, which gradually evolvedReserve Bank in 1963 to provide funds by way ofinto two separate arms, one for short term credit andrefinance, but credit cooperatives still did not functionanother for long term credit - a structure that still existstoo well.today. The continuing intense concern with theConsequently, the All India Rural Credit Reviewprovision of rural credit continued in the post war years:Committee (Chairman: Shri B. Venkatappiah) was setmore than half a dozen committees were appointedup in July 1966 to, inter alia, review the supply ofbetween 1945 and 1950. Despite all these efforts, evenrural credit in the context of the Fourth Five Year Planby 1951 the provision of credit through cooperativesin general, and the requirements of the intensiveremained meagre with only 3.3 per cent of theprogrammes of agricultural production in different partscultivators having access to credit from cooperatives,of the country, in particular, and to makeand 0.9 per cent from commercial banks. Furthermore,recommendations for improving the flow of agriculturalthe funds supplied by the money lenders were subjectcredit. After a comprehensive review, the Committeeto high interest rates and other usurious practices andrecommended that the commercial banks should play aaccordingly, legislation on money lending was advocatedcomplementary role, along with co-operatives, into check such malpractices.extending rural credit. The social control and theThe foundation for building a broader creditsubsequent nationalisation of major commercial banksinfrastructure for rural credit was laid by the Reportin 1969 (and in 1980) acted as a catalyst in providingof the All India Rural Credit Survey (1954). Themomentum to the efforts of leveraging the commercialCommittee of Direction that conducted this surveybanking system for extending agricultural credit. Theobserved that agricultural credit fell short of the rightoutreach of banks was enlarged considerably within aquantity, was not of the right type, did not serve therelatively short period of time. The concept of priorityright purpose and often failed to go to the right people.sector was introduced in 1969 to underscore theThe Committee also observed that the performance ofimperative of financing certain neglected sectors likeco-operatives in the sphere of agricultural credit wasagriculture. The channelling of credit to the prioritydeficient in more than one way, but at the same time,sectors was sought to be achieved through the994November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004stipulation that a certain proportion of the total net bank among others things, agriculture. NABARD took overcredit be deployed in these sectors by specific target the entire undertaking of the ARDC and the refinancing*dates . Decentralised credit planning through the Lead functions of the RBI in relation to state cooperativesBank Scheme was also introduced, under which, each and RRBs. NABARD is the Apex institution which hasdistrict was placed with one of the commercial banks been entrusted with a pivotal role in the sphere of policy(called the district Lead Bank) to spearhead the credit planning and providing refinance facilities to ruralallocation for, inter alia, agricultural lending. In order financial institutions to augment their resource base. Sinceto emphasise the developmental and promotional role its inception, the NABARD has played a central role inassigned to the ARC in addition to refinancing, the providing financial assistance, facilitating institutionalCorporation was renamed as the Agricultural Refinance development and encouraging promotional efforts in theand Development Corporation (ARDC) by an area of rural credit. NABARD also administers the Ruralamendment to the Act in 1975. Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), which wasset up in 1995-96; the corpus of RIDF is contributedIt was also the case that the 1950s and 1960s hadby scheduled commercial banks to the extent of theirbeen characterised by a big industrial push with inadequateshortfall in agricultural lending under the priority sectorattention being given to agriculture. It was the 1965-targets. NABARD has been playing a catalytic role in1967 drought that brought matters to a head andmicro-credit through the conduit of Self-Help Groupsfocussed concentrated attention to agriculture. The Green(SHGs).Revolution then followed in the late 1960s and 1970snecessitating adequate availability of credit that couldTHE PERIOD OF INTROSPECTION AND REFORMS: 1991 TOenable the purchase of inputs such as fertilizer, highTHE PRESENTyielding varieties of seeds, pump sets for irrigation, andthe like.Notwithstanding the impressive geographical spread,Despite all these efforts, the flow of credit to the functional reach and consequent decline in the influenceof informal sources of credit, rural financial institutionsagricultural sector failed to exhibit any appreciablewere characterised by several weaknesses, viz., declineimprovement due mainly to the fact that commercialin productivity and efficiency; erosion of repaymentbanks were not tuned to the needs and requirements ofethics and profitability. On the eve of the 1991 reforms,the small and marginal farmers, while the co-operatives,the rural credit delivery system was again found to beon the other hand, lacked resources to meet the expecteddemand. The solution that was found involved the in a poor shape (R.V. Gupta Committee, 1998).establishment of a separate banking structure, capableThe Report of the Committee on the Financialof combining the local feel and familiarity of rural problemsSystem (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham, 1991)characteristic of co-operatives and the professionalism andprovided the blue print for carrying out overall financiallarge resource base of commercial banks. Following thesector reforms during the 1990s. Furthermore,recommendations of the Narasimham Working Groupweaknesses in the performance of rural financial(1975), Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) were set up. Thus,institutions since 1991 resulted in setting up of variousby the end of 1977, there emerged three separatecommittees/working groups/task forces to look into theirinstitutions for providing rural credit, which is oftenoperations such as: “The High-level Committee ondescribed as the ‘multi-agency approach’.Agricultural Credit through Commercial Banks” (R. V.Gupta, 1998), “Task Force to Study the Functions ofFollowing the recommendations of the “CommitteeCooperative Credit System and to Suggest Measuresto Review Arrangements for Institutional Credit forfor its Strengthening” (Jagdish Capoor, 1999), “ExpertAgriculture and Rural Development”, the National BankCommittee on Rural Credit” (V.S. Vyas, 2001), and “Thefor Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) wasWorking Group to Suggest Amendments in the Regionalset up in 1982 for providing credit for promotion of,* At present, scheduled commercial banks (excluding RRBs), are expected to ensure that the priority sector advancesconstitute 40 per cent of  net bank credit and within the overall lending target of 40 per cent, 18 per cent of net bankcredit goes to agricultural sector. To ensure that the focus of banks on direct category of agricultural advances does notget diluted, lendings under indirect category should not exceed one-fourth of the agricultural sub-target of 18 per cent,i.e., 4.5 per cent of net bank credit.995November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Rural Banks Act, 1976” (M.V.S. Chalapathi Rao, 2002). RRBs; introduction of prudential accounting norms andThese committees/working groups/task forces made far- provisioning requirements for all rural credit agencies;reaching recommendations having a bearing on agricultural increased refinance support from RBI and capitalcredit. While the Capoor Task Force suggested adoption contribution to NABARD; constitution of the Ruralof a Model Co-operative Act, setting up of a Co-operative Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) in NABARDRehabilitation and Development Fund at NABARD and for infrastructure projects; introduction of Kissan CreditMutual Assistance Fund at the state level, the Vyas Card (KCC) and stipulation of interest rate not exceedingCommittee (2001) recommended restoration of health of 9 per cent for crop loans up to Rs.50,000 extended byPrimary Agricultural Credit Societies (PACs) by the public sector banks.scrapping the cadre system, selective delayering of co-SUMMING UPoperatives credit structure and integration of short andlong-term structures. The Chalapathi Rao Working GroupThus, concern with the inadequacy of agricultural(2002) had, in addition to suggesting diversification ofcredit has had more than a century of tortuous history.the business of RRBs, recommended introduction ofThe agricultural credit system (Chart 1) as it hascapital adequacy norms for RRBs in a phased manner,emerged, has been a product of both evolution andalong with the RRB-specific amount of equity based onintervention and symbolises the system’s response tothe risk-weighted assets ratio.the stimuli from continuing dissatisfaction with creditThe financial sector reforms formed an integral partdelivery. The concern for food security and the needof the overall structural reforms initiated in 1991 andfor building up buffer stocks, which guided the Greenincluded various measures in the area of agricultural creditRevolution, created both enhanced and diversified typesuch as deregulation of interest rates of co-operatives,of credit requirements for agricultural production. Inand RRBs; deregulation of lending rates of commercialIndia, a “supply-leading approach” to the institutionalbanks for loans above Rs. 2 lakh; recapitalisation of selectdevelopment for agriculture credit has been followed.Chart 1:  Structure of Agricultural Credit System in IndiaGOVERNMENT OF INDIARESERVE BANK OF INDIANABARDCOMMERCIAL RURAL CO-OPERATIVE REGIONAL RURALBANKS CREDIT  INSTITUTIONS BANKSLONG-TERM CREDITSHORT-TERM CREDIT STRUCTURESTRUCTURESTATE CO-OPERATIVE BANKSSTATE CO-OPERATIVEAGRICULTURE AND RURALDEVELOPMENT BANKSDISTRICT CENTRAL CO-OPERATIVEBANKSPRIMARY CO-OPERATIVEAGRICULTURE AND RURALDEVELOPMENT BANKSPRIMARY AGRICULTURAL CREDITSOCIEITESDEPOSITORS AND BORROWERS996November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004ASSESSMENT OF PROGRESS IN AGRICULTURAL CREDIT continuously since the 1950s, and even as a proportionof total GDP until the 1980s. There was indeed a fall inAgricultural credit clearly started to grow after bankthe mid 1990s, but has again risen now (Table 1). It isnationalisation (Chart 2), and it has been growingtrue, however, that agricultural credit has indeed fallencontinuously since then. With all the concerns andas a proportion of total credit.skepticism expressed, the difficult and continuousThe existing agricultural credit system is geared tochanges in institutional credit have indeed borne fruit.the needs of foodgrains production: with the share ofOver the years there has been a significant increase infoodgrains production falling as a proportion of totalthe access of rural cultivators to institutional credit and,agricultural production, it is all the more creditable thatsimultaneously, the role of informal agencies, includingagriculture credit has not fallen as a proportion ofmoney lenders, as source of credit has declined.agricultural GDP. With the share of agriculture in GDPAccording to the All India Debt and Investment Surveyfalling continuously, from 36 per cent in 1981 to 29 per1991-92, the relative shares of institutional agencies incent in 1991 and 22 per cent in 2001, it is to be expectedthe total cash debt of rural cultivators increased fromthat the share of agricultural credit would also fall as a31.7 per cent in 1971 to 63.2 per cent in 1981 andproportion of total credit, unless this trend is correctedfurther to 66.3 per cent in 1991.by increasing commercialisation of agriculture.Nonetheless, recent years have again beencharacterised by a concern over the falling share of The age old problem of rural credit has been theagricultural credit as a proportion of total credit. This is excessive reliance of borrowers on money lenders andindeed true, but is this the correct metric to look at the other informal sources that have entailed usuriousprogress of agricultural credit? What would be more interest rates and exploitation. It is quite remarkablerelevant is to evaluate agricultural credit as a proportion how long it has taken to really substitute institutionalof agricultural GDP; or short-term credit as a proportion credit for informal money lending channels and howof the value of inputs; or long term credit as a proportion tortuous the process of change has been: change ofof private investment. any significance took over 50 years from the beginningof serious attention in the 1930s to the 1980s (TableAs might be expected, the share of agricultural value2). It was the nationalisation of banks in 1969 andadded has been falling as a share of total GDP. Hencesubsequent spread of rural bank branches that has reallycredit to agriculture may also be expected to fall as amade a difference in reducing, finally the share ofproportion of total credit, assuming relative stability inmoney lenders in agricultural credit.the share of purchased inputs as a proportion of valueadded. What is interesting is that the share of agriculturalTable 1: Ratio of Direct Agricultural Credit (Disbursements) tocredit as a proportion of agricultural GDP has been risingAgricultural Gross Domestic Product (GDP),Total GDP and Total Credit (Per cent)  Agricultural Credit/ Agricultural Credit/ AgriculturalAgricultural GDP Total GDP Credit / CS1950-51 0.5 0.3 n.a1960-61 3.3 1.3 n.a.1970s 5.4 2.1 10.81980s 8.3 2.6 8.51990s 7.4 2.0 6.42001-02 8.7 2.0 5.5n.a. : not available.Note : 1. Agricultural Credit : Direct credit for agricultural and allied activitiesextended by Co-operatives, Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks.2. Total GDP and Agricultural GDP are at factor cost and at current prices.3. CS – Other banks’ credit to commercial sector (outstanding) proxy for totalcredit.Source: Report on Currency and Finance: Various Issues and Handbook of Statisticson Indian Economy: 2002-03.997November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 2: Relative Share of Borrowing of Cultivator Households from Different Sources(Per cent)Sources of  Credit 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991Non –Institutional 92.7 81.3 68.3 36.8 30.6of which      Money Lenders 69.7 49.2 36.1 16.1 17.5Institutional 7.3 18.7 31.7 63.2 66.3of which      Cooperative Societies / Banks 3.3 2.6 22.0 29.8 35.2Commercial Banks 0.9 0.6 2.4 28.8 35.2Unspecified – – – – 3.1Total 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0Source: All India Debt and Investment Survey and RBI Bulletin, February 2000.As documented in the last section, it has taken drastic rural credit continues to be extended by them and henceaction ranging from the formation of cooperatives to it is essential that they be revitalised and put on a soundbank nationalisation, setting up of RRBs and the like. business footing.The Indian record of extension of rural credit is quite aThere has been increasing expression of concern onstory of institutional innovation.the extension of agricultural credit in the 1990s. ThereThe remarkable feature of agricultural credit has actually been continuous growth in the number ofextension in India is the widespread network of Rural accounts in all size-wise categories in the case ofFinancial Institutions (RFIs). Following the first phase commercial banks (Chart 3).of nationalisation of commercial banks in 1969, largeIt is probably the case that the introduction of Kissanscale branch expansion was undertaken with a view toCredit Cards (KCCs) has also aided this process in thecreating a strong institutional base in rural areas. Atrecent years. But it is equally true that the share of smallthe time of nationalisation in June 1969, the total numberfarms in total credit appears to be falling to a certainof rural offices of scheduled commercial banks (SCBs)extent (Chart 4).was 1,833, which then increased significantly to 32,406This trend needs to be analysed carefully and is aby March 2003. The number of co-operative institutionsgood topic for further research. Are larger farmerscatering to agriculture went up from 95,871 in end-becoming more productive and commercial with higherJune 1980 to over 1,10,000 at present. The share ofintensity of bought-out inputs, thus requiring higherthe rural branches of scheduled commercial bankslevels of credit? Or are small farms becoming unviable,(including RRBs) in total increased sharply from 22making it difficult for banks to finance them? Or, areper cent in June 1969 to 47 per cent by March 2003.The main story in the expansion of rural credit in the1980s and 1990s has been the ascendancy ofcommercial banks, along with RRBs, with acorresponding fall in the share of cooperatives (Table3). This is reflected in the increasing concern in recentyears over the effectiveness, governance and financialhealth of rural cooperative banks. Just under half ofTable 3: Decadal Average Share of Institutions in DirectAgricultural Credit (Disbursements) (Per cent)Co-operatives RRBs Commercial Banks1970s 79.5 2.3 21.01980s 55.9 5.3 38.91990s 51.5 6.2 42.32001-02 44.0 11.0 45.0Note : Direct Agricultural Credit (disbursements) from 1975-76 for RRBs and1971 - 72 for commercial banks.Source: Handbook of Statistics on Indian Economy: 2002-03.998November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 5: Private Capital Formation and Share of Long-Term Credit(Rupees crore) Year Private Sector Investment Proportion (%)Capital Formation Credit1980-81 2,843 1,335 47.01990-91 8,402 4,208 50.11998-99 19,311 13,264 68.7Source: Pant  Joshi (2003).second best, we can look at agricultural credit as aproportion of net state domestic product (NSDP). TheSouthern states stand out with a substantially higher shareof agricultural credit (Tables 6 and 7), followed by theNorthern and Central regions. Whereas the ratio for theSouthern region increased during the latter part of the1990s, it remained stationery for the Northern, Centraland North-Eastern regions. It is also notable that theSouthern States have a much more active cooperativemovement (not covered in the data reported here), andbanks becoming more risk averse and hence reluctanthence their share of agricultural credit is likely to beto lend?even higher. The low share of the Western region isThere is some evidence to the contrary. Availablesurprising, but could be because of the very active roledata suggest that agricultural credit has been rising inof cooperatives in this region. The East and North-Easternrecent years as a share of both the value of inputs orregions clearly get a very low share.the value of output (Table 4). Moreover, long-termSome information is also available on a per capitacredit as a share of private investment has also beenbasis and, as may be expected the Southern region reallyrising in the 1990s (Table 5). Thus, it is probably fairstands out in terms of exposure to agricultural credit.to say that the agricultural credit effort has not reallyThe per capita extension of agricultural credit in thebeen slackening in the 1990s. It is also possible thatEastern and North Eastern regions is extremely lowwith credit intensity going up in this fashion it could,(Table 8). Since these data pertain to commercial banks,ironically, also lead to greater risk on the part ofthe puzzle before us is why should such starkborrowers because of greater indebtedness.differences exist between regions? Given that Punjab,Haryana, and Western UP are the centres of the greenREGIONAL DISTRIBUTIONrevolution, one would have expected a higher intensityof agricultural credit in the Northern region and whyAmong the striking features of the agricultural creditdo public sector banks, with similar management andscene in India are the wide regional disparities in thedisbursement of agricultural credit by scheduled staff, behave so differently between regions? If it ispossible for banks to do direct lending for agriculturecommercial banks (excluding RRBs). The correct wayin the Southern States, why not in the other regions?to evaluate the performance of agricultural credit is toAnd why should the differences be so large? Incidentally,look at the ratio of agricultural credit to state agriculturalit is notable that the rural stress that has emerged invalue added. It is difficult to obtain these data. So, as aTable 4: Gross Value of Outputs, Value of Inputs and Short-Term Credit(Rupees crore at 1993-94 prices)Year Gross Value of Outputs Value of Inputs Short-term Credit Short-term Credit as Percentage toValue of inputs Value of outputs1993-94 2,04,874 27,413 9,752 35.6 4.81996-97 2,32,833 30,735 13,330 43.4 5.71998-99 2,45,413 34,566 14,642 42.4 6.0Source : Pant  Joshi (2003).999November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 6 : Region-wise Ratio of Agricultural Credit to Table 8: Region-wise Trends in Agricultural and Allied Sector Net State Domestic Product (NSDP) Credit Per Capita(Per cent) (Rupees)Regions 1991-95 (Average) 1996-2001 (Average) Regions 1991-95 1996-2001Northern 60 153Northern 0.7 1.0North-Eastern 9 17North-Eastern 0.2 0.2Eastern 21 42Eastern 0.5 0.5Central 0.7 1.0 Central 36 86Western 0.7 0.7Western 67 134Southern 1.6 2.0Southern 157 280All India 0.9 1.0All India 67 128Notes : 1. Agricultural credit relates to direct finance to agriculture and alliedNotes : 1. Ratios obtained by dividing the average direct finance to Agriculturalactivities by all scheduled commercial banks (disbursements - Short termand allied activities of all scheduled commercial banks (Disbursements –and Long term).Short term and Long term) during the period 1991-95 and 1996-2001 by2. NSDP is at current prices.the total region-wise population in 1991 and 2001, respectively.Source: Reserve Bank of India and Economic Survey: Various Issues.2. NSDP is at current prices.Source : Reserve Bank of India and Economic Survey: Various Issues.recent years after repeated droughts has beenconcentrated in the Southern region. Ironically, it ispriority sector. However, they are not as high as thosepossible that this may have occurred as a consequencefor small scale industries (SSI) and for other priorityof the relative success of the agricultural credit effortsectors. In fact, for private sector banks, agriculturalin this region. All these issues need much greaterNPAs are as low as 5 per cent of total outstandingresearch so that our continuing search for viableadvances to agriculture, and are lower than for the nonagricultural credit extension is informed by appropriatepriority sector (Table 9). In fact, it is likely that ifknowledge.public sector enterprises are excluded from the datafor the non-priority sector, the performance of NPAsNON-PERFORMING ASSETSin agriculture may not be much higher than for lendingto the non-priority sector private sector credit exposureI started with the core issue of risk in agricultureas a whole. These data do suggest that agriculturaland how that is a key determinant of all the problemslending may be more risky than non-priority sectors,encountered in agricultural lending. I would, therefore,but the difference is probably not large enough tobriefly like to examine the record of non-performingwarrant excessive caution in bank lending forassets (NPAs) in agriculture for commercial banks. Isagricultural purposes.the hesitation of banks to lend for agriculture reallycaused by the experience of a much higher level ofTable 9: Sector-wise Average Non-Performing Assets of Banks -NPAs? It is found that the proportion of NPAs are(2001- 2003)indeed higher for agriculture than they are for the non-(Amounts in Rs Crore)Agriculture Small Others Total Non-Scale Priority PriorityTable 7: Region-wise Share of Agriculture and Allied Sector CreditSector Sector(Short Term and Long Term) Disbursements (Per cent)Public Sector BanksRegion 1990-91 1995-96 2001-02    Average NPAs 7,635 10,362 6,748 24,745 28,764Northern 12.9 11.6 19.9    Average NPAs as aNorth-Eastern 0.4 0.4 0.5per cent of averageoutstanding advances 12.0 20.6 12.2 14.2 9.4Eastern 8.3 6.4 7.4Central 16.9 16.4 14.1 Private Sector BanksWestern 13.6 17.1 14.4Average NPAs 433 1,249 593 2,275 9,271Southern 47.9 48 43.8Average NPAs as aAll-India 100 100 100 per cent of averageOutstanding advances 5.1 15.9 5.3 8.1 10.2Note  : Agricultural Credit relates to direct finance to agricultural and alliedactivities of all scheduled commercial banks (Disbursments - Short-term andNote : NPAs and outstanding advances as on March 31.Long- term).Source : Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India: Various Issues; ReserveSource: Reserve Bank of India.Bank of India.1000November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 10: Growth of Indian Economy (Annual Growth Rate)SUMMARY (Per cent)What have we learnt from this brief summary of theYear GNP Per Capitarecord of agricultural credit? First, after about 70 years1950-80 3.5 1.2of constant efforts, institutional credit is indeed reaching1980-90 5.7 3.4a substantial proportion of farmers. Second, with the1990-2000 5.8 3.6share of agricultural GDP falling in total GDP, it is to beSource: National Accounts Statistics: Central Statistical Organisation.expected that the share of agricultural credit will go downas a proportion of total credit. But we do need to ensureWhen annual per capita income growth is in thethat it does not fall as a share of agricultural GDP, andregion of 1.2 per cent, it is barely palpable, eventhat it in fact intensifies. Third, what is needed is acumulatively over 10 years. When, however per capitabetter analysis by banks on where the risks are in theincome growth ascends to around 3.5 per cent perextension of agricultural credit, and to then find market-year, it starts becoming palpable on a cumulative basisoriented solutions for mitigating such risks. Where theand leads to perceptible shifts in the demand pattern.mitigation of such risk involves positive externalities andAlthough there is some dispute on the measurementthe promotion of public good, methods of appropriateof poverty, the official estimates of poverty, and ofgovernment intervention would need to be identified andmost academic analysts suggest that there has beenconsidered. Fourth, there is an urgent need for thesubstantial reduction in absolute poverty levels betweenadoption of the best modern techniques for riskthe 1970s and late 1990s (Chart 5). With measuredmanagement in agriculture, including a clearer distributionpoverty having fallen to around 26 per cent, frombetween risky and less risky borrowers. Fifth, banksthe late 1970s levels of around 50 percent, the patternneed to adopt a more specialised approach as betweenof demand for food has been changingdifferent agricultural sectors and regions in order tocorrespondingly.achieve a better understanding of agricultural credit needsThe key observation to be made is that there hasand risks on a disaggregated basis: which sectors andregions are more credit worthy and which less so? Which been a steep fall in the share of cereals in total householdagricultural activities and regions are getting more credit food expenditure over the last 30 years: from just under60 per cent in the late 1960s to less than 40 per cent inand why? Business as usual and a blanket approach willthe late 1990s in rural areas; and from over 35 per centno longer do. Sixth, there is an increasing need for alliedin the late 1960s to 25 per cent in the late 1990s inactivities and term lending, and hence a change in oururban areas (Table 11).traditional view of what constitutes agriculture and howit should be promoted.It is to these issues that I now turn.THE CHANGING FACE OF AGRICULTURECHANGES IN THE DEMAND FOR FOODThe defining characteristic of the 1980s and 1990shas been the overall acceleration in economic growth ofthe country (Table 10). Whereas per capita annual incomegrowth was only about 1.2 per cent for about 30 yearsuntil 1980 or so, growth has been accelerating in the1980s and 1990s. With the perceptible fall in populationgrowth in the 1990s a similar level of overall GDP growthimplies still higher per capita income growth. Theconsequence is that Indian annual per capita income isnow about US $ 500 which is pushing India into thegroup of middle income countries.1001November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 11: Share of Cereals and Non-Cereal Items in Total MonthlyCHANGES IN THE SUPPLY PATTERN OF FOODPer-Capita Expenditure on Food: Rural and Urban AreasIndia is already a very large producer of fruits and(Per cent)1969-70 1987-88 1993-94 1999-2000 vegetables. It is ranked among the top five producers inRural Cereals 56.0 41.0 38.3 37.3 a range of items such as bananas, mangoes, papayasNon-Cereals 44.0 59.0 61.7 62.7 and pineapples, among fruits; and brinjal, cabbage,Urban Cereals 36.6 26.5 25.7 25.7cauliflower, peas, onions and potatoes, among vegetables.Non-Cereals 63.4 73.5 74.3 74.3India is perhaps the second largest producer of bothSource: Various NSS Rounds on Household Consumption Expenditure. fruits and vegetables (Table 13).As incomes increase and diet diversification takesMoreover, there has been similar change in theplace, the demand for fruits and vegetables will growhousehold expenditure on food as a proportion of totalcorrespondingly and hence, we can expect huge changesexpenditure in both rural and urban areas. In rural areas,to take place in the supply response to such emergingthe expenditure on non-food items has shot up from 26demand. The production growth in these items is likelyper cent of the total in 1969-70 to 41 per cent in 1999-to accelerate significantly if appropriate conditions are2000. In urban areas, this proportion has gone up fromcreated for such expansion. Correspondingly, suchabout 34 per cent to 52 per cent over the same periodexpansion will give rise to huge possibilities for food(Table 12).processing. Although India is indeed a very large producerThus household expenditure on cereals has beenof fruits and vegetables, our productivity levels continueshrinking as a proportion of total expenditure in theto be very low: Indian yields are significantly below thelast 30-35 years, and this trend may be expected toworld average in vegetables (Table 14).continue in the years to come. It is quite clear thatOne successful example of policy attention in the non-with progressive and continuous increases in incomefoodgrains area is that of milk. Ever since the creationand poverty reduction, the Indian diet is graduallyof the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB), thebecoming more diversified. The composition ofproduction of milk has increased tremendously, as hasproducts in the supply of food will also have to reflectits distribution over most parts of the country. Thethis with the passage of time. With acceleration inproduction of milk increased from around 56 millioneconomic growth, this change will probably take placetonnes in 1991-92 to about 80 million tonnes by 2000-faster.01. This development took place only as a result ofFrom a policy perspective, the key lesson from thisfocussed attention to technology development, extension,change in demand pattern is that Indian agricultural policyprovision of input supply, procurement, distribution andwill need to shift its almost exclusive attention from themarketing, along with corresponding appropriateproduction of foodgrains to the promotion of all the otherinstitutional development. The success achieved in bothfood products. The quest for higher agricultural growth,the acceleration of growth in foodgrains production sinceand large accelerated economic growth in rural areasthe early 1970s, and milk production later, owed muchtherefore requires a shift of policy attention to a muchmore diversified approach involving growth of production Table 13: India's Position in World Production ofFruits and Vegetablesof products such as meat, fish, poultry, vegetables, fruits,Crop Rank Crop Rankand the like.1 2 3 4Apple 10 Brinjal 2Table 12: Share of Food and Non-Food Items in Total MonthlyBanana 1 Cabbage 2Per-Capita Expenditure: Rural and Urban Areas(Per cent)Mango 1 Cauliflower 11969-70 1987-88 1993-94 1999-2000 Papaya 2 Peas 1Rural Food 73.7 63.8 63.2 59.4Pine apple 4 Onion 2Non-food 26.3 36.2 36.8 40.6Grapes 10 Potato 3Urban Food 65.7 55.9 54.7 48.1Total Fruits 2 Total Vegetables 2Non-food 34.3 44.1 45.3 51.9Coconut 3 Cashew 1Source: Indian Horticulture Database - 2001.Source: Various NSS Rounds on Household Consumption Expenditure.1002November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Table 14: Yields in Vegetables: India and the Worldheterogeneity, unlike in the case of wheat, rice and milk.(Quintals per hectare)There is a multiplicity of varieties that can be produced1990 1995 2000 2002 2003in each of these product groups; production is oftenWorld 149 155 166 169 168regionally concentrated; the production and marketingChina 177 188 189 196 192conditions differ significantly; and the input requirementsIndia 102 102 131 125 129are equally heterogeneous. Hence, policies and programmesNote : Vegetables include melons.that are to be designed to support higher productivity andSource: FAO Stat 2004.production in these areas need to be much more regionallyto specific policy analysis and subsequent policy actiondisaggregated and knowledge intensive.accompanied with institutional development - includingIn the new growth areas of agriculture, thethat of the provision of credit. The key innovation madeimportance of post harvest activities such as storage,by the NDDB was to find a way of expanding productiontransportation, processing and marketing of non-cerealby small producers located over different regions, whileproducts increases which leads to greater links betweenconcentrating technology investment centrally and thenagricultural diversification and rural industrialisation. Theextending it to the producers.success of this strategy would, however, dependJust as research and development activities, andcrucially on developing adequate infrastructural and othermarketing were very important in the production andsupport systems.adaptation of high yielding seed varieties for wheat andThe monopoly of Government regulated wholesalerice, expanding milk production, productivity increasesmarkets has prevented development of a competitivein other areas such as horticulture will also need similarmarketing system in the country, providing no help tointensity of investment in appropriate R&D, and specialfarmers in direct marketing, organised retailing, developingmarketing efforts increasingly involving public/privatesmooth raw material supply systems for agro-processingpartnership.industries and the adoption of innovative marketingsystem and technologies. An efficient agriculturalELEMENTS OF A NEW APPROACHmarketing system is essential for development of theThe changing demand pattern for food involves aagricultural sector as it provides outlets and incentivesreordering of priorities in organising appropriate matchingfor increased production and the marketing systemsupply responses. Besides promoting diversification, therecontributes greatly to the commercialisation ofis also a need for value addition in agricultural productionsubsistence farmers. Worldwide, Governments havefor increasing rural employment and incomes.recognised the importance of liberalised agriculturalInterestingly, very significant changes are taking placemarkets. If the agricultural markets are to be developedin the agricultural sector in this regard. There arein private and co-operative sectors and are to be providedincipient signs of a much closer connection betweena competitive environment vis-à-vis regulated markets,primary producers, trade intermediaries, food processingthe existing framework of State Agricultural Produceentities, and the eventual marketing of value addedMarketing Committee (APMC) Acts will have to undergoproducts. With the share of unprocessed foods falling,a change. In this context, the Model Agricultural Producethe real growth area in the agricultural sector is in valueMarketing (Development & Regulation) Act, 2003added food products such as meat, poultry, fish,circulated in September 2003 acquires significance. Tenvegetables, fruits and the like. There is an acceleratingStates have initiated legal or administrative action for directmove of consumers to basic processed foods such asmarketing and ‘contract farming’ arrangements in line withatta, packaged milk, fresh poultry, soft drinks, processedthe Model Act. Other states need to follow suit.meat and poultry, and the like.As mere policy reforms in these areas would beSupporting policy changes and investment are requiredinadequate, corresponding investment in ruralto facilitate agricultural diversification and value-addition.infrastructure is required for closer connection betweenThe task of the policy makers in designing an appropriatethe farmer and the market. The government has alreadypackage of measures becomes more challenginglaunched an ambitious rural roads programme, namelyconsidering the fact that the new growth areas ofthe Prime Minister’s Gram Sadak Yojana. As villageagriculture are characterised by a high degree ofconnectivity is actually achieved through the1003November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004construction of rural roads, it will become possible to Experience shows that the green revolution was largelymake other investments that are required for farm to aided by domestic and international research and extensionmarket transfer of agricultural products. The experience efforts. While traditionally this has been concentratedof states like Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Haryana, Kerala and exclusively in the Government, in these new areas ofGoa, where rural connectivity through roads was agriculture, measures need to be taken to encourage theachieved much earlier, suggests that such a programme private sector to invest in R&D and extension activities.is more successful when conducted in a decentralisedSeveral South-east and East-Asian countries, whichframework.adopted agricultural diversification and ruralHeavy investments need to be made in establishing industrialisation as a strategy for rural development, havecold chains across the country such as cold storage, witnessed a move away from cereals to non-cerealtransport facilities and the like. The kind of storage and production. This was spurred by the structural changes,transportation facilities required will differ from product which accompanied the long-term contraction ofto product and from region to region. It would be best agriculture in the economy, the decline in the real pricesaccomplished in a decentralised private sector framework of cereals following the success of green revolution,with appropriate policies and supportive financing as also the changes in the consumption pattern due tofacilities. rising incomes and urbanisation. Agriculturaldiversification has been seen as desirable response toThe banking system in India is, at present, gearedthese demand and supply changes and was explicitlymore to financing the traditional crops like cereals.incorporated into many countries’ agricultural policiesHowever, it needs to reorient itself to meet the changingand rural development strategies (Goletti, 1999). Thus,requirements of commercialising agriculture. Creditfundamental changes in the diets of the population inrequirements would go up due to purchased-inputAsian developing countries has been a major factor inintensive and heterogeneous production cycles of the newthe evolution of cereal supply and demand andareas of agriculture. This would also call for designingagricultural diversification (Rosegrant and Hazell, 2001).innovative schemes and products which recognise theAgro-based rural industries were recognised asdiffering nature of agri-business and supply chains forproviding not only high value products and income todifferent products. Newer forms of credit assessmentthe rural population but also employment to large ruraland risk management systems may also have to be putnon-farm population which could not be absorbed byin place, besides upgrading skills and changes in attitudesthe rapidly expanding industrial and services sector. Thisand mind-sets. The rural credit system has been bypassedstrategy was followed in several countries like Taiwanby the revolution in information technology. The bankingand Malaysia in sixties and Thailand, Philippines andsystem may also have to address the problem of ‘financialIndonesia in the seventies and eighties.dualism’, characterised by faster modernisation of urbanfinancial markets compared with their rural counterparts The rapid transformation that has been observed inand the ‘digital divide’ which separates those using these areas in South East Asian countries in the last 20modern computers and communication technologies from years provides pointers to what can be expected in thethose who do not. Financial dualism could result in large years to come. One key area of change that hasfarmers, agri-business and rural industries obtaining occurred is in the modernisation of retail groceryfinancial services from modern urban financial institutions, structures. Most cultures in a transitional phase attachwhile small and marginal farmers and landless laborers great importance to personalised shopping for dailymay have to depend on micro finance and personal needs. The small corner stores are well distributedsavings. Information technology has to be used to across towns and cities. The situation in East Asia wasfacilitate transformation in various processes of rural similar until the 1980s. However, tremendous changecredit. In this regard, it is suggested that each bank has taken place in retail grocery structures in theseshould form a special task force to look into the entire countries over the last 15 years. In Taiwan, for example,gamut of credit in the context of the agricultural whereas only about 2 per cent of groceries were soldtransformation. The best results could be obtained if these in modern retail formats such as super markets in thetask forces are staffed with enthusiastic young bankers mid 1980s, this proportion has now shot up to morewith penchant for innovation. than 65 per cent. Similar change has taken place from1004November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004zero to 50 per cent over the same period in Thailand. medium and long-term lending and limited depositEven in Indonesia, about 25 per cent of groceries are mobilisation and heavy dependence on borrowed fundsnow bought in modern super markets. Modern retailing by major agricultural credit purveyors. These havefirms are much more efficient than traditional firms. major implications for agricultural development as alsoTheir costs can be as much as 20 per cent lower than the well being of the farming community. Efforts arein traditional firms. Contrary to popular perception, they therefore required to address and rectify these issues.actually generate greater employment. The economiesFollowing the changes in the consumption and theof scale provide for greater variety in product stocks;dietary patterns from cereals to non-cereal products, athey provide a demand pull factor from consumers tosilent transformation is taking place in the rural areasproducers; and they help in reducing the differencecalling for diversification in agricultural production andbetween the retail and farm gate prices. Overall, theyvalue addition processes in order to protect employmenthelp in accelerating growth in the whole food chainand incomes of the rural population. In the changedthereby leading to higher agricultural growth and, morescenario, strong and viable agricultural financialimportantly, higher employment growth in the wholeinstitutions are needed to cater to the requirements offood chain from the farm, food processing, logistics,finance for building the necessary institutional andand retailing.marketing infrastructure.To sum up, the income and consumption changes,What is needed in agriculture now is a new missiondescribed above, have ushered in a new demand structuremode akin to what was done in the 1970s with thefor rural products that has gone largely unnoticed.Green Revolution. The difference is that then weTraditional approaches to agriculture, which focussed onconcentrated countrywide on two relativelyfoodgrain production will only bring agricultural stagnationhomogeneous products so that the countrywide strategyand employment distress in rural areas. The need of thecould also be similarly homogeneous. The approach washour is to promote agricultural diversification, encouragea package approach, which attempted to bring togetherproduction of other food products, invest actively in ruraltechnology inputs (focussed investment in newinfrastructure, and enable greater food processing andagricultural universities, regionally distributed, withvalue addition to agricultural production, which wouldcomplementary organisation of agricultural extensioncreate new avenues for rural employment and income.services) along with provision of infrastructure inputslike power at subsidised costs; arrangements for theCONCLUSIONsupply of bought out inputs like seeds, fertilisers,tractors; and most importantly, correspondingAgricultural credit has played a vital role inarrangements for credit provision through the thensupporting agricultural production in India. The Greenrecently nationalised banking system. This model hasRevolution characterised by a greater use of inputs likeclearly delivered results in the sense that India hasfertilizers, seeds and other inputs, increased creditbecome self sufficient in food and we have effectivelyrequirements which were provided by the agriculturalbrought food security. However, the model has notfinancial institutions. Though the outreach and thechanged much since then and various ills have resulted:amount of agricultural credit have increased over thethe persistence of high fertiliser subsidies, poweryears, several weaknesses have crept in which havesubsidies and minimum support prices that may nowaffected the viability and sustainability of theseact as a disincentive for crop diversification. We,institutions. Furthermore, antiquated legal framework andtherefore, need a major review of agriculture policy tothe outdated tenancy laws have hampered flow of creditmeet the changing needs of both producers andand development of strong and efficient agriculturalconsumers.credit institutions.The difference now is that we need initiatives in aA review of performance of agricultural credit indisaggregated manner in many different segments ofIndia reveals that though the overall flow ofagriculture and agro industry: horticulture, aquaculture,institutional credit has increased over the years, therepisciculture, dairying, sericulture, poultry, vegetables, meat,are several gaps in the system like inadequate provisionfood processing, other agro-processing and the like.of credit to small and marginal farmers, paucity of1005November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004So what we need to do is to initiate a nationwide major Indian Banks’ Association (2002), Report of the Workingmission programme for different activities, regionally Group on Agricultural Credit.disaggregated, in a similar package mode. The packagesMohan, Rakesh (2002), A Decade After 1991: Newwill have to be different for each activity and location. thChallenges Facing the Indian Economy: 28 FrankTo begin with, expert teams will have to be formed forMoraes Lecture delivered at Chennai on July 26,each agro climate zone focussing on the relevant activitiesOrganised by United Writers Association and the Frankthere. These teams can then design the package that needsMoraes Foundation. Reserve Bank of India Bulletin,to be put together in each place. The basic ingredients ofNovember.each package can be similar: provision of technologyNABARD, Annual Report, Various issues, Mumbai.inputs, infrastructure, extension services, arrangements for———— (1999), Report of the Task Force on Supportivethe supply of inputs and the corresponding credit model.Policy and Regulatory Framework for Microfinance,A key difference in approach would have to be the muchOctober.greater involvement of region specific market participants,and of private sector suppliers in all these activities, and——— (2001), Report of the Expert Committee on Ruralcredit suppliers ranging from public sector banks,Credit (Chairman Dr. V.S. Vyas).cooperative banks, the new private sector banks andPant Joshi, Deepali (2003), “Indian Agriculturemicro-credit suppliers, specially self help groups.Perspectives”, Prajnan, Vol 32(1), pp7-36.ReferencesReddy, Y.V. (1998), “RBI and Banking Sector Reform”,All India Rural Credit Review Committee (Chairman:Speech delivered at Indian Institute of Management,B.Venkatappiah). Ahmedabad.Capoor, J (1999), “Structural Reforms in AgriculturalReserve Bank of India (1970), History.and Rural Development Banks”, Reserve Bank of India————, Annual Report, various issues, Mumbai.Bulletin, October, Vol.53 No.10, pp.1185-1190.————, Functions and Working, 1983, 2001.Desai, Bhupat M. and N.V. Namboodri (1993), Rural————, Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy,Financial Institutions: Promotions and Performance,various issues, Mumbai.Oxford, New Delhi.————, Monthly Bulletin, various issues, Mumbai.Food and Agriculture Organisation (2004), FAOSTAT(website), Rome.————, Report on Currency and Finance, variousGovernment of India: Economic Survey, various issues,issues, Mumbai.Ministry of Finance, New Delhi.————, Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in——— , NSSO, various rounds, New Delhi.India, various issues, Mumbai.——— (1991), Report of the Committee on the———— (1985), Report of the Committee to ReviewFinancial System (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham),the Working of the Monetary System in India (Chairman:Ministry of Finance, New Delhi.Prof. Sukhamoy Chakravarty).——— (1998), Report of the Committee on the Banking———— (1998), Report of the High Level CommitteeSector Reforms (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham),on Agricultural Credit through Commercial BanksMinistry of Finance, New Delhi.(Chairman: Shri R.V. Gupta).——— (2001), Indian Horticulture Database, New Delhi.———— (1999), Report of the Task Force on Revival/——— (2002), Report of the Working Group to SuggestRestructuring for Co-operating Banks (Chairperson: Shri.Amendments in the Regional Rural Banks Act,1976Jagadish Capoor), Mumbai.(Chairman: Shri M.V.S. Chalapathi Rao), Ministry of———— (2000), All-India Rural Debt and InvestmentFinance, New Delhi.Surveys, Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, February.Goletti Francesco (1999), Agricultural Diversification———— (2004), Report of the Advisory Committee onand Rural Industrialisation as a Strategy for RuralFlow of Credit to Agriculture and Related Activities fromIncome Growth and Poverty Reduction in Indochina andBanking System (Chairman: Prof. V. S.Vyas), June.Myanmar; IFPRI, June.1006November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004————, Report of the All India Rural Credit Survey Someshwara Rao, K. (1998), Economics of RuralCommittee, 1951-52 . Banking, Anmol Publications, New Delhi.Report of the Committee on Co-operation in India, 1915 Subramanian, K. and T.K. Velaudham (1997), BankingReform in India: Managing Change, Tata McGraw Hill,(Maclagan Committee).New Delhi.Rosegrant, W. Mark and B.R. Peter Hazell (2001),Thingalaya, N.K. (1999), The Banking Saga: History ofTransforming the Rural Asian Economy: The UnfinishedRevolution; IFPRI. South Kanara Banks, Corporation Bank, Mangalore.1007
