The Roadmap for Fixed Income and Derivatives Market*Friends,I am thankful to the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Associationof India (FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI), the organisers,for inviting me to deliver the keynote address today.  I have had the pleasure ofbeing closely associated with FIMMDA and PDAI since their inception. ReserveBank of India has been taking active interest in the development of fixed incomemarkets and the role of FIMMDA is becoming increasingly important in this regard. Ithas played a pivotal role in the design of documentation of repos, Commercial Paperand Certificate of Deposits, finalising the daily/annual valuation methodology for fixedincome securities. RBI consistently seeks its views on various G-Sec market relatedissues.  It is also involved in standardisation of market practices for fixed incomesecurities/money market instruments/fixed income derivatives. It has beenemphasising the importance of best practices in the OTC interest rate derivativesmarket and has circulated a Guidance Note for Best Practices to its members in thisregard. We, in the RBI, understand the need for continued collaborative relationshipwith FIMMDA and PDAI. It is in this spirit that I look forward to the deliberationstoday in the sixth Annual Conference being organised jointly by FIMMDA and PDAI.I am somewhat reluctant to elaborate on the subject of the day, namely, theroad map of fixed income and derivatives market, in my keynote address for severalreasons. My views in this regard were articulated in a seminar and then published ina BIS paper titled “Issues and challenges in the development of the debt market inIndia”.  The subject was subsequently updated, elaborated and improved uponcomprehensively by my friend and former colleague Dr.Rakesh Mohan, when headdressed this gathering last year in Dubai.  Dr. Mohan has already indicated the“Road Ahead”, which I fully endorse.  Moreover, one should wait for free and frankdiscussion on the subject in this conference, in which distinguished persons withseveral perspectives are participating.   Let me assure you that we in RBI do lookforward to the deliberations of this conference and  the suggestions made will be, tothe  extent  possible, examined by the various Technical Groups in the RBI that have* Inaugural address by Dr. Y V Reddy at the Fixed Income and Money market & DerivativesAssociation of Indian and Primary Dealers Association of India Delivered on March 11, 2005 atMumbai.2been set up recently.  It is our intention to place the reports of the Groups onMoney Market, Government Securities Market and Forex Market in the publicdomain soon.  Hence, the subject of the Sixth Annual Conference is both well-timedand significant for us.To justify my presence here, let me take this opportunity to mention some ofthe recent developments which should be kept in view in the deliberations of theconference.First, under the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility and BudgetManagement Act, 2003, the Reserve Bank will not be participating, in the normalcircumstances, in the primary market for the government securities from the start of2006-07.   The Technical Group that I referred to is currently working on theoperational, technological and institutional aspects of this.  Hence, the marketperspectives on the implications of this development can best be articulated in theconference today.Second, the Twelfth Finance Commission has made certainrecommendations which would mean that the State Governments would approachthe market instead of obtaining loans from the Government of India.   Severaloperational and other issues will have to be addressed in the management of theborrowing programme of the State Governments, in future.  We are convening athConference of the State Finance Secretaries on 8 April 2005, which will beaddressed by Dr. C. Rangarajan, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the PrimeMinister and the former Chairman, Twelfth Finance Commission, to discuss theseissues. The road map that this Conference would indicate in this regard will behelpful for our discussions and further policy formulation in regard to debt-papers ofthe State Governments.Third, the Central Government budget has proposed a Special PurposeVehicle (SPV) for raising resources for investment in infrastructure.  The issuance ofdebt-paper with relatively longer maturity, outside the Government of India’s normalborrowing programme, is yet another recent dimension added to the debt-marketdevelopments in the country.Finally, several legislative changes on the anvil provide new opportunities forfurther development of fixed income markets.  For example, the long awaitedGovernment Securities Bill is at an advanced stage of processing.  The FinanceMinister, in his budget speech, announced the intention of the Government to bring3about amendments to the RBI Act and the Banking Regulation Act and theamendments relating to statutory pre-emptions could have implications for fixedincome markets.  In this context, it is useful to recognise that the stake of the RBI in the fixedincome and derivatives market arises on account of several reasons.   First, RBI as amonetary authority is most concerned with the transmission of monetary policy.Second, it must be recognised that in the Indian conditions, we are neither a closedeconomy nor an open economy. In reality, we are an opening economy and a carefulmanagement of the process of opening is critical for growth and stability.  Third, forthe Reserve Bank of India, as the central bank, financial stability is one of theincreasingly important considerations and an important subset of the financialstability is determined by the stability in the external sector.  Fourth, governmentsecurities market, which is currently the dominant segment of the fixed incomemarkets, is also a legitimate concern for the Central Bank, since it provides thebenchmark interest rates.  The government securities market, in our setting, haspolicy signalling although the rates are largely market determined.  Fifth, the ReserveBank of India is a regulator of the banks and also of the primary dealers, whichtogether constitute large holders of Government papers.  Hence, there is asignificant linkage between RBI’s prudential regulations and the fixed incomemarkets.  Finally, in an economy like ours which is attempting structuraltransformation, RBI has to have a developmental role also, apart from being aregulator of money markets, Government securities markets and forex markets.  It isin this context that the Reserve Bank of India goes into close interactive mode withorganisations like FIMMDA and PDAI.RBI’s developmental role in the context of Self Regulatory Organisations(SROs), is perhaps worth exploring at some length.  A good beginning may be theReport of the Advisory Group on Securities Market Regulation, 2001 (Chairman: ShriDeepak Parekh) which made certain observations on self regulation by the SROsand the RBI. The relevant extract from Section 2.4 reads as follows:“Further, the slow evolution of the Association of Mutual Funds ofIndia (AMFI) as a SRO has meant continuation of substantial regulatoryburden on SEBI.  In this regard, the Group suggests that SEBI assist the4AMFI to develop into a full-fledged SRO.  Similarly, in money andgovernment securities markets, Fixed Income Money Market andDerivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and Primary DealersAssociation of India (PDAI) are operating as industry level associations,who are gradually taking on the role of SROs.  There is as yet noregulatory oversight of the RBI over these emerging SROs.  However, tofacilitate these associations to emerge as full-fledged SROs, the RBI isengaging them in a consultative process, which needs to be furtherintensified.  On their part, to promote integrity of the markets, FIMMDAand PDAI  need to establish a comprehensive code of conduct and bestpractices in securities transactions and also have a mechanism toenforce such codes.  The RBI can play a supportive role here”.There has been a recent review (December 2004) of the recommendations ofthe Advisory Groups constituted by the Standing Committee on InternationalFinancial Standards and Codes published in January 2005 RBI Bulletin.  An extractfrom this “Report on the Progress and Agenda Ahead” is useful, though, as thedisclaimer says, it is an assessment by the professional staff of the RBI and notnecessarily the view of the Reserve Bank:“The proposal to accord legal status as an SRO to FIMMDA has beenexamined in detail by RBI and was not found feasible at present.However, FIMMDA has established a code of conduct and undertakenrelated responsibilities appropriate to an industrial body.  According self-regulatory status to PDAI is a non-issue since all PDAI members arealso members of FIMMDA”.There are several concepts which are addressed in the Reports cited, inparticular, `industry body’; `Self Regulatory Organisation’ and `legal status as SRO’.There is considerable merit in debating these concepts and their relevance toFIMMDA, keeping in view the way forward that is being contemplated in theconference today.Self-regulation has a long history of working effectively.   Some of the earliestsigns of self-regulation were evident in the utterance of the Hippocratic oath by the5medical professionals at the time of their graduation.  Almost a thousand years ago,Maghribi traders had probably one of the first self-regulatory schemes based onmarket incentives for regulating their trade.  The Maghribi were Jewish traders wholived in the Abbasasid caliphate (centered in Baghdad) until the first half of the tenthcentury, when they emigrated to North Africa.  They operated through businessassociates to handle some of their business dealings abroad.  Merchants couldnever be sure that agents actually handed over the entire proceeds of business doneabroad on their behalf.  Courts were generally unable to verify agents’ claims andactions or track down an agent who absconded with the merchant’s money.  TheMaghribi traders solved the problem by organizing themselves into a coalition thatserved as a grapevine for information on honest and dishonest agents.  Any agentswho treated a member unfairly could never hope to do business again with othermembers.  In Europe, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, as more and more ruralfolk moved to towns and cities, a new class of merchants emerged to meet thedemands of the growing urban population.  It was during this period that the basicconcepts and institutions of modern Western mercantile law (lex mercatoria) wereformed.The self-regulation has evolved significantly since then and linkages withregulatory authorities, often on a sound legal basis, were established mainly in thefinancial sector. Self-regulation generally imposes lower cost than official regulationwhenever a shift is feasible. SROs possess the flexibility to adapt to regulatoryrequirements of rapidly changing business environment. They provide an intimateknowledge of the markets and products. Self-regulation, typically involving a uniquecombination of private interests with government or regulatory oversight over them,is an effective and efficient form of regulation for the complex, dynamic and ever-changing financial services industry.  The role of self-regulation and, indeed, its veryexistence, differs from country to country, across market sectors and across thedeveloped and emerging markets.  In its most complete form, self-regulationencompasses the authority to create, amend, implement and enforce rules ofconduct with respect to the entities subject to the SRO’s jurisdiction, and to resolvedisputes through arbitration or other means.6The advantages of self-regulation are very clear, especially in terms ofminimising the cost of regulation as well as cost of compliance of regulation in thefinancial sector, while improving the quality of regulation. However, there are anumber of issues particularly in the financial sector which are often cited.  Forinstance, there is a well-known observation about the “regulatory capture”, that is,the regulated entities, in the organised form, have a tendency to capture theregulator to protect their own interests. It is also argued that the SROs protect theinterests of the members if they are in conflict with interests of the system.  In thisregard, I find that the model for effective regulation, brought out in the Report of theSRO Consultative Committee of the International Organization of SecuritiesCommissions in May 2000, is useful.  Perhaps these issues will also be addressed inthis Conference as part of the way forward.Let me again thank the organisers for giving me this opportunity and wish theConference all success.
