A  BIT  of  TomorrowThe topic for today’s conclave is “Technology Solutions for BusinessTransformation” and I have chosen to speak on “A BIT (Banking and InformationTechnology) of Tomorrow”. I do not consider myself as being even computer savvy. Butone does not have to be an IT professional to think of how IT can bring about businesstransformation. For this, all that the banker needs is to have vision, conviction and thecourage to change. It is for the IT professional to make it possible. The entire world islooking at India for its IT services. Let us take a harder futuristic look.2. While Indian industry and agriculture contribute almost equally to GDP, industrygets four times the gross loans and advances from banking system than whatagriculture gets.Is there no potential for a transformation here and can IT not provide the solution?India has around 6 lakh villages. Bank penetration is around 18 villages per branch.Imagine if a bank were to set up an Information Kiosk to cater to a cluster of say 2 to 3villages, what would be the outcome?3. There is no limit to the extent of usage of such a kiosk.  The farmer can know, atthe click of the mouse his bank balance, entries of debit and credit in  his  account,outstanding  loan amount, interest rate, interest charged to the account, commodity____________________Keynote address by Smt. K.J.Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at theBFSI Conclave 2005 on Technology Solutions for Business Transformation at Mumbaion June 7, 2005 Acknowledgements for inputs are due to S/Shri A.K. Hirve, S. GaneshKumar and A. Madhavan.price movements, weather, expected yield and income, direct credit of receivables intohis account, direct payment for purchases without involving cash and lot of other valueadded services, all in his native language.  Such kiosks could, through arrangements,even double up as vending machines. The possibilities are immense. The constraintsonly are adequate and quality power supply. But we have to be optimistic.4. And if you think that farmers are uneducated and this is grandiose thinking let me1quote from C.K.Prahalad :“The most telling comment was from a farmer captured on video by the researchers:“I did not know how to hold a mouse”Four months later:“Even if they take away the computer, we will buy one.We need net connectivity”.That summarises it all.”5. Also, ITC’s e-Choupal would not have been such a huge success and almostreplaced the local mandi if this were not true !!What would the bank gain from this? i) Only customers i.e. either as depositors or as borrowers would get theservice and there is no gainsaying the fact that banks would benefit from both.ii) It would free the farmer from the shackles of the ubiquitous moneylenderand the avaricious middle man and most importantly banks would be providing serviceto the farmer and the common man, through the use of IT.A win-win solution for both !__________________1The Fortune at the Bottom of the Pyramid (Wharton School Publishing)6. If the Railways can change the entire environment of booking of tickets, checkingof reservations and so on and provide wholesome service to the common man, whycan’t our banks harness technology to do so?7. The future holds exciting promises for those institutions which can quicklyrecognise the opportunities, harness their strength, seize the initiative and flow acrosshitherto uncharted areas of activity. Banks and FIs have proven themselves uptothis task. We are moving from the use of MICR technology to image based chequeprocessing and have successfully gone forward from ECS & EFT to RTGS. TheINFINET system set up by the RBI for use by banks has demonstrated that PKI basedmessaging system surpasses international standards and also meets the legalrequirements pertaining to electronic data transmission in a safe and secure manner.Banks have leveraged technology to provide most sophisticated services to customerswithout their having to visit the bank. No doubt, every change brings it’s ownconcomitant irritants. This is not the forum to deal with this except to say that theseneed to be addressed on a priority basis.8. Consolidation of knowledge leveraging technology is the real key to success andwould put a bank one step ahead of the competitor. The new generation software whichhas excellent data warehousing and data mining techniques, bordering on neuralnetwork, can link all data relating to a customer right from the savings to fixed deposithabits, loans, credit/debit card usage, internet usage etc., to not only have a customer’sfinancial profile but also draw behavioural profile. This can be classified into groupprofiles that would enable a bank to offer products to the target groups giving the look ofa customized product offered to each customer. The same can be replicated to thecorporate segment. Using technology to the hilt is the mantra and I believe datawarehousing and data mining are more in the nature of knowledge management ratherthan connecting disparate data elements.  This is being done successfully by banksoverseas. Why cannot our banks do so in India? As a typical central banker, I wouldadd just one word of caution here. While transferring data for data warehousing banksmay remember that compliance to Basel II requires voluminous past data and thereforebanks would need to ensure that integrity of data does not get affected through datatransfer operations like data cleansing.9.   The high rate of technology obsolescence along with requirement for constantupgradation and adoption of newer technology has necessitated higher capital andrevenue expenditure.  Therefore, there is tremendous pressure to achieve higher rate ofreturns on investments within lesser time periods than before.  Already banks are in themode of co-operation and co-existence as seen from the sharing of ATMs. Is it,therefore, not possible that in the years to come when complex modeling techniqueswould have to be used by banks, banks may share with other banks the IT systemwhereby they could thread their data and churn the output and yet maintain individualityand confidentiality? This is a thought for bankers and IT professionals to pursue. This isall the more necessary if you consider the dimming of business territories as anotherstark reality of the future. More industries and organisations would converge theirservices resulting in a hybrid approach towards service delivery offerings. Banking andinstitutions is a visible activity of this kind.10. Service providers have, therefore, become an extended arm of financialorganisations. Outsourcing services has its own challenges. Drafting such legalcontracts, giving details of service level, etc., requires expertise not readily availablewith banks and implementing or enforcing them is difficult. Thus the relationship is legaland short term in law but that of dependence and long term in reality. The Joint Forumof BCBS has published a paper on Outsourcing in Financial Services which deals withthe risks, issues and principles in outsourcing. It also captures the regulatorydevelopments in outsourcing and the cross-country measures. The Reserve Bank hasconstituted an internal group on outsourcing and based on its recommendations,regulatory guidelines would be issued.11. Security is the top most concern of a banker. IT security is all the more important.The risk arises out of security inadequacies or indifferent attitudes towards securityissues. With regard to the former, the Reserve Bank has issued guidelines on variousissues such as internet banking, IS Audit, Business Continuity Plan etc.12. As regards the latter i.e. the attitude towards security issues, this is an HRchallenge and not one which can be addressed so easily but is one which is the corechallenge.  The work force of tomorrow would be a more enlightened lot, functioning ina more educated environment. Continuous skill enhancement and regular training, apartfrom good compensation, will lead to better employee retention and motivation in ahighly challenging and changing environment. I have said this before and I repeat thattraditional HR systems in banks would need to undergo rapid changes in the manner ofrecruitment, motivation, performance appraisal and compensation package.  Thesooner this is done the better it would be.13. India is recognised as the ultimate destination for IT talents and firms from theworld over are seeking IT solutions from India.  Our banking system too has maturedand proved its resilience and capabilities. A combination of these two professionals i.e.banks and IT should be able to lift not just the banking industry but the entire economy,especially the rural sector onto a higher trajectory of growth.14. Permit me to end my address with a quote from the book “The World is Flat” byThomas L. Friedman which makes one proud to be Indian.  I quote, “If I have a granddaughter one day and I tell her that I am going to India she will say grand pa is thatwhere software comes from”. Perhaps, a decade ahead it would be a little kid inSwitzerland pointing to the signboard of an Indian bank and saying “Look dad – ourbank” !Thank you.
