ISSUES IN BANK REGULATION AND SUPERVISION*FICCI has been in the forefront of creating a platform for healthy debate and discussion leadingto responsible actions. I would like to thank FICCI for inviting me to speak at this Forum especially asthere are several high level functionaries who have travelled great distances to be with us on thisoccasion. It is a wonderful opportunity and I would certainly use it to explore a few issues at thefrontiers of regulation and supervision. Some of these are unsettled issues and the raising of issues isessentially with a view to encouraging debate as it is only through debate and dissent that we canaspire to achieve meaningful progress. I would, therefore, stress that the raising of unsettled issues atthe frontiers should not be perceived as a statement of an official stance of the Reserve Bank of India.While much of the issues are raised from an Indian perspective, I would also like to glean somethoughts from experience abroad.2 In recent years the blurring of the distinction between financial intermediaries under thecombined effect of domestic and cross-border integration, innovations in instruments and processes,advances in technology and the massive volumes of capital intermediated by the financial system hasnecessitated a pro-active strengthening of the regulatory and supervisory framework.3 The financial landscape is increasingly witnessing entry of some of the bigger banks into otherfinancial segments like merchant banking, insurance, etc., which has made them financialconglomerates. Emergence of several new players with diversified presence across major segmentsand possibility of some of the non-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring large enoughproportions to have systemic impact make it imperative for supervision to be spread across varioussegments of the financial sector. Banks have grown organically beyond the national frontiers andspread across the globe. With liberalisation in trade in services, banks are also able to render bankingservices across territories even without the need for physical presence in those territories. Theseaspects add other dimensions to the challenges of regulation and supervision of the banking system.Recent Measures by RBI4 I would now turn to some of the issues on which the RBI has taken action in the recent period.As part of a move towards greater deregulation, banks fulfilling certain minimum criteria regardingCRAR and net NPAs have been given the discretion to pay dividend without the prior approval of theRBI.  In view of the ongoing shift towards financing borrowers based on estimated cash flows ratherthan on collateral and in recognition of the availability of financial assistance through creditsubstitutes, viz., commercial paper, bonds and debentures, the restriction on unsecured exposureswas withdrawn and banks’ boards are allowed to formulate their own policies on unsecuredexposures.  Banks are not required to obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank for engaging ininsurance agency business or referral arrangement without any risk participation, subject to theircomplying with the prescribed conditions. Banks intending to set up insurance joint ventures withequity contribution on a risk participation basis or making investments in insurance companies forproviding infrastructure and services support, however, still require prior approval of the RBI.5 Various issues which received regulatory attention during the recent period include ownershipand governance in banks, further progress towards international best practices in prudential normswith country-specific adaptation, greater deregulation and rationalisation of banking policies,compliance with Know Your Customer (KYC) norms, strengthening the financial system for globalintegration in the light of the ongoing liberalisation of the capital account, greater inter-regulatory co-ordination and the drive for improving the quality of public services rendered by banks. In theevolution and implementation of policy, a consultative approach continues to be followed throughformal institutional structures such as the Board for Financial Supervision, the newly-formed StandingCommittee on Financial Regulation, the Technical Committee on Money and Government SecuritiesMarkets and also through specific working groups and committees as well as formal and informalconsultations with the regulated entities, external experts and professionals.Transparency and Disclosure6 Transparency has been the watchword in our endeavour to promote best practices. Moreover,transparency is crucial to a well functioning financial system. The RBI recognises the need to alignstandards adopted by the Indian banking system with global standards. The Reserve Bank hasissued detailed guidelines relating to several Accounting Standards.  Banks are required to ensurethat there are no qualifications by the auditors in their financial statements for non-compliance withany of the accounting standards. We recognise that the banking sector will need to adjust to moreexacting valuation rules. Again, rules on disclosure will need to be exacting, including disclosure onpenalties or adverse action by the supervisory authority. The financial sector has to recognise thatexacting standards of disclosure are necessary to strengthen the financial sector and there is a world-wide move to such disclosures.7 In recognition of the importance of dissemination of credit information, the RBI requiresbanks/DFIs to obtain the consent of all their borrowers - not only defaulters - for dissemination ofcredit information to enable Credit Information Bureau of India Ltd., to compile and disseminatecomprehensive credit information.Preserving the Integrity of the Banking System8 Prevention of frauds and implementation of anti money laundering (AML) measures are twoimportant aspects of the efforts being made to prevent criminal misuse of the financial system whichthreaten the stability of financial transactions worldwide.Supervisory Initiatives9 Keeping in view the emerging scenario under the Basel II accord and the need to usesupervisory resources more productively, a beginning towards risk-based supervision (RBS) of bankshas been made. On the basis of experience gained this will be extended to the entire banking systemand will become an essential aspect of Pillar 2 compliance.Risk Management Systems10 I would now like to flag a few issues – some of which are purely exploratory and are raised fordebate rather than as a statement of the official stance. As you are all aware, we are positioned at acrucial juncture because the current phase will be the time when risk management skills of financialentities will be put to test.11 The liquidity overhang in the system coupled with the past downward movement of interestrates seems to have spurred a sense of complacency oblivious of the downside risks of an adverseinterest rate movement. It is also apprehended that this attitude has led some banks to dilute theirapproach to credit risk. The building of the risk elements into the pricing of the credit facilities isreportedly taking a backseat in the pursuit of asset expansion.   This may leave banks in a situationwhere some of the players are not only less prepared to face the reversal of interest rate movement,but are also left with a badly priced portfolio in relation to the credit quality.   I would like this aspect tobe appreciated not so much as a note of alarm but as a voice of prudence. Credit growth should becarefully calibrated with risk measurement and should not be merely seen as deployment of funds atmarginal costs in the background of sluggish growth. Banks should look ahead at the expansion ofcredit portfolio in a healthy way, particularly in the background of higher industrial growth, new plans ofcorporate expansion and higher levels of infrastructure financing. Coupled with this are the regulatoryrequirements of management of market risks, which are becoming increasingly relevant. As we are allwell aware, the adverse effects of risk exposures do not impact independently but tend to snowballinto an avalanche.12 These are perhaps the times when market players begin looking for some concessions in theprudential norms, regulatory forbearance and dilution of accounting principles. So what would onemake of such a situation?• That the most ill prepared players make the loudest noises or• The weakest ones make the first noise?13 What is the lesson to be learnt from this?   Is it not time for banks to adopt integrated riskmanagement systems whereby they effectively address all relevant risks in an ongoing andcomprehensive manner? Should banks not think in terms of having a Chief Risk Officer who overseesall risks - credit, liquidity, operational and market risks?14 Moreover, while banks may have adopted risk management systems for their various portfolios,very few, if any, have developed risk models suited to their operations. It occurs to me that India is thecradle of IT professionals who are doing wonders and are providing efficient solutions to their clientsacross the world. It is also a matter of pride that some Indians are at the helm of the affairs at some ofthe large global banks. In these circumstances, it is surprising that the banks in India are laggingbehind in tapping the IT potential of the country and putting them to productive use for developing /applying risk models. As compared with the potential available in this country, the extent of applicationof the talents in banks is relatively low, especially when the benefits to be derived from them aretremendous.15 A concurrent question that emerges is whether banks should think in terms of disclosing to theinvestors at large their risk management policies indicating also their risk containment practices andstrategy pursued by the bank, on the same lines of statements made by Chairmen of large corporates.At present, such disclosures cannot be made mandatory considering the level of maturity of thefinancial sector and the levels of assimilation of information by the stake holders and the public.16 Banks confident of pursuing a well defined strategy taking into account their clear strengthsshould articulate their philosophy of running their banks in their annual reports. Encouraging banks todo so should certainly help in improving the perception of the concerned banks in the eyes of thepublic and the market. It should, however, be a well thought out step, considering that the bank’smajor asset is the trust reposed by the public at large and nothing should be done to undermine thatlevel of confidence.17 We have recently issued guidelines to banks for maintenance of capital charge for market risks.In addition, banks will also be required to draw up their strategies for meeting the capital requirementarising out of implementation of Basel 2. Banks have been until now tapping the traditionalinstruments eligible for capital status, namely equity shares and subordinated debt instruments. Thepresent legal framework does not allow all banks to raise capital through issue of preference shares.There are also certain restrictions on the maximum tenure of preference shares. This not only givesrise to an uneven playing field but also raises issues pertaining to the eligibility of redeemablepreference shares for capital status, especially with regard to inclusion under Tier I or Tier II.  In viewof the above uncertainties this has been a largely untapped source of capital in India. With a view toenabling banks to tap this source the Reserve Bank is examining the amendment of the existinglegislation. Through proper structuring, preference capital may be made attractive to meet the needsof a section of investors. We need to explore carefully this option as also the raising of capital throughother hybrid instruments defined under the Basel guidelines, so as to address the requirements ofcapital by the banking sector in India.18 This brings me to consolidation in the banking sector. As you are aware, the First NarasimhamCommittee had recommended consolidation in the Indian banking sector whereby we would have afew internationally active banks, a few national banks and the others would remain regional banks. Itwas also clarified that the mergers should be based on synergies and locational and business specificcomplementarities of the concerned institutions and must obviously make sound commercial sense.Mergers of public sector banks should emanate from the managements of banks with the Governmentas the common shareholder playing a supportive role. In this background, the implementation of Basel2 could trigger a round of consolidation in the banking sector.19 It is difficult to foresee the precise pattern of consolidation which is likely to be triggered with theimplementation of Basel 2 in India.   As we have seen in the past, in any merger integrating themanpower and culture of the taken over bank with the manpower and culture of the host bank provesto be a great challenge. It is only when integration in these aspects is achieved successfully that themerged entities would be able to capitalise on the synergies. Hence, while the consolidation moveswould be triggered by market forces, it will be necessary to ensure that mergers are successful in allrespects, including manpower and cultural aspects, which are unique in the Indian context.20 Smaller localised banks might nonetheless still have a relevant role even on a standalonebasis if they were to redefine their business strategy in favour of conservative growth which can besupported by internal accruals and by having an effective control on their risk exposures. This wouldperhaps be possible when they carve out a niche for themselves.Self-regulation21 The international experience with reference to banking sector suggests that statutoryregulation by the banking regulator cannot be substituted by self-regulation. It could at bestsupplement the banking regulation.  Having recognised that self-regulation has its relevance evenwhen banking regulator is present we would encourage self-regulation. If self-regulation has toestablish itself firmly the first and foremost prerequisite would be establishment of sound principles ofcorporate governance in the banking system as a whole. The supplementing factor, which is alsoenshrined in Pillar 3 of Basel 2, namely, transparency and disclosure should also take strong roots inthe system. Transparency and disclosure under Pillar 3 is expected to facilitate active role for marketdiscipline. A thought which occurs to me is whether Indian markets are equipped to discipline theparticipants. One opinion is that the markets in India lack adequate depth and width which wouldqualify them as efficient markets.22 The above reaffirms the need for intensifying supervisory/ regulatory efforts, at least in the shortterm, before self-regulation and market discipline stabilise in the country.  In the interregnum it wouldbe useful for the banks to take proactive measures on both, corporate governance and transparency /disclosure aspects.23 Following the Ganguly Report, issues of governance in the banking system have come to thefore. Increasingly exacting standards of Board accountability will need to be introduced and issuesrelating to penal action if directors fail to properly discharge their duties need to be addressed. I raisethis issue not to create panic among directors or to generate media headlines but to pose the issue ofwider and effective powers for bank boards commensurate with increased accountability.Ownership Issues in Banks24 In the recent period there has been considerable debate on the question of ownership of thebanking system and the issue of restriction on ownership of a bank by a single individual, institution orgroup. In view of the importance of corporate governance in banks, it was considered necessary tolay down a comprehensive framework of policy in a transparent manner.  Accordingly, we haverecently placed in public domain a draft paper on ‘A comprehensive policy framework for ownershipand governance in private sector banks’. The RBI has been openly encouraging a debate on thisissue and the draft would be reviewed on the basis of the feedback received from various quarters. Inthis context, I would only make two brief comments. First, the banking system is central to thecountry’s economy irrespective of whether banks are locally or foreign owned. Some countries likeAustralia feel that banks are so systemically important that foreign controlled banks are precluded.Our stance in India is on the middle ground where foreign ownership of banks has been permitted oncertain conditions. Secondly, we must not forget that the cost of bank failures is not limited to rescuingbanks or bailing out depositors but there can be large real economy costs. Thus, a well reasonedapproach of regulating ownership of banks is a necessary concomitant of a stable financial system.Anti-tying measures25 I would now refer to an issue which is at the frontiers of regulation.26 Banks and financial institutions are increasingly offering a broad measure of financial servicesand thereby endeavoring to build customer loyalty. In some countries there are anti-tying restrictionsto prevent banks from forcing customers to take unwanted products to obtain needed services. Theseissues are interlinked to corporate ethics, a robust internal control culture and transparent disclosures.I would submit for debate that sooner or later we in India will need to consider the feasibility of anti-tying regulations in the financial sector. I would invite attention to an interesting presentation by Ms.Susan Schmidt Bies. (BIS Review No.42).27 Further, with increasing consumer spending the data bases of the banks’ customers are alsobeing shared with various product sellers and the cross-selling is acquiring a new dimension ofinvasion of the privacy of the customer. This is an area where banks need to exercise self-regulation.Concluding Observation28 I would end here by saying that the rationale for financial regulation lies in the economic costsimposed on the society by financial market failure. The adverse consequences include threat tosystemic stability, the potential for gridlocks due to adverse selection and moral hazard problems aswell as undermining the substantial benefits which would otherwise accrue from correction of marketimperfections, reduced transaction costs and providing people with a financial system they can trust.In a rapidly changing economic environment the financial system necessarily has to undergo change,however painful it may be.* Speech delivered by Smt. K J Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a seminar on Global Banking:Paradigm Shift organised by the Federation of Indian Chamber of commerce and Industries on September 16, 2004, atBangalore.*****
