 1Competitive Monetary Easing: Is it yesterday once more?Good morning. As the world seems to be struggling back to its feet after the great financialcrisis, I want to draw attention to an area we need to be concerned about: the conduct ofmonetary policy in this integrated world. A good way to describe the current environment isone of extreme monetary easing through unconventional policies. In a world where debtoverhangs and the need for structural change constrain domestic demand, a sizeable portionof the effects of such policies spillover across borders, sometimes through a weaker exchangerate. More worryingly, it prompts a reaction. Such competitive easing occurs bothsimultaneously and sequentially, as I will argue, and both advanced economies and emergingeconomies engage in it. Aggregate world demand may be weaker and more distorted than itshould be, and financial risks higher. To ensure stable and sustainable growth, theinternational rules of the game need to be revisited. Both advanced economies and emergingeconomies need to adapt, else I fear we are about to embark on the next leg of a wearisomecycle.Central bankers are usually reluctant to air their concerns in public. But because the neededchange has political elements to it, I take my cue from speeches by two central bankers whomI respect greatly, Ben Bernanke in his 2005 “Global Savings Glut” speech, and JaimeCaruana in his 2012 speech at Jackson Hole, both of whom have raised similar concerns tomine, although from different perspectives.Before starting, I should disclose my interests in this era of transparency. For the last fewmonths India has experienced large inflows of capital, not outflows, and is seen by the2markets as an emerging economy that has made some of the necessary policy adjustments.We are well buffered with substantial reserves, though no country can be de-coupled from theinternational system.  My remarks are motivated by the desire for a more stable internationalsystem, a system that works equally for rich and poor, large and small, and not the specificsof our situation.Unconventional PolicyI want to focus on unconventional monetary policies (UMP), by which I mean both policiesthat hold interest rates at near zero for long, as well as balance sheet policies such asquantitative easing or exchange intervention, that involve altering central bank balance sheets3in order to affect certain market prices. The key point that I will emphasize throughout thistalk is that quantitative easing and sustained exchange intervention are in an economicequivalence class, though the channels they work through may be somewhat different. Ourattitudes towards them should be conditioned by the size of their spillover effects rather thanby any innate legitimacy of either form of intervention.Let me also add there is a role for unconventional policies – when markets are broken orgrossly dysfunctional, central bankers do have to think innovatively. Fortunately for theworld, much of what they did immediately after the fall of Lehman was exactly right, thoughthey were making it up as they went in the face of extreme uncertainty. They eased access toliquidity through innovative programs such as TALF, TAF, TARP, SMP, and LTRO. Bylending long term without asking too many questions of the collateral they received, by1Remarks by Dr. Raghuram G. Rajan at the Brookings Institution, April 10, 2014.These are my personal views. I acknowledge very useful comments from Joshua Felman, Prachi Mishra,Jonathan Ostry, Michael Patra, Eswar Prasad, and Tharman Shanmugharatnam.2 See Mishra et al. (2014).3See Borio and Disyatat (2009) for an excellent early comprehensive taxonomy and assessment of balance sheetpolicies.1buying assets beyond usual limits, and by focusing on repairing markets, they restoredliquidity to a world financial system that would otherwise have been insolvent based on4prevailing market asset prices. In this matter, central bankers are deservedly heroes.The key question is what happens when these policies are prolonged long beyond repairingmarkets – and there the benefits are much less clear. Let me list 4 concerns:1) Is unconventional monetary policy the right tool once the immediate crisis is over?Does it distort behavior and activity so as to stand in the way of recovery? Isaccommodative monetary policy the way to fix a crisis that was partly caused byexcessively lax policy?2) Do such policies buy time or does the belief that the central bank is takingresponsibility prevent other, more appropriate, policies from being implemented? Putdifferently, when central bankers say, however reluctantly, that they are the onlygame in town, do they become the only game in town?3) Will exit from unconventional policies be easy?4) What are the spillovers from such policies to other countries?Since I have dwelt at length on the first two concerns in an earlier speech, let me focus on the5last two.ExitThe macroeconomic argument for prolonged unconventional policy in industrial countries isthat it has low costs, provided inflation stays quiescent. Hence it is worth pursuing, even ifthe benefits are uncertain. A number of economists have, however, raised concerns about6financial sector risks that may build with prolonged use of unconventional policy. Assetprices may not just revert to earlier levels on exit, but they may overshoot on the downside,and exit can cause significant collateral damage.One reason is that leverage may increase both in the financial sector and amongst borrowers7as policy stays accommodative. One channel seems to be that a boost to asset liquidity leadslenders to believe that asset sales will backstop loan recovery, leading them to increase loanto value ratios. When liquidity tightens, though, too many lenders rely on asset sales, causingasset prices and loan recovery to plummet. Because lenders do not account for the effects oftheir lending on the “fire sale” price, and subsequently on lending by others, they may have8an excessive incentive to build leverage. These effects are exacerbated if, over time, lendersbecome reliant on asset sales for recovery, rather than on upfront project evaluation and duediligence. Another possible channel is that banks themselves become more levered, orequivalently, acquire more illiquid balance sheets, if the central bank signals it will intervene9in a sustained way when times are tough because unemployment is high.4I was not a member of the fraternity at that time, so I do not feel a conflict in doling out praise!5“A step in the dark: unconventional monetary policy after the crisis”, Raghuram Rajan,Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture delivered at the BIS on 23 June 2013.6See Borio (2014), Borio and Disyatat (2009), Stein (2013), though see Chodorow-Reich (2014) for analternative viewpoint. One question about Chodorow-Reich’s assessment that quantitative easing does not, byand large, prompt risk taking is that he uses market prices to estimate effects, even though these pricesthemselves could be distorted by risk taking.7For evidence, see for example Becker and Ivashina (2013), Bruno and Shin (2014 a,b), Ioannidou, Ongena andPeydró (2009), Maddaloni and Peydró (2010).8 Stein, Jeremy. 2012. Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 127,no. 1: 57-95.9 See Diamond and Rajan (2012), Farhi and Tirole (2012) and Acharya, Pagano and Volpin (2013). Theproblem is exacerbated if unemployment is driven by factors that move to a different cycle and pace than thefinancial cycle.2Leverage need not be the sole reason why exit may be volatile after prolongedunconventional policy. Investment managers may fear underperforming relative to others.This means they will hold a risky asset only if it promises a risk premium (over safe assets)10that makes them confident they will not underperform holding it. A lower path of expectedreturns on the safe asset makes it easier for the risky asset to meet the required risk premium,and indeed draws more investment managers to buy it – the more credible the forwardguidance on “low for long”, the more the risk taking. However, as investment managerscrowd into the risky asset, the risky asset is more finely priced so that the likelihood ofpossible fire sales increases if the interest rate environment turns. Every manager dumps therisky asset at that point in order to avoid being the last one holding it.Leverage and investor crowding may therefore exacerbate the consequences of exit. Whenmonetary policy is ultra-accommodative, prudential regulation, either of the macro or microkind, is probably not a sufficient defence. In part, this is because, as Fed Governor Stein sosuccinctly put it, monetary policy “gets into every crack”, including the unregulated part of11the financial system. In part, ultra accommodative monetary policy creates enormouslypowerful incentive distortions whose consequences are typically understood only after thefact. The consequences of exit, however, are not just felt domestically, they could beexperienced internationally.SpilloversPerhaps most vulnerable to the increased risk-taking in this integrated world are countriesacross the border. When monetary policy in large countries is extremely andunconventionally accommodative, capital flows into recipient countries tend to increase localleverage; this is not just due to the direct effect of cross-border banking flows but also theindirect effect, as the appreciating exchange rate and rising asset prices, especially of real12estate, make it seem that borrowers have more equity than they really have.Exchange rate flexibility in recipient countries in these circumstances sometimes exacerbatesbooms rather than equilibrates. Indeed, in the recent episode of emerging market volatilityafter the Fed started discussing taper in May 2013, countries that allowed the real exchangerate to appreciate the most during the prior period of quantitative easing suffered the greatest13adverse impact to financial conditions. Countries that undertake textbook policies offinancial sector liberalization are not immune to the inflows – indeed, their deeper marketsmay draw more flows in, and these liquid markets may be where selling takes place when14conditions in advanced economies turn.Macro-prudential measures have little traction against the deluge of inflows – Spain had ahousing boom despite its countercyclical provisioning. Recipient countries should adjust, ofcourse, but credit and flows mask the magnitude and timing of needed adjustment. Forinstance, higher collections from property taxes on new houses, sales taxes on new sales,capital gains taxes on financial asset sales, and income taxes on a more prosperous financialsector may suggest a country’s fiscal house is in order, even while low risk premia onsovereign debt add to the sense of calm. At the same time, an appreciating nominal exchangerate may also keep down inflation.10 See Feroli , Kashyap, Schoenholtz, and Shin (2014) for details.11See Stein (2013).12 See Bruno and Shin (2014 a, b), Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1996), Obstfeld (2012), Rey (2013), andSchularick and Taylor (2012) for example.13 See Eichengreen and Gupta (2013) and Mishra, Moriyama, N’Diaye, and Nguyen (2014).14See Prasad (2014, p 198) and Eichengreen and Gupta (2013).3The difficulty of distinguishing the cyclical from the structural is exacerbated in someemerging markets where policy commitment is weaker, and the willingness to succumb to thesiren calls of populist policy greater. But it would be a mistake to think that pro-cyclicalpolicy in the face of capital inflows is primarily a disease of the poor; Even rich recipientcountries with strong institutions, such as Ireland and Spain, have not been immune tocapital-flow-induced fragility.Ideally, recipient countries would wish for stable capital inflows, and not flows pushed in byunconventional policy. Once unconventional policies are in place, however, they dorecognize the problems stemming from prolonged easy money, and thus the need for sourcecountries to exit. But when source countries move to exit unconventional policies, somerecipient countries are leveraged, imbalanced, and vulnerable to capital outflows. Given thatinvestment managers anticipate the consequences of the future policy path, even a measured15pace of exit may cause severe market turbulence and collateral damage. Indeed, the moretransparent and well-communicated the exit is, the more certain the foreign investmentmanagers may be of changed conditions, and the more rapid their exit from risky positions.Recipient countries are not being irrational when they protest both the initiation ofunconventional policy as well as an exit whose pace is driven solely by conditions in thesource country. Having become more vulnerable because of leverage and crowding, recipientcountries may call for an exit whose pace and timing is responsive, at least in part, toconditions they face.The Case for International Monetary Policy CoordinationHence, my call is for more coordination in monetary policy because I think it would be animmense improvement over the current international non-system. International monetarypolicy coordination, of course, is unpopular among central bankers, and I therefore have tosay why I reiterate the call and what I mean by it.I do not mean that central bankers sit around a table and make policy collectively, nor do Imean that they call each other regularly and coordinate actions. In its strong form, I proposethat large country central banks, both in advanced countries and emerging markets,internalize more of the spillovers from their policies in their mandate, and are forced by newconventions on the “rules of the game” to avoid unconventional policies with large adverse16spillovers and questionable domestic benefits. Given the difficulties of operationalizing thestrong form, I suggest that, at the very least, central banks reinterpret their domestic mandateto take into account other country reactions over time (and not just the immediate feedbackeffects), and thus become more sensitive to spillovers. This weak “coordination” could besupplemented with a re-examination of global safety nets.The Gains from CoordinationEconomists generally converged on the view that the gains to policy coordination were smallprovided each country optimized its own policies keeping in mind the policies of others. The“Nash equilibrium” was not that far from the global optimum, hence the “own house in17order” doctrine was dominant in the international monetary field. National macroeconomicstability was seen as sufficient for international macroeconomic stability. The domestic andinternational aspects were essentially regarded as two sides of the same coin.15 See Feroli et al. (2014).16 Though see Caruana (2012),  Eichengreen et al. (2011), Jeanne (2014), and Taylor (2013) for proposals bycurrent and former policy makers and monetary economists.17 See Eichengreen et al. (2011). For an articulation of the doctrine, see Rose (2007) or Taylor (2013).4Two factors have led to a rethinking of the doctrine. First, domestic constraints includingpolitical imperatives of bringing unemployment down and the economic constraint of thezero lower bound may lead monetary policy to be set at levels different from theunconstrained domestic optimal. Dysfunctional domestic politics could also contribute inmoving monetary policy further from the unconstrained optimal. In other words, the centralbank, responding to a variety of political pressures and weaknesses, may stray away fromeven the constrained optimal – towards third best policies rather than second best policies.Second, cross-border capital flows can lead to a more dramatic transmission of policies,driven by agency (and other) considerations that do not necessarily relate to economicconditions in the recipient countries.One argument along these lines is that if some large country adopts unconventional andhighly accommodative sub optimal policies, other countries may follow suit to avoid18exchange rate appreciation in a world with weak demand. As a result, the policyequilibrium may establish at rates that are too low compared to that warranted by the globaloptimal. Another argument is that when the sending country is at the zero lower bound, andthe receiving country responds to capital inflows with aggressive reserve accumulation, both19may be better off with more moderate policies. Indeed, it may well be that coordinationmay allow policy makers political room to move away from sub optimal policies. If politicalparalysis and consequent fiscal tightening forces a source country to a sub-optimal relianceon monetary stimulus, policy coordination that allows for expanded demand elsewhere could20allow the source country to cut back on its dependence on monetary stimulus.Domestic Optimal is close to the Global OptimalDespite these arguments, official statements by multilateral institutions such as the IMFcontinue to endorse unconventional monetary policies while downplaying the adversespillover effects to other countries. Indeed, in an excellent analysis of the obstacles tointernational policy coordination, the IMF’s own Jonathan Ostry and Atish Ghosh argue that“impartial” international policy assessments by multilateral entities could be suspected of21bias“…if there were a systematic tendency of the assessor to identify a change in policy (tighterfiscal policy; looser monetary policy; structural reform) as always yielding welfare gains atthe national and global levels. This would breed suspicion because the base case should bethat countries do not fail to exploit available welfare gains…it is implausible that welfaregains at the national and global levels should always be positively correlated…”By downplaying the adverse effects of cross-border monetary transmission of unconventionalpolicies, we are overlooking the elephant in the post-crisis room. I see two dangers here. Oneis that any remaining rules of the game are breaking down. Our collective endorsement ofunconventional monetary policies essentially says it is ok to distort asset prices if there areother domestic constraints to reviving growth, such as the zero-lower bound. But netspillovers, rather than fancy acronyms, should determine internationally acceptable policy.Otherwise, countries could legitimately practice what they might call quantitative externaleasing or QEE, whereby they intervene to keep their exchange rate down and build hugereserves. The reason we frowned on QEE in the past is because we believed the adversespillover effects for the rest of the world were significant. If we are unwilling, however, toevaluate all policies based on their spillover effects, there is no legitimate way multilateral18 See Taylor (2013).19 See Jeanne (2014).20See Ostry and Ghosh (2013).21 See Ostry and Ghosh (2013, p23).5institutions can declare that QEE contravenes the rules of the game. Indeed, some advancedeconomy central bankers have privately expressed their worry to me that QE “works”primarily by altering exchange rates, which makes it different from QEE only in degreerather than in kind.The second danger is a mismanaged exit will prompt fresh distortionary behaviour. Even assource country central banks go to great pains to communicate how their removal ofaccommodation will be contingent on domestic activity, they have been silent on how theywill respond to foreign turmoil. Market participants conclude that recipient countries,especially those that do not belong to large reserve currency blocks, are on their own, andcrowd devastatingly through the exit.Indeed, the lesson some emerging markets will take away from the recent episode of turmoilis (i) don’t expand domestic demand and run large deficits (ii) maintain a competitiveexchange rate (iii) build large reserves, because when trouble comes, you are on your own. Ina world with deficient aggregate demand, is this the message the international communitywants to send?For this is not the first episode in which capital has been pushed first in one direction andthen in another, each time with devastating effect. In the early 1990s, rates were held low inthe United States, and capital flowed to emerging markets. The wave of emerging marketcrises starting with Mexico in 1994 and ending with Argentina in 2001, sweeping throughEast Asia and Russia in between, was partially caused by a reversal of these flows as interestrates rose in industrial countries. The subsequent reserve build up in emerging markets,including China, contributed to weak global demand and excess spending by some industrialcountries, culminating in the global financial crisis of 2007-09. Once again, though, post-crisis unconventional monetary policy has pushed capital to emerging markets, with theassociated build up in fragility. Are we setting the stage for a resumption of the “globalsavings glut” as emerging markets build reserves once again?Two obvious remedies suggest themselves; Less extreme monetary policies on all sides withsome thought given to adverse spillover effects when setting policy, and better global safetynets to mitigate the need for countries to self-insure through reserve buffers.More Moderate PolicyEven though we live in a world where monetary transmission is global, policy focus is local.Central banks mount a number of defences as to why they should not take full account ofspillovers. One way to demonstrate the weaknesses in the usual arguments that are putforward to defend the status quo is to see how they would sound if they were used to defendQEE, that is, sustained intervention in the exchange market to keep the exchange ratecompetitive.Defense 1: We are a developing country and we are mandated to support growth. Institutionalconstraints in enhancing productivity, and our vulnerability to sudden stops, means that a22competitive exchange rate, and thus QEE, is essential to fulfilling our mandate.Defense 2: Would the world not be better off if we grew strongly? QEE is essential to ourgrowth.Defense 3: We take into account feedback effects to our economy from the rest of the worldwhile setting policy. Therefore, we are not oblivious to the consequences of QEE on othercountries.22 See Rodrik (2008) on why exchange undervaluation may be essential for emerging economies.6Defense 4: Monetary policy with a domestic focus is already very complicated and hard tocommunicate. It would be impossibly complex if we were additionally burdened with havingto think about the effects of QEE on other countries.There are many problems with these defenses that those who have complained aboutcurrency manipulation will recognize. Currency manipulation may help growth in the shortrun (even this is debatable), but creates long-run distortions that hurts the manipulatingcountry. There are more sensible policies to foster growth. And even if a central bank has apurely domestic mandate, the country’s international responsibilities do not allow it toarbitrarily impose costs on the rest of the world. The net spillover effects need to beestimated, and it cannot be taken for granted that the positive spillovers from the initiatingcountry’s growth (say through greater trade) more than offset the adverse spillovers to othercountries.  Feedback effects to the source country represent only a small part of the spillovereffects experienced by the world, and a central bank will be far from implementing theglobally optimal policy if it is solely domestically-oriented, even if it takes these feedbackeffects into account. Countries are required to pay attention to the effects of their policies onothers, no matter how much the added complication, because we all have internationalresponsibilities.Of course, the reader will recognize that each one of these arguments has been madedefending unconventional monetary policy. Yet multilateral institutions treat sustainedcurrency intervention with great opprobrium while giving unconventional monetary policy aclean chit. Should the cleanliness of the chit not depend on the size of the net spillovers andthe competitive response it engenders? Without estimating them carefully, how can we tell?Operationalizing Coordination: Some SuggestionsWe need to break away from this cycle of unconventional policies and competitive monetaryeasing. Already, the events of recent months have set the stage for renewed reserveaccumulation by the emerging markets. And this time, it will be harder for advancedeconomies to complain if they downplay their own spillover effects while they are pushingfor recovery.An Independent AssessorIn an ideal world, unconventional monetary policies such as QE or QEE should be vetted by23an independent assessor for their spillover effects. The assessment procedure is easy tovisualize; Perhaps following a complaint by an impacted country (as in the WTO), theindependent assessor could analyse the effects of such policies and come to a judgment onwhether they follow the rules of the game. Policies where the benefits are largely domestic,while the costs fall largely abroad, would be especially carefully scrutinized. And if theassessor deems the policy reduces global welfare, international pressure should be applied tostop such policies.The problems with such an idealistic process are easy to see. Where is such an impartialassessor to be found? The staff at multilateral institutions is excellent, and well capable ofindependent judgment. But political pressure subsequent to the initial assessment operatesunevenly. Initial assessments typically remain unaltered when a small country complains (nocountry likes independent assessments), but are often toned down when a large economyprotests. There are many exceptions to this, but more work is needed to build trust in theimpartiality of assessments of multilateral institutions.23 See Ostry and Ghosh (2013) for the idea of an independent assessor.7Even if multilateral organizations become immune to power politics, they are not immune tocognitive capture. Their staff has been persuaded by the same models and frameworks as thestaff of industrial country central banks – models where monetary policy is an extremelypowerful tool to elevate activity, and exchange rate flexibility does wonders in insulatingcountries from the most debilitating spillovers. “Decoupling” is always possible in suchmodels, even though the evidence is that the models typically underestimate the extent of“coupling”. Indeed, many of these models do not have realistic models of credit, or ofmonetary transmission in an economy with debt overhang, which reduces their valueconsiderably. Progress is being made but it will take time.And, of course, even if a truly independent assessment came to the conclusion that certainpolicies were in violation, how would such a judgment be enforced?The reality is that the rules of the game were framed in a different era to deter competitivedevaluations and currency manipulation. They have not been updated for today’s world ofmore varied competitive easing. But it is unclear that even if they were updated, they couldbe assessed and enforced in the current environment.A More Modest ProposalPerhaps then, it would be better to settle for a more modest proposal. Central banks shouldassess spillover effects from their own actions, not just in terms of immediate feedback, butalso in terms of medium term feedback as other countries alter their policies. In other words,the source country should not just worry about the immediate flows of capital to othercountries from its policies, but the longer run reaction such as sustained exchangeintervention that this would bring about. This would allow central banks to pay moreattention to spillovers even while staying within their domestic mandate.For example, this would mean that while exiting from unconventional policies, central bankswould pay attention to conditions in emerging markets also while deciding the timing ofmoves, while keeping the overall direction of moves tied to domestic conditions. Their policystatements should acknowledge such concerns. To be concrete in a specific case, the Fedpostponing tapering in September 2013 allowed emerging economies more time to adjustafter the initial warning in May 2013. Whatever the underlying rationale for postponement, ithelped tapering start smoothly in December 2013, without disrupting markets. In contrast,with volatility hitting emerging markets after the Argentinian problems in January 2014, theFed policy statement in January 2014, with no mention of concern about the emerging marketsituation, and with no indication Fed policy would be sensitive to conditions in those marketsin the future, sent the probably unintended message that those markets were on their own.Speeches by Regional Fed Presidents emphasizing the Fed’s domestic mandate did not help.Since then, Fed communication has been more nuanced, though the real challenge in24communication lies ahead when policy rates have to move up.International Safety NetsEmerging economies have to work to reduce vulnerabilities in their economies, to get to thepoint where, like Australia, they can allow exchange rate flexibility to do much of theadjustment for them to capital inflows. But the needed institutions take time to develop. Inthe meantime, the difficulty for emerging markets in absorbing large amounts of capitalquickly and in a stable way should be seen as a constraint, much like the zero lower bound,rather than something that can be altered quickly. Even while resisting the temptation ofabsorbing flows, they will look to safety nets.24For a recent nuanced view from a key Fed President, see Dudley (2014).8So another way to prevent a repeat of substantial reserve accumulation is to build stronger25international safety nets. As the financial crisis suggested, this is not just an emergingeconomy concern. In a world where international liquidity can dry up quickly, the worldneeds bilateral, regional, and multilateral arrangements for liquidity. Multilateralarrangements are tried and tested, and are available more widely, and without some of thepossible political pressures that could arise from bilateral and regional arrangements. Indeedswap arrangements can be channelled through multilateral institutions like the IMF instead ofbeing conducted on a bilateral basis, so that the multilateral institution bears any (small)credit risk, and the source central bank does not have to justify the arrangements to itspolitical authorities.Perhaps equally valuable would be a liquidity line from the IMF, where countries are pre-qualified by the IMF and told (perhaps privately) how much of a line they would qualify forunder current policy – with access limits revised every Article IV and any curtailment26becoming effective 6 months later. Access to the line would get activated by the IMF Boardin a situation of generalized liquidity shortage (as, for example, when policy tightening insource countries after an extended period of low rates causes investment managers to becomerisk averse). The IMF has suggested such arrangements in a discussion paper, and theyshould be explored because they allow countries access to liquidity without the stigma ofapproaching the Fund, and without the conditionality that accompanies most Fund27arrangements.Clearly, the Fund’s resources will be safe only if the situation is one of genuine temporaryilliquidity rather than one where countries need significant reforms to regain market access.Equally clearly, access will vary across countries, and prolonged use after the liquidityemergency is declared over will necessitate an IMF program. Nevertheless, the twinproposals of the Global Stability Mechanism and Short-term Liquidity Line that the IMFBoard has examined in the past deserve close examination for they come closest to genuinelyhelping offset reserve build-up.Finally, it would be a useful exercise for the Fund, in a period of growing vulnerability tocapital flow reversals, to identify those countries that do not have own, bilateral, regional, ormultilateral liquidity arrangements to fall back on, and to work to improve their access tosome safety net. The role of honest ex-ante marriage broker may be one that could prove tobe immensely important when the interest rate environment changes.ConclusionThe current non-system in international monetary policy is, in my view, a source ofsubstantial risk, both to sustainable growth as well as to the financial sector. It is not anindustrial country problem, nor an emerging market problem, it is a problem of collectiveaction. We are being pushed towards competitive monetary easing.If I use terminology reminiscent of the Depression era non-system, it is because I fear that ina world with weak aggregate demand, we may be engaged in a futile competition for agreater share of it. In the process, unlike Depression-era policies, we are also creatingfinancial sector and cross-border risks that exhibit themselves when unconventional policies28come to an end. There is no use saying that everyone should have anticipated theconsequences. As the former BIS General Manager Andrew Crockett put it, “ financial25See Farhi, et al. (2011) for comprehensive proposals, as also Prasad (2014).26 So as to give a country time to adjust policies to qualify for higher limits, or to find alternative arrangements.27 See “The Fund’s Mandate – The Future Financing Role: Reform Proposals”, IMF June 29 2010.28 For an interesting episode, see the farm mortgage crisis in the United States documented in Rajan andRamcharan (2013).9intermediaries are better at assessing relative risks at a point in time, than projecting theevolution of risk over the financial cycle.”A first step to prescribing the right medicine is to recognize the cause of the sickness.Extreme monetary easing, in my view, is more cause than medicine. The sooner we recognizethat, the more sustainable world growth we will have.ReferencesAcharya, V,  Marco Pagano and Paolo Volpin (2013), Seeking Alpha: Excess Risk Takingand Competition for Managerial Talent, NBER Working Paper 18891.Becker, Bo and Victoria Ivashina (2012),  “Reaching for Yield in the Bond Market”, NBERworking paper 18909Borio, Claudio (2014), “Monetary Policy and Financial Stability: What Role in Preventionand Recovery”, BIS Working Paper 440, January 2014.Borio, Claudio and Piti Disyatat (2009), “Unconventional Monetary Policies: An Appraisal”,BIS working paper 292.Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2014 a), “Capital flows and the risk-taking channel ofmonetary policy”, American University working paper.Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin (2014 b), “Cross-Border Banking and GlobalLiquidity”, American University working paper.Calvo, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart (1996), “Inflows of Capital toDeveloping Countries in the 1990s”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 10, no 2, pp 123-139.Caruana, Jaime (2012), “Policy Making in an Inter-connected World”,http://www.kansascityfed.org/publications/research/escp/escp-2012.cfmChodorow-Reich, Gabriel (2014), “Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy on FinancialInstitutions”, Brookings Panel on Economic Activity Conference Draft.Coval, Josh and Tobias Moscowitz (1999), “Home Bias at Home: Local Equity Preference inDomestic Portfolios”, Journal of Finance, 54(6), pp. 2045-73.Diamond, Douglas and Raghuram Rajan (2012), “Illiquid Banks, Financial Stability, andInterest Rate Policy”, Journal of Political Economy Volume: 120 Issue: 3 Pages: 552-591,JUN 2012Dudley, William (2014), “U.S. Monetary Policy and Emerging Market Economies”, Remarksat the Roundtable Discussion in Honor of Terrence Checki: Three Decades of Crises: WhatHave We Learned?, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City.Eichengreen, B., M. El-Erian, A. Fraga, T. Ito, J. Pisani-Ferry, E. Prasad, R. Rajan, M.Ramos, C. Reinhart, H. Rey, D. Rodrik, K. Rogoff, H.S. Shin, A. Velasco, B. Weder diMauro and Y. Yu, “Rethinking Central Banking” (2011), Brookings Institution.Eichengreen, Barry and Poonam Gupta (2013), “Tapering Talk: The Impact of Expectationsof Reduced Federal Reserve Security Purchases on Emerging Markets”, Working Paper,University of California, Berkeley.10Farhi, E., Gourinchas, P.O., Rey, H. (2011), “Reforming the International Monetary System”http://www.helenerey.eu/RP.aspx?pid=Policy-Papers_en-GB&aid=72587282480_67186463733Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole (2012), “Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, andSystemic Bailouts.” American Economic Review 102: 60–93.Feroli, Michael, Anil Kashyap, Kermit Schoenholz, Hyun Song Shin (2014), “MarketTantrums and Monetary Policy”, Chicago Booth Working Paper 101.Ioannidou, V. and S. Ongena and J. Peydró (2009), “Monetary policy and subprime lending:a tall tale of low federal funds rates, hazardous loan and reduced loans spreads.”Jeanne, Olivier (2014), “Macro-prudential policies in a global perspective”, NBER Workingpaper 19967.Maddaloni, A. and J. Peydró (2010), “Bank risk taking, securitization, supervision, and lowinterest rates: evidence from lending standards.” Working Paper no. 1248, ECB Series.Mishra, Prachi, Kenji Moriyama, Papa N’Diaye and Lam Nguyen (2014), “The Impact ofFed Tapering Announcements on Emerging Markets”, IMF working paper.Obstfeld, Maurice (2012), “Does the Current Account Still Matter”, Richard T. Ely Lecture,American Economic Association Annual Meetings, Chicago IL.Ostry, Jonathan and Atish Ghosh (2013), “Obstacles to International Policy Coordination,and How to Overcome them”, IMF Staff Discussion Note SDN/13/11X.Mitchell Petersen and Raghuram Rajan (2002), “Does Distance Still Matter? The Revolutionin Small Business Lending”, Journal of Finance, 57(6), pp. 2533-2570Prasad, Eswar (2014), The Dollar Trap: How the U.S. Dollar Tightened Its Grip on GlobalFinance, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.Rajan, Raghuram and Rodney Ramcharan (2013),  “The Anatomy of a Credit Crisis: TheBoom and Bust in Farm Land Prices in the United States in the 1920s”, working paper,University of Chicago.Rodrik, Dani (2008), “Undervaluation is good for growth, but why?”,  Brookings Papers onEconomic Activity, Fall 2008Rose, A. (2007), A Stable International Monetary System Emerges: Inflation Targeting isBretton Woods, Reversed. Journal of International Money and Finance, 26, 663-681.Schularick,  Moritz  and Alan M. Taylor  (2012), "Credit  Booms Gone Bust:   MonetaryPolicy: Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008." American Economic Review102, 1029-61Stein, Jeremy (2012), Monetary Policy as Financial-Stability Regulation. Quarterly Journal ofEconomics 127, no. 1: 57-95.Stein, Jeremy (2013), “Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and PolicyResponses”, speech at the "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the GreatRecession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter" research symposium sponsored by theFederal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, February 7, 201311Stein, Jeremy (2014), “Incorporating Financial Stability Considerations into a MonetaryPolicy Framework”, speech at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy,Washington, D.C. , March 21, 2014.Taylor, John (2013), “International Monetary Policy Coordination: Past, Present, andFuture”, BIS Working Papers No 437.12
