Indian Insurance : At The Crossroads *I am grateful to the New India Assurance Company Limited for inviting me tothis special function organised on the occasion of launching a new financial product forcredit insurance by the Honourable Union Minister of Finance.  It is fitting that NewIndia Assurance, the first insurer fully set up by Indians in 1919 and the country's largestnon-life insurer today should lead the way in product innovation. All of us present hereare thankful to the Honourable Finance Minister for taking some time off from hisextremely busy schedule and making himself available for launching of this newinsurance product.In an uncertain world, most of us would like to smoothen our lives (andconsumption patterns) by balancing the favourable and unfavourable events. Insuranceallows individuals to transfer risks by participating in risk pooling arrangements, inwhich each one sets aside a bit for the rainy day when times are good and draws on thefund in adversity. Thus, risk pooling advantages, by their very nature, increase when thenumber of participants increase and the risks they face are uncorrelated. Insurers providea medium for risk pooling. Obviously, the price of insurance - the premium - isintrinsically related to the probability of the adverse situation arising. If the number ofinsurers increase, it is then more likely that the premium would be actuarially fair, ascompetition preclude monopolistic rents that could be charged by the insurer.The almost two century-old Indian insurance industry today stands at thecrossroads. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 has pavedthe way for liberalisation of the insurance sector, following recommendations of theCommittee on Insurance Sector Reforms  (Chairman: Shri R.N. Malhotra) in thebackdrop of financial sector reforms and in light of international commitments. TheReserve Bank has allowed commercial banks (and non-banking financial companies) tocontract insurance business under Section 6 (1) (o) of the Banking Regulation Act. Withthe entry of players after decades of the state monopoly, the insurance sector faces newchallenges.The opening up of the insurance industry in less developed countries - and inIndia - is the cumulation of a long debate. The proponents of liberalisation have arguedthat a free market would ensure the benefits of competition. Those opposed toliberalisation have pointed out that the very need for nationalisation arose in the Indianinsurance sector because of a string of failures. It is, therefore, necessary to recognise thatthe present programme of liberalisation would be successful, if and only if, we are able tobuild the proper safeguards for the functioning of the industry. Viewed in this light, theon-going programme of insurance liberalisation has to be evaluated from two angles:first, the benefits to the economy and second, the sustainability of the competitiveprocess, especially, given the past history of insolvencies before the nationalisation of theinsurance industry. In a sense, the liberalisation of the insurance sector is as much achallenge to the insurers as to the supervisors, including the Reserve Bank of India,especially in view of the emergence of the banc assurance market.The scope for product innovation is underscored by the fact that the insurancebusiness is often classified in great detail in many developed countries, on the basis ofbusiness specialisation and risk and claims characteristics, with niche insurers operatingin some of the segments. For instance, the European Directive on Life and Non-LifeInsurance classify the life business into 7 classes (including unit linked insurance and2pensions) and non-life insurance into 17 classes (including credit insurance) forindependent authorisation. Of course, in India, although the insurance sector is bifurcatedinto life and general by the Insurance Act, the insurance companies have already taken upa number of businesses.It will be appreciated that the benefits of liberalisation - in terms of coverage andcheaper premium - are likely to flow with a gestation lag. The challenges of creatingdemand by product innovation to suit consumer needs has already begun. A clearexample of this is the Business Credit Shield that is being launched by New IndiaInsurance in alliance with Indo European Credit Guarantee (P) Limited. The fact that anexisting insurer rather than a new entrant is introducing this new product is itself atestimony to the compulsions of liberalization and competetion.The credit insurance business - which offers protection to suppliers of goods andservices against the effects of debtor insolvency, in cases of domestic credit, export creditand political risk, individually and increasingly comprehensively – has grown rapidly inthe past three decades - especially in Europe - with a worldwide premium of around US $5 billion according to a recent study commissioned by the International Credit InsuranceAssociation. Bouts of economic crises have enlarged the scope of credit insurance fromthe original role of protecting the capital at risk in accounts receivable to an essential partof comprehensive credit and financial management. The credit insurance expansion hasbeen in terms of both new players in both the private and the public sectors and newproducts. Credit insurance has also recently been used to enhance asset securitisationdeals.In the UK, for example, the credit insurance business - which is now almost twocenturies old - offers covers for late payment and insolvency of debtors - with options forinsuring the whole or the partial turnover and in certain cases, for supplier default.Besides, credit insurers also offer credit intelligence and credit management facilities,including national and international debt collection. The Association of British Insurerspoints out that credit insurance in the UK is a competitive market not only because of thelarge number of insurers and the multinational competition but also because of thecompeting types of domestic cover such as “self insurance” or provisioning (which islimited to bigger companies) and factoring.The Business Credit Shield is a commendable maiden venture by New IndiaAssurance in introducing domestic credit insurance in the Indian economy. If successful,the product would also offer a competitive product to the exporters especially at theshorter end of the market. The basic features of the product - coverage for insolvency andprotracted default (with discretionary credit limit facilities), political risk for exporters,indemnity up to 90 per cent of the agreed loss - are, more or less, in line withinternational practices. The minimum turnover limits, minimum DCL requirements andthe emphasis on strong credit management are equally necessary especially from theangle of business security.The prerequisite of risk management is, of course, information. In order todevelop an institutional mechanism for sharing of credit related information, the CreditInformation Bureau has been recently set up by the State Bank of India, in collaborationwith HDFC Limited and foreign technology partners. As the insurance business spreadsto newer activities, it would be a good idea to build up a co-operative database of theirparticular risk and claim characteristics. For instance, in case of credit insurance, Britishcredit insurers do contribute to an international database through which commercial3information is exchanged with others in the industry and also allows insurers to offercredit intelligence to their clients at very little cost.Such a database of activity-wise profiles could also have externalities if we dofinally move to a system in which minimum capital and other prudential requirements arebased on particular business profiles depending on the particular risk and claimscharacteristics, as is the case in many countries rather than on an aggregate business. Thiswould allow stipulations (such as minimum capital levels) to be fixed more efficiently(than the present across-the-board requirement) and encourage diversification.As all of us present here do experience, the economic situation in the world isbecoming more and more uncertain with new complexities.  With increase inuncertainties, the needs for reducing the economic burden of risk are increasingly felt.Business firms are required to identify key risk issues, define the amount of risk that canbe taken, find out risk mitigation options and make an appropriate choice from suchoptions.  One of the key risk issues, which is common to any business, is risk of defaultor non-payment by debtors.  Introduction of such credit insurance by New IndiaAssurance in the India market should, hopefully, turn out to be a landmark in this regard.* Address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the launch ofinsurance product “Business Credit Shield” of The New India Assurance Co.Ltd. at Mumbai on 12/9/2001.
