Indian Banking of Tomorrow *byVepa Kamesam,Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of IndiaIt is a proud privilege to be present at a conference which not only provides anintrospection of the way things have gone by but also provides a glimpse into the nearfuture – so that banks could plan their future course of action accordingly.  I am indeedprivileged to make the lead presentation on a topic close to my heart – on managingchange for the better. Although my topic reads as ‘Indian Banking of tomorrow’ let mehasten to add that the tomorrow is already here today. If this paradox has to beunderstood better, I must dwell on certain aspects which I believe would kick start themuch needed changes in the Indian Banking industry.2. The changes staring in the face of bankers relate to the fundamental way ofbanking – which is undergoing a rapid transformation in the world of today in response tothe forces of competition, productivity and efficiency of operations, reduced operatingmargins, better asset / liability management, risk management, anytime and anywherebanking. The major challenge faced by banks is to protect the falling margins due to theimpact of competition. Falling profit margins call for increasing volumes so as to result inbetter operating results for banks. This is best achieved by exploiting the benefits oftechnology, which facilitates handling increased volumes at higher levels of efficiencyand enhancing customer relationships. It is in this context that there is an imperative needfor not mere technology upgradation but also its integration with the general way offunctioning of banks to give them an edge in respect of services provided to theirconstituents, better housekeeping, optimising the use of funds and building up of MIS fordecision making and better management of assets and liabilities and the risks assumedwhich in turn have a direct impact on the balance sheets of banks as a whole. Technologyhas demonstrated potential to change methods of marketing, advertising, designing,pricing and distributing financial products and services and cost savings in the form of anelectronic, self-service product-delivery channel. These challenges call for a new, moredynamic, aggressive and challenging work culture to meet the demands of customerrelationships, product differentiation, brand values, reputation, corporate governance andregulatory prescriptions. Technology holds the key to the future success of Indian Banks.3. Winning in the new economy depends crucially on strategically effective andintelligent management of marketing and customer relationships. The first and foremostimportant shift required by banks is to treat the customer as a customer of the bank andnot as a customer of any particular branch. Technology enables the customer "helphimself" through PC banking, ATM banking and telephonic banking and the banks tofine tuning their marketing strategies to the right targets for the right products and at theright time. Indeed, the competitive edge that a bank would require to just retain itsexisting customers would be to provide such innovative services which offer customersthe convenience of transacting from anywhere, at any time and using delivery channelsmore suitable for them. Therefore, the imperative need would be to inculcate anattitudinal change in the mindset of bankers – towards providing services through suchinnovative, simple and secure means. However it my be borne in mind that technologydependent customer relationship management need not necessarily be 'cold' and'mechanical' but must carry an individual dimension displaying personalised uniqueness,relevance and accuracy. The intangible factors of conduct such as likeable-ness,timeliness and creativity will reflect vital characteristics of corporate culture and enhancecustomer satisfaction.4. Another change which is taking place – slowly but at a steady pace is the use ofalternatives to cash by most of the constituents of banks. The large scale use of cards forsettlement of financial transactions – whether credit cards or debit cards or even the newsmart cards – proves beyond doubt that cash is slowly losing the prominence of theyesteryears. It is gratifying to note that banks are quickly adapting themselves to providefor non-cash based services too. This development has, however, to be looked at from anopportunity for banks to cash in on certain invisible benefits. It is a recognised fact thatthe cost of servicing a transaction conducted through an Automated Teller Machine orthrough an electronic mode such as the Internet – as in the case of Internet Banking – issubstantially less than a physical service to a customer from a counter of a bank. Theneed of the hour is therefore, to encourage the wide spread usage of such cost effectivepayment modes. The proliferation of ATMs and the network of ATMs – the Swadhan –are all but indicators of the initiatives of banks in this direction. With the cost of handlingcash and the associated risks being an inherent part of the cash based society, non-cashbased payment systems offer an excellent choice for reduced costs to banks therebyresulting in better overall financial results. Such efforts need to be augmented andconsolidation of these would result in better results of the banking sector as a whole.25. For the corporate customer, funds availability at the place of its deployment is animportant requirement. Most of the banks have already put in place, Cash ManagementProducts which meet this objective and that funds are transferred from many parts of thecountry to the preferred location of the customer. I must add here that this requirementwould grow manifold and a centralised facility for operation on cash balances held acrossmany locations may have to be provided for by banks. It is in this context thatcentralisation of the accounts of banks comes to the rescue and provides for therequirements of efficient cash management by constituents of banks.6. The technology initiative calls for attention to certain aspects which would have adirect bearing on their functioning such as, standardisation of hardware, operatingsystems, systems and application software to facilitate inter-connectivity of systemsacross branches, security to ensure confidentiality and integrity of transactions, businessprocess re-engineering for holistic benefits of computerisation for the customer, the staffand management and development of human resources. With movement of funds takingplace electronically between different accounts of customers requirements relating tosecurity would require paradigm shift and various techniques such as digital signatures,certification etc., will assume significance. All these would be added requirements andthe well-established practices of today must co-exist with the new requirements. Aneffective security policy with the objective of protecting data, information and eventually,the economic value of the organization, supplemented by education and training of staffin these areas would have to be put in place and in these areas. Continued security wouldhave to be ensured by periodical audits and assuduously guarding against computercrime. The Reserve Bank has already provided detailed guidelines in this regard. I maydraw your attention to the issues of security discussed by the the Basle Committee ofBanking Supervisors in its document " Risk Management for Electronic Banking andElectronic Money Activities" (March 1998).7. The banks would be under pressure to increase profitability and explore avenuesfor new business by providing new and innovative products, enhancement of efficiencyand reduction in costs. Traditional sectors of the economy, such as agriculture and small-scale industry are themselves reorienting themselves to meet the demands of theInformation Age. This would spur the need for a re-look at the type of appraisal offunctioning of these sectors and unlock the business potential especially in areas likeagro-processing Infrastructure sector, long term financing, structured finance, issuance ofasset backed/mortgage backed securities, distribution of insurance products,3bancassurance etc,. While a trained eye and a shift to the lateral thinking would help inthe identification of the opportunities, the pricing strategies would have to be backed byrisk assessment methodologies. Technology would play a pivotal role here too byproviding solutions in the form of data warehousing and analysis for decision support.8. Considerations of financial sector stability would gradually strengthen prudentialnorms relating to capital adequacy, income recognition, asset classification, provisioningrequirements to reach the standard of international best practices. The accounting anddisclosure standards would also require to be enhanced. The supervisory practices wouldundergo a shift to become   more risk focussed calling upon banks to have resilient MISto meet regulatory requirements. With the progress in liberalisation in banking andfinancial sectors, the increasing sophistication and specialisation, emergence of a pureinter-bank call/notice and term money market, introduction of Real Time GrossSettlement (RTGS), funds would flow freely from one market to another leading to betterintegration of the domestic financial markets among themselves, and with internationalfinancial markets as well requiring the banks to adopt strategies to benefit out of thedevelopments which would be possible with a technology thrust.9. Indian banks have always proved beyond doubt their adaptability to change and Iam sure it would be possible for them to mould themselves into agile and resilientorganizations by adopting fine-tuned customer relationship management strategies,operations based on asset liability and risk management systems, the requiredtechnological capabilities and developing the human resources to meet the challenges ofthe paradigm shift.* Lead Presentation at the Technical Session II – Indian Banking Paradigm Shift – Functional Aspect at theBECON 2002, on January 15, 2002 made by Shri V.K.Sharma, Regional Director, RBI, Kolkata on behalfof Shri Kamesam who could not be present in person.4
