International Financial Regulation : The Quiet RevolutionI am highly honoured to have been asked to be the latest in a very distinguished list C. D. Deshmukh lecturers. My predecessors are a kind of Who’s Who of international finance :Michel Camdessus, Gerry Corrigan, Eddie George and others. Clearly, to mark the newI was last in India, in both Mumbai and Chennai almost exactly two years ago.  I spoke at a CIIconference in Chennai with Mr Narasimham, who was at that time engaged in preparing hissecond report on the Indian financial system.  We orchestrated between us an interesting debateon the But, in truth, it was then too early to reach a considered view. The dramatic collapses ofconfidence in Thailand, Korea, Indonesia and elsewhere were far too recent. And indeed inretrospect it can be seen that we were only halfway through the story. The Russian collapse wasyet to come, as was the dramatic intervention by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority to combatspeculation in the Hong Kong currency and equity markets. Still in the future, too, was thecollapse of Long Term Capital Management, in September 1998, which showed that threats to thestability of the financial system could arise from the activities of unregulated hedge funds as wellThese were highly unusual events.  Indeed the risk model operated by LTCM told its managersthat the market price movements which occurred on two days in late August were events whichshould have occurred only once in every 80 trillion years. This may tell you something importantabout their risk model.  But there is no denying that there were some highly unusual price changesIndeed financial markets remained very turbulent right up to the end of 1998.  And that turbulenceparticularly affected developing countries. For a time there was a very marked flight to what wereperceived to be safer assets and instruments, especially government bonds in developed countries.The average spread on emerging market bonds, which averaged 500 basis points in the first halfof 1997, was around 1175 basis points in the last quarter of 1998. It was conventional wisdom inthe City of London and on Wall Street at that time that emerging markets would be closed to newwhich took everyone by surprise.as from regulated banks.lessons which India might draw from the Far Eastern crisis of 1997.Millennium, you have decided to go downmarket!ofborrowers for years to come.  More than one investment bank in London took the axe to itsIt is clear now that some of these more extravagant forecasts were well wide of the mark.Markets have been much calmer over the last twelve months than was foreseen, and while life hasremained difficult for borrowers in developing countries, spreads have fallen back significantly,so that the average emerging market spread over US Treasury bonds in the last quarter of 1999was only about 850 basis points.  This is a welcome reduction for borrowers, but the spreadremains considerably wider than it was a couple of years ago.And almost everywhere around the world equity markets had an annus mirabilis in 1999. TheDow Jones went up 25% during the year and the London FT -SE Index by 18%. Even thatdramatically good performance was outdone elsewhere.  The Nikkei rose 37% and the Koreanmarket in Seoul rose 83% over the year.  In Brazil, the BOVESPA index rose 150% in localSo is all now well?  Have we now recovered from what we can now see was a nasty bout of thewobbles?  Have we learnt all the lessons and taken the medicine to prevent any recurrence? Canwe now look back on the turbulence of 1997 and 1998, confident in the knowledge that it couldn’tYou will detect from the tone of these rhetorical questions that I do not believe the answer to allI recognise that this is just the sort of time when people are least interested in warning messagesfrom financial regulators.  But it is almost certainly the time when they are most needed. PaulVolcker once said that the rôle of the central banker was to take away the punchbowl just as theparty was beginning to go with a swing.  Just in the same way, financial regulators are paid to beprofessional wet blankets, to warn of troubles ahead at the moment when there is a risk that pastSo in these good times we need to shout louder to be heard.  I do not mean that literally. My aimtoday is to suggest that the general directions of change adopted by the financial authorities incountries around the world in response to the market turbulence of 1997 and 1998 are correct.2problems are fading in the memory.of them is yes.happen again?currency, while the BSE 30 here passed a more than respectable rise of 64%.emerging markets department, and everyone at least did some rigorous pruning.But, even as recovery gathers pace and so one impetus to reform weakens, reforms need to bepursued with more vigour than has been the case hitherto.  And that is true both internationallyBut rather than stay at the level of comfortable generality – hands up those who are againstprudence and good management – I will try to be a little more specific, in three areas where- First , the international financial architecture, where important reforms have been- , in international financial regulation, where there is more work to do toensure that the right incentives are in place for financial institutions in developed- , in emerging market countries themselves, where there is a need for morepractical efforts to upgrade accounting and legal standards, and systems offinancial regulation, and of course to clean up the balance sheets of bankingMy emphasis will lie heavily on the financial system, and on the financial regulation aspects ofthe problem, not on monetary or macro-economic policy. It is not because I do not thinkimportant for countries to adopt sound macro-economic and monetary policies – indeed it is anessential pre-requisite of a healthy financial system that they do.  But when the Financial ServicesAuthority and the Bank of England separated a couple of years ago I agreed with the Governorthat I would keep out of his garden if he kept out of mine.  That has so far proved the basis of anIn the aftermath of the Asian crisis it seemed, for a time, that a kind of international designcompetition had been launched, with the creative departments of every finance ministry in theworld (if that is not an oxymoron) putting forward their own ideas for a new internationalfinancial architecture. There were a number of freelance contributions, too, from academics and3commentators around the globe.International financial architectureexcellent relationship!systems which, in many cases, remain very fragile.Thirdand developing markets to manage their risks more effectively in future; andSecondmade, but where the hard work of implementation still lies ahead;further change is certainly needed:and at the level of the individual country.Some argued for a new Bretton Woods settlement. Chintaman Deshmukh, who was present atBretton Woods himself, would have appreciated that. Others pressed the case for a kind of worldfinancial authority with the power to regulate all cross border business, a Financial ServicesThese more extravagant ideas have not, in the event, commanded majority support. And anevolutionary, pragmatic approach has been adopted. There are clear advantages to proceeding inthat way. It is far quicker, cheaper and more effective at international level to adapt existinginstitutions than to set up new ones. And in my view the key need was, rather than newarchitecture, enhanced plumbing: in other words better linkages between the differentinternational financial institutions and groupings we already have. I will say more about thisenhanced plumbing in a moment. But it is important to recognise that there have been someThere is the establishment of the G20, which met for the first time in Berlin last December, and ofwhich India is of course an important member. It will be interesting to see how the agenda of theG20 develops in the future and especially how it addresses the main vulnerabilities affecting G20economies and the global financial system. I note that all ministers and governors of the G20agreed in principle to the preparation of Financial Sector Assessments, to be produced by the IMFand World Bank.  I shall say more about these Financial Sector Assessments in a moment.We have also seen the establishment of the Financial Stability Forum which began to meet lastApril.  The Forum brings together, for the first time, supervisors and their international groupings,(the Basel Committee, IOSCO and so forth) central bankers and finance ministries, together withthe IMF, the World Bank, the OECD and the BIS.  Representation, which initially was limited tothe G7, now extends to Australia, Netherlands, Hong Kong and Singapore. I would not besurprised if its doors were opened even wider in the future.The gap which the Forum is designed to fill was initially identified by our Chancellor of theExchequer, Gordon Brown, at the end of 1998. He pointed out that there was no forum in whichregulators, central banks and finance ministries came together to look at financial crises, andindeed to try to share information which might lead to better forecasting and conceivablyprevention of future crises, together with more financial stability. Hans Tietmeyer, then President4structural changes of significance.Authority on a universal scale.of the Bundesbank, was invited to examine this proposal in more detail, and the eventualcomposition and remit of the Forum reflects his work.I am one of the UK members of the Forum, which perhaps conditions me to regard it as anSo far we have tried to do two things. First, to work towards developing a better “early warningsystem” than was previously available. I do not underestimate the difficulty of that task, and I amsure we will never be able to specify a list of indicators which can be guaranteed to flash red atthe sign of impending disaster. But I cannot think it is anything other than useful for those of uswho are closely involved in supervising markets to exchange opinions and impressions of marketdevelopments, in an attempt to scope out future shocks, and to think about how we would goSecondly, the Forum is trying to specify concrete actions in areas where progress is needed.  of the three working groups set up by the Forum is focused on the problems for financial stabilitycreated by highly leveraged institutions, including both the impact of the LTCM affair, and alsothe various market episodes in 1998 in which hedge funds and other highly leveraged institutionsare argued to have played a potentially destabilising part. I am chairing that group, which includesrepresentatives from Hong Kong and Australia :  we plan to report to the next meeting of theSo we are in the process of formulating our conclusions now, and I do not wish to prejudge themtoday. But I can say that we have done some useful and original work in looking at the details ofparticular episodes of market instability, and the ways in which different types of institutioninteracted with each other during those episodes. We shall publish that analysis, and a series ofcase studies on individual countries and their experiences. I hope that the authorities in bothdeveloped and developing countries will at the very least find the report a useful contribution toAnother group established by the Forum is looking at the particular rôle of offshore financialcentres, especially the availability of accurate data, compliance with key standards, and sanctionsfor non-compliance. And a third group is examining some of the issues surrounding short-termcapital flows, that will undoubtedly be of considerable interest to the Indian authorities, focusing5their understanding of market dynamics.Forum in Singapore at the end of next month.Oneabout responding to them should they occur.important new initiative.on management of risks, including debt; the volatility of capital flows; and capital controls.Again, these reports are to be submitted to the next meeting of the Forum, and published soonafter.It is of course too early to say how the Financial Stability Forum will develop. But in my view itis potentially a very useful innovation. Clearly, if it develops successfully, there will be a need toconsider the balance of its membership, and the case for including, in particular, other largedeveloping economies among its numbers. I should emphasise, though , that the working groupshave already reached out beyond the formal membership of the Forum to include representativesBut I think it likely that, in the future, these institutional developments will be seen to be of lesssignificance than a range of individually modest, but collectively important enhancements to thesystems of co -operation and co -ordination between institutions. Before explaining thosedevelopments in a little more detail, I should take a short step back, to explain how I see thetheory of international financial regulation, and how the practice today seems to fall sadly short.In theory, financial regulation around the world is governed by standards set by three main groupsof regulators.  For banking, it is the Basel Committee, set up under the auspices of the BIS.  Forsecurities firms and markets it is the International Organisation of Securities Commissions(IOSCO), and for insurance companies it is the International Association of Insurance Supervisors(IAIS). The latter two are more recent creations with a wide membership. The former is a muchtighter grouping of developed country supervisors only, but one which has earned considerableauthority around the globe, largely as a result of the quality of its output. In effect, it also setsAll three organisations have established principles of good regulatory practice, to which moststructures for regulation, with requirements for independence from political interference , they setout an approach to capital, and many other desirable features of a soundly regulated financialsystem. So far, so good.6countries in the world are, at least nominally, signed up.  These principles describe the appropriatestandards for countries outside its membership.International financial regulationfrom countries particularly affected by the problems under discussion.But these principles do not appear to have been effective in preventing, or perhaps morerealistically mitigating, the effects of financial crises.  And we can see from the aftermath of theAsian crises that the Korean banking system was not adequately capitalised in line with Baselprinciples, and in Indonesia and Thailand the available capital was quickly wiped out by a waveof bad debts. Very significant recapitalisation of those banking systems has been subsequentlynecessary – indeed it is a process which remains to be completed.  The sums of money involvedare enormous. It is estimated that the costs of the banking collapse in both Indonesia and Thailandwill amount to more than 40% of GDP, and around 15% in Korea. Should we therefore concludethat the Basel capital standards, for example, set up in response to crises of a similar order inLatin America in the 1980s, are hopelessly inadequate?  I do not think so. While there are manyproblems with the existing structure of the Basel Capital Accord, which are being addressedcurrently, the better explanation seems to be that banks in Asia were not being properlyI do not have time today to go into detail on the ways in which the regulatory systems fall short.But it is clear that many banks were in reality undercapitalised. Their provisions for non-performing loans were inadequate. Their accounts lacked objectivity and transparency and ruleson connected lending were not effectively policed.  They also ran very significant and under-appreciated indirect currency risks through their lending to companies who themselves were notOnce currencies came under pressure, and inadequate external liquidity became the issue, theopacity of local accounting standards, the insecure basis of provisioning policies, uncertainties inenforcing collateral, dubious corporate governance and the inability of central banks andsupervisory authorities to impose discipline were all important factors undermining confidenceOf course there were other factors that work in these crises, including unstable macroeconomicpolicies and, perhaps, inappropriate incentives as lenders believed they would be bailed out in theIt seems clear, therefore, that there is a need to enhance supervision, particularly in economiesopen to capital flows, and to strengthen their compliance with internationally agreed bestpractices. I use compliance both in the sense of firms complying with the standards set by their7event of devaluation. But my focus, as I said at the start, is on the regulatory dimension.and aggravating the collapse.adequately hedged.supervised in line with internationally accepted best practice.supervisors, and in the sense of those supervisors complying with international standards.  Inpractice, the second sense will embrace the first.  he traditional approach to compliance has beento assume that all members of a particular club, such as Basel or IOSCO, would comply with theclub’s rules, the supervisors would bring to colleagues attention their own experiences ofinterpreting rules and that informal contacts would provide a kind of peer review. This traditionalapproach breaks down either when some members do not apply the rules (for example in thefinancial crises of the 1990s I have described) or where there are marked inconsistencies in theThe groups of supervisors themselves do not have the basis on which to enforce rules among theirvoluntary membership.  The Basel Committee in particular has tried hard, and with some success,So the last two years have seen a growing, albeit far from complete at this stage, acceptance bysupervisors and by the international financial community generally that the standard setting rôleof international supervisory bodies needs to be complemented by arrangements for assessingcompliance with those standards. And these arrangements need to go beyond peer review, whichInstead, the necessary expertise, resources and willingness to pass judgement on compliance withthese standards are being put together by the IMF and the World Bank.  The IMF has a worldwideresponsibility for economic surveillance, which – surprisingly you may think – has only recentlybeen extended to cover financial systems in any depth.  Both the Fund and the Bank have lendingprogrammes designed to help countries recover from or avoid financial crises and bothinstitutions are expanding their financial policy departments and enhancing their liaison withsupervisors in developed countries in particular, who have agreed to lend staff resources to theinternational financial institutions to support this compliance assessment work. In the case ofbanking supervision, arrangements are now moving forward, though much work lies ahead in thepractical application and there are some doubts about whether the  have the records they needto complete the job.  The securities and insurance areas are a little behind, as they discuss with theThe Fund and the Bank have now completed around 30 country assessments of compliance withthe core principles of banking supervision, and more are planned.  Increasingly these assessments8IFIs how best the work should be done, and who should take the lead.IFIshas been only modestly successful.to reach out beyond its membership, but of course it has no firm mandate to do so.way countries apply them.are being done within a much broader framework, known as the financial sector assessmentprogramme – a joint Fund/Bank collaboration effort based on joint teams and drawing insupervisors from some national authorities, including the FSA.  Around a dozen FSAPs areunderway or in preparation.  I understand that India is one of the countries currently discussing anassessment programme.  The Reserve Bank of India has already taken one important step inpreparing a self-assessment of its own compliance with Basel Core Principles, which it has alsopublished on the Internet. This is a commendable move, which other supervisors would do well toThe outcome of these assessments will be available to the authorities in the countries concernedand to the senior management of the IFIs. There is no agreement, as yet, on how much further togo.  Some governments will no doubt choose to make public the full assessment, though perhapswith the exclusion of sensitive information about individual institutions. Other governments seedifficulty in the Fund and the Bank combining their rôle as confidential policy adviser with that ofimpartial assessor.  Squaring this circle may involve convincing reluctant governments that it is intheir is that there should be a strong presumption in favour of publication as you have done with yourself-assessment.  But of course the most important thing is follow up. Compliance assessmentsshould help national authorities design and carry through programmes to strengthen their financialsystems and those programmes may well be given added credibility by being supported byAnd supervisors in other markets will, I believe, increasingly use the Basel Core Principles, andthe Fund’s view of compliance with them, in assessing the health of banks with branches in theirSo, to summarise a rather complex picture, I would maintain that we are in the midst of a quiet- much more outreach for banking supervisors, above all to supervisors in- increasing acceptance by all supervisors that core principles of supervision,- increasing acceptance of the need for external monitoring to ensure compliance9rigorously applied in all countries of the world, are essential;emerging markets;revolution in international financial regulation.  The main elements of that quiet revolution are:jurisdictions.international assessments.longer term interests to be open about their financial sectors and reform plans.  My own viewfollow.- a willingness by supervisors to work much more closely than before with the- greater willingness by supervisors to work more closely with each other across- a willingness by the Fund and the Bank to take on the rôle of monitoring and tointegrate financial sector surveillance and reconstruction much more closely into- a desire by the international financial community to consider more carefully thethreats to financial stability, to put in place better incentives for avoiding suchcrises, and to bring together the key government officials, supervisors, centralImplications for emerging marketsMy answer to that question must begin with an important disclaimer. I have never run a financialsystem, or overseen one, in an emerging market. For a while in the 1970s, the United Kingdomseemed to be a disappearing market, but we have recovered from that, and London is now themost international and sophisticated financial market in the world.  We also benefit from a verywell capitalised banking system, a traditionally open and competitive market, and a very wellestablished set of institutions, with a well developed tradition of leaving decisions on regulatorymatters to independent institutions insulated as far as possible from political interference. Irecognise that these features of the UK scene, which we tend to take for granted, are luxuries inmany emerging markets.This is a roundabout way of saying that when I suggest what might need to be done in emergingSo with that disclaimer firmly before you, I will nonetheless hazard a few observations which IPerhaps the best place to start is with the markets themselves. Why have normal marketmechanisms not operated properly to weed out poorly performing institutions and create a healthycompetitive financial system? There are a number of potential answers to that question. But10hope may be helpful.markets to enhance the strength of their financial systems, I am not on the firmest of ground.So what are the implications of this quiet revolution for emerging market countries?banks and the financial institutions, through the new Financial Stability Forum.their work; andborders and across traditional sectors of banking, securities and insurance;financial institutions as the leaders of that monitoring exercise;with those core principles;factors which can encourage banks and other financial institutions to take on too much risk, with- excessive safety nets at the national level, including too extensive guarantees todepositors, and a reluctance to take prompt action to deal with failing banks;  this is-taking being partly underwritten by the authorities;- excessive safety nets at international level, arising from large country rescue- incentives, for example in the 1988 Basel Capital Accord, which may unduly- excessive reliance on banks for financial intermediation; and insufficient use of othermechanisms, especially securities markets.So it is important to ensure, for regulators to do their job effectively, that the appropriatepre -conditions for effective banking supervision are in place. The Basel Committee defined fivepre -conditions for effective supervi sion in banking, and I am sure that something very similar- First, a reasonably stable macroeconomic environment (an easy thing to say, of- Second, a well developed public infrastructure for financial markets, particularlyincluding well specified accounting rules and implementation practices. I cannotemphasise too strongly the importance of good accounting practices.  Economicallysound financials are the cornerstone of any properly functioning market economy.- Third, effective market discipline through transparency and the avoidance as far as--I would personally add that competition, particularly foreign competition, is another importantrequirement for a healthy financial sector. It is worth noting that most countries in Latin America,following their extensive banking crises in the early 1980s, opened up their financial systems andstrengthened supervision, whereas many countries in Asia have made it more difficult for foreign11Fifth, appropriate, and by that I mean limited, safety nets.Fourth, procedures for efficient resolution of problems in financial institutions; andpossible of uncertain or implicit government guarantees;Without that, supervision and regulatory systems are houses built on shifting sands;course);applies in the case of both investment and insurance business. They are:encourage short term capital flows; andpackages, which can allow banks to enjoy returns higher than justified by the risks;seen as leading to banks’ riskthe occasional panic when reality takes hold, include:competition to enter, thus closing off one important transmission mechanism for goodmanagement and new techniques to strengthen the domestic financial sector.  In South East Asiait is ironic that the open trading policy so successfully pursued by many countries andmanufacturers, and which was celebrated in the so called East Asia miracle, were not followed infinancial services. Reform programmes in these countries now put a welcome emphasis onopening trade in financial services and on the cross border establishment of competing firms.There are important developments under way in India which will open up important sectors here,I would also add another linked point.  Emerging markets would do well to broaden their financialintermediation systems in future.  There are clear advantages to be had from avoiding excessivereliance on banks.  Measures to promote domestic bond markets are well worth considering. Ofcourse low and stable inflation is an important prerequisite, but there may be other tax and marketBeyond these pre-conditions, there is of course the need for appropriate regulatory institutions,and for those institutions to be given the power and independence to pursue the good principles ofsupervision which are available, in the well specified form, from the international groupings ofregulators.  The appropriate institutional arrangements will certainly vary, country by country,depending on the nature of their public institutions, on the one hand, and on the structure of thefinancial markets, on the other.  In some cases it may be appropriate for banking, securities andinsurance supervision to be carried out separately. That may be so, for example, where thesectoral divisions are enshrined in law, as has been the case until very recently in the UnitedIn a country like the United Kingdom, where there are no impediments to banks owning insurancecompanies, or vice versa, and where both can engage in securities business, there is in my view apowerful case for a single regulatory institution, as we have now established, following modelspioneered in Scandinavia.  And what of the rôle of the central bank?  Here, again, I do not think that there is a generalanswer, applicable at all times and in all countries. We have reached the view that, in the UK’scircumstances, it makes sense to separate banking supervision from the monetary authority.  Thatis partly, indeed perhaps very largely, because we believe that banking, securities and insurance12We have since been followed by Japan and Korea, among others.States, for example.infrastructure issues to consider as well.notably insurance.supervision should be put together. And securities supervision, particularly the investor protectiondimensions, are not the natural habitat of central banks.  The government also took the view that itwould be easier for the Bank of England to establish its credibility as an independent monetaryinstitution if it were not at the same time engaged in the messy, and sometimes mucky business ofbanking supervision! Bank failures there inevitably will be, even in the best regulated market –perhaps particularly in the best regulated market, I might add! (Since, following my earlierstrictures about the rôle of markets, a financial system in which bank failure was impossibleOn the other hand, in countries where the central bank is well established as an independentinstitution, and where the interplay between the banking system and the government’s finances,perhaps because of state ownership, or state run programmes of lending, is close, then one can seeI think it is fair to say that, internationally, there is a modest trend towards the separation ofmonetary and supervisory responsibilities, but that is certainly not true everywhere, and a recentpaper from some academic enthusiasts for merging banking, securities and insurance supervisionhas argued that, in many developing countries, the central bank remains the most appropriateI would re-emphasise that, in my view, independence and the ability to take unpopular decisionsand carry them through is far more important than the title of the institution, or its relationshipLastly, and this is always a popular point to make to institutions responsible for financialsupervision, it is vital to have well staffed, well trained and well paid financial regulators! It is astruggle, everywhere, to maintain a strong cadre of regulators. While financial institutionscomplain about regulators, often rather vociferously, they also show an enormous appetite forrecruiting and employing their staff. We find that the right structures and disciplines are created ifthe regulator is as close as possible to the market place and, in particular, if the regulator is paidfor by financial institutions themselves. That is the case in London. It does not resolve all fundingproblems, but it does mean that if we need to raise more funds because market salaries are rising,then the institutions concerned can understand the point, and indeed have the basis to contest it ifit is wrong.  So I am strongly in favour of market based funding systems for regulators, which put13with the central bank or ministry of finance.home for prudential supervision.a stronger argument for central bank involvement in banking supervision.would be highly unlikely to be the most efficient and effective system available).the incentives for economy and efficiency, on the one hand, and for maintaining appropriatelevels of expertise on the other, in the right place. It also has the optical benefit of achieving areduction in recorded levels of public expenditure, something which ministries of finance aroundThe financial market crises of 1997 and 1998 vividly illustrated the need for reform in theinternational financial system.  Much of the early debate around that reform centred on proposalsfor a new international financial architecture, and for new international institutions. Some havebeen disappointed that only modest institutional changes – the establishment of the G20 and theFinancial Stability Forum – have been forthcoming and have, in my view wrongly, concluded thatBut my own analysis suggests that, below the parapet, so to speak, there are more important andfar reaching changes underway in the international financial plumbing than has generally beenperceived. Indeed it is arguable that those changes, taken together, amount to a quiet revolution ininternational financial regulation with, for the first time, the monitoring and compliance muscle ofthe international financial institutions linked to the standard setting expertise of the regulatoryclubs. Much of the framework is now in place; a great deal of work and hard political decisionsThat new alliance, reinforced a by a renewed awareness around the world of the huge public costsof financial system failures, should gradually create stronger pressures on countries to engage infinancial system reform and restructuring programmes. It will create greater pressure, too, forimplementation of the core principles of good supervision, established by Basel, IOSCO and theIAIS. And it will throw sharp focus on the nature of the national regulatory institutions in place,and the status and quality of those institutions, which are responsible for promoting and policingThere is no one simple institutional model which can be recommended for universal application.And each country will wish to assess the pros and cons of different structures, in the light of theirown financial markets and political structures. The developed countries offer a range of working14good practice.worldwide. lie ahead in making it a reality little has changed.As I close, I will try briefly to summarise the argument I have attempted to make this evening.Conclusionsthe world are devoted to achieving.models from which to choose. What is crucial is to ensure that the regulatory institutions have theFinally, let me add one reality check. I do not think that all of this reform, all this marketsurveillance, all this regulatory good practice, will produce a world free of financial crises.Financial markets are inherently unstable.  They are there to manage and intermediate risk.  TheyWe should not try to prohibit this volatility. Of course we want to be in a position where we canmanage crises, and mitigate their worst effects. But a realistic aspiration might be to design asystem which will cope with three of the next five crises, rather than five of the next three. Or toput it another way, if we over -control, we will damage the economic utility of the very marketswe are trying to develop. So I wish you a volatile, but not too volatile, future.15will go up and down, sometimes dramatically.independence and authority to take firm, sometimes unpopular decisions in a timely manner.
