Urban Co-operative Banks: Agenda for Future Reforms*It is very gratifying to note that Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerceand Industry (FICCI) as Apex representative body of Indian Trade & Commerce hasevinced keen interest in Urban Co-operative Banks ( UCBs), the purveyors of credit toAs urban co-operative banking sector is under focussed scrutiny of media andobservers of co-operative credit movement, I feel it is very apt that organisers chose'Reforms in urban banking sector' as theme for today’s discussion. Beforeapproaching the subject proper, I would make a brief mention about the size, role andUrban Banking Sector - The High Power Committee on Urban Co-operative Banks constituted by RBIin 1999, has aptly commented that the co-operative credit endeavour was the first everattempt at micro credit dispensation in India. UCBs were essentially designed to tapthe resources of lower and middle income groups and extend credit support to theireconomic activities.  Over a century old urban co-operative credit movement todayhas a network of 2,084 urban co-operative banks with 7,368 branch outlets spreadover the country. Their total deposit sources aggregated Rs.71 ,701 crore andoutstanding loans accounted for  Rs.45,856 The deposits of UCBs are equivalent to 9% of commercial banks' deposits.Few states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil account for over 80% of urban co-operative banks presence and 75% of their totaldeposits. Predominant concentration of Urban Co-operative Banks in these 5 states ismainly on account of emergence of strong co-operative leadership. UCBs normallyconfine their area of operation to localised geographical regions. But over a period oftime, their area have crossed the frontiers of districts and in some cases the states oftheir registration. The client profile of UCBs predominantly comprises priority sectorsegments viz. small business establishments, SSIs, retail traders, professional, self-employed persons and SRTOs, etc. who would not normally find it easy to haveaccess to large commercial banks. There are weak banks in the total population ofurban cooperative banks. But most of the banks may be rated as satisfactory to verygood banks.  Many of them are highly computerized. We should, therefore, judgeeach entity on its performance.  Wrong doings by a few should not make us berate theentire lot as it would hurt the honest managements who should in fact getencouragement.As regards their regulation, which has become a subject of intense debate inthe recent past, UCBs essentially being co-operative societies are governed by theirrespective state governments out of the powers derived from respective State Co-operative Societies Acts. Being banking institutions, they are also governed by theReserve Bank of India by virtue of powers conferred on it under the BankingRegulations Act. As UCBs are member driven institutions, every member has to havestake in the capital and irrespective of a member’s shareholding , each member hasonly one vote.The urban co-operative banking sector being an integral part of financialsystem, RBI has brought in a series of reforms in it.  The recent Madhava RaoAgenda of ReformsNaducrore as at the end of June 2000.A  Bird’s eye-viewreach of the urban cooperative banks in the map of Indian Banking System.small and medium enterprises.Committee which is also called High Power Committee (HPC) on UCBs, has dweltextensively on certain regulatory issues related to UCBs' licensing policy, future setup of weak and unlicensed banks, application of capital adequacy norms, resolution ofconflicts arising of dual control over UCBs etc.  RBI has accepted theserecommendations and implemented them.  However, issues related to dual controlnecessitate legislative changes to State and Central Acts and there is hardly anyprogress in this area.  In the backdrop of the present scenario, future agenda forreforms in urban co-operative banking sector, as I perceive is four (a)  (c) (d) Unlike the other segments of co-operative credit sector, UCBs today undertakemultifarious banking activities. Some of them have also been permitted to undertakeforex and merchant banking activities. There is a view emerging in the recent past thatUCBs being members of payment system, beneficiaries of deposit insurance schemeand enjoying unlimited access to public deposits, it is an imperative necessity to applyexactly the same regulatory rigours to UCBs as applicable to commercial banks.While broadly agreeing with this argument, I feel that their institutional frame work,size of operations and balance sheet, nature of business, product mix and above all theskill levels, may have necessarily to be kept in view while deciding on the supervisoryand regulatory rigours. Therefore, without undermining the regulatory efficacy, thereis a need to fine-tune the prudential prescription.  The view expressed by mydistinguished colleague Deputy Governor Dr. Y.V. Reddy, in the context ofimplementation of Financial Standards and Codes in India is equally applicable inUCBs’ adoption of prudential standards. He said “although the notion of a code ofgood practices is intuitively appealing, the temptation to prescribe universally validmodel codes which do not allow for differences in institutional development,legislative frame work and more broadly, different stages of development must beavoided”. Notwithstanding cultural differences between UCBs and commercial banks,RBI has been gradually attempting at regulatory convergence for both. To begin with,in 1993, RBI introduced Income Recognition and Asset Classification Norms toUCBs.  In 1995, the prudential exposure norms to single/group borrowers were alsomade applicable to them.  However, introduction of capital adequacy norms wasdelayed due to statutory limitations on UCBs' right to raise unlimited capital but theseare also now going to be implemented from 31 March 2002, in a phased time-frame.The future agenda for reforms as I  Today, main risk exposure of UCBs is not the credit risk but interestrates risk. Most of the UCBs interest rates particularly on deposits areout of sync with the rest of the banking sector. In this backdrop,observance of Risk and Asset Liability Management guidelinesassumes importance. RBI has recently constituted a Working Group toevolve guidelines keeping in view the specifics of UCB sector. TheGroup is expected to submit its recommendations very soon. As market discipline is an important supervisory tool in approach tonew Capital adequacy framework, prescription of disclosure standardsfor , perhaps is of imminent necessity. UCBs, therefore, shouldbe able to disclose their level of owned funds, unimpaired networth,CRAR, Gross/Net NPAs, operating results, ROA, compliance with2UCBs(ii)(i)visualise should focus on these following issues:(a) Aligning UCB sector with rest of financial systemResolving the issues emanating from dual controlImproving governanceDeciding the future of weak entities (b)Aligning urban co-operative banking sector with the rest of the financial systemfold :reserve requirements, per employee productivity, etc. with balance Strengthening the audit systems is of paramount concern for  RBI as itis an important tool in its supervisory kit.  It had taken a lead inappointing an expert panel in 1995 for reforming the audit systems invogue in UCBs. The panel suggested professionalisation of audit,mandatory concurrent audit for larger banks, redesigning audit format,etc. RBI had accepted these recommendations and advised States toinitiate measures. Unfortunately, many state governments have yet to Yet another important issue which is engaging the attention of theobservers of co-operative banking movement is defining the frontiersof UCBs.  Whether they should have unlimited access to inter-bankmarkets?  Whether their reach should be nation-wide?  Whether theyIn view of special role assigned to , in the recent Monetary andCredit Policy Statement made by the Governor, it was decisively statedthat they should not have unrestricted access to inter-bank markets asresorting to this avenue is essentially to meet their temporary liquiditymismatches rather than raising short term resources to fund their longterm assets. By their sheer volatile nature, neither capital market nor itsinstruments can be investment avenues for UCBs who arerepresentatives of small depositors. As regards their area of operation,we have very recently taken a decision to allow only such UCBs withRs. 50  Whether UCBs membership of Payment System should beunconditional?  This issue has come into focus in the wake ofMadhavpura Mercantile Co-operative Bank crisis.  In case ofcommercial banks, in the event of payment crisis, CRR balances wouldbe available besides SLR securities, whereas in respect of UCBs, theirSLR investments need not entirely be in Government Securities and incase of non-scheduled banks maintenance of CRR balances with RBIis not mandatory.  Whether a system can be evolved whereby fire-walls can be erected to avert payment crisis of co-operative banks byway of lodging certain Government Securities, mandatory cashdeposits with clearing houses for meeting payment obligations in theevent of liquidity crisis? Whether such an act would further pre-emptthe resources of UCBs? Or these deposits would constitute part of SLRWell these are issues which require informed deliberations for crystalising intoThe sheer number of weak banks which is well over 200 is a cause of concern. Ina large number of cases licenses have already been cancelled and the banks haveclosed down.  This process is taken up very cautiously so as not to create panic in thesociety.  Closure is decided only after all other options are exhausted. Level of capital,history of losses and size of NPAs are some of the factors which weigh with us intaking a decision on closure. Possibilities of rehabilitation are invariably exploredbefore such a decision is arrived at.  Rehabilitation may involve the following(a) Registrars should direct the co-operative courts for speedy recovery process3and execution of decreesstrategies :(b) Future set-up of weak Bankspolicy inputs.enquiry. funds?  This issue needs extensive (v)crore owned funds to go beyond their state of jurisdiction.UCBscan have access to capital market?(iv)respond positively despite five years of persistent persuasion by RBI.(iii)sheet figures. This issue is engaging the attention of RBI. (c) (d) Merger with a well-managed bank. However, a forcible merger should beIt is extremely important that there is a mechanism to ensure that an effectivesystem of internal governance is in place.  Chief Executive should be a person ofclean image and display a professional attitude. Board should consist ofknowledgeable persons who are aware of their responsibilities as board members.There should be a board level committee which should focus attention on the findingsof audit and inspection teams and ensure compliance thereof.  The Committee shouldalso ensure compliance with various regulatory instructions issued by RBI as alsostate governments.  It is ultimately the board’s responsibility that all prudential normsDuality of command over UCBs perhaps has become an intense issue ofdebate in co-operative circles. Academics, co-operators and bankers made vociferousRao Committee that dual control over UCBs must as that was instrumental in stifling their growth. Narsimham Committee II had alsounequivocally recommended for ending dual control regime over UCBs. Is dualcommand the causative factor for the ills of UCBs? Is it an impediment in effectivesupervision over them? Having been closely associated with the regulation of thecooperative banking structure for quite some time, I am indeed inclined to agree withthe Madhava Rao Committee recommendation on this issue.  The Committee aptlyobserved “…. that dual control regime, per se, need not cause any hindrance to thegrowth of urban banking movement.  It is the absence of clear cut demarcationbetween functions of RBI and that of State Govt. that adversely affects the smoothfunctioning of UCBs.”  Most of the issues emanating out of dual control regime aredue to overlapping jurisdiction of RBI and state governments.  It, therefore,recommended demarcation of banking related functions and such of those whichwarrant only state governments’ action. RBI has concurred with its recommendationsand is impressing upon the state governments for bringing in legislative amendments.Duality in command does come in the way of effective supervision.  In the case ofcommercial banks RBI has the wherewithal under the Banking Regulation Act fordealing with crucial aspects of functioning of commercial banks.  In the case of co-operative banks, however, many areas which directly relate to supervision over themhave been kept beyond RBI’s authority.  Situation gets somewhat messy as may be RBI has no authority to deal with delinquent management in a cooperative Making investments out of surplus resources being clearly a banking functionshould be entirely within the decision making powers of cooperative bankssubject to RBI guidelines but this needs approval of the Registrar. Similarly, writing off an unrealisable debt also requires permission of theRegistrar. There was an instance where on request made by RBI, the Registrarsuperseded the board of a cooperative bank.  But subsequently the StateGovernment in its wisdom annulled Registrar’s orders and restored the Board.It is strange but true.4(iv)(iii)(ii)bank. This requires intervention of the Registrar of Cooperative Societies.(i)indicated by a few illustrations as follows:end Madhava representations to the (d) Dual control dilemmaof governance are observed by the bank.(c) Improving Governancestrictly avoided.Avenues should be explored for the bank getting additional capitalUnviable branches should either be relocated or closed down (b) It is open for a bank whose licence has been cancelled to appeal to thegovernment. RBI is required to appear before the Appellate Authority. OftenRBI is advised to review its decision. It is a matter of satisfaction, however,that RBI's decisions have been supported by government and in no case RBI’sdecision has been struck down.  Nevertheless the exercise has to be gonethrough.(a) One approach is by bringing in the subject of cooperation under concurrent listso as to enable the Union Government to legislate in matters pertaining tocooperative banking.  But such a move involves amendments to the Another way of approaching this issue is the states enacting progressivelegislations thereby making Registrars confine their acts only to register andaccept byelaws. As a result, dual command over UCBs will be ceasedautomatically.  Though a lead has been taken by the Governments of  and Karnataka in this direction, most of the states are yet to follow.Even in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, it does not make any change in thestatus of existing banks unless they are registered under the new legislation.Unless a uniform initiative is taken by all the states, perhaps it would be(c) Yet another approach is to demarcate the regulatory roles of state governmentsand RBI in the State Acts, as suggested by the Madhava Rao Committee. Irather tend to agree with this approach since it is best way to resolve dualcontrol dilemma. There have also been suggestions that the BankingRegulation Act, which is a central statute may be amended in a manner that itenables RBI to assume certain powers which are at present available to stategovernments under the respective State Cooperative Societies Act, However,Here I would like to make it clear that while RBI is in favour of ending the dualcontrol, as far as Madhavpura episode is concerned, the immediate cause of itsproblems did not arise out of the present regime of dual control.  What happened inthe case of Madhavpura was ostensibly due to lack of observance of prudentialAs an institution cooperative banks have made a place for themselves and byand large doing very well in their respective areas.  Their strongest point is their easyaccessibility by their clients.  However, their number being very large puts a severestrain on the supervising and monitoring system.  Most of the banks keep a lowprofile and go about their job without much fan-fare.  RBI inspects them usually oncein two years unless there are any supervisory concerns in which case the frequency ofinspection is increased. One may, however, question this and say that would not have happened had our inspections been annual like in the case ofcommercial banks.  My humble submission is that Madhavpura episode did not havemuch to do with frequency of inspections for, it is always possible for to indulge in objectionable practices during the gap between two inspections.  It needsto be appreciated that it is not possible for RBI to oversee day-to-day transactions ofRBI has recently mooted the idea of supervision of UCBs to be entrusted to aseparate apex authority. The reason is that these banks number more than 2,000 and5banks.managementsMadhavpuraCase for a Separate Supervisory Structure?banking practices.the legal advice given to RBI does not support such a move.difficult to remove irritants of dual control regime.PradeshAndhra(b)Constitution.I feel there are 3 ways of resolving dual control issues:(v)are spread across the country. The sheer magnitude of their number and geographicalspread as also the level of professionalism generally available in these banks perhapsneeds a separate agency for focussed supervision. The issues that would need to beaddressed in this connection are the status, structure and management of this body, itsrelationship with RBI, its resources, staffing and location. No final view has yet beenFriends, Urban Cooperative Banking sector has come to occupy a formidableplace in the Indian Financial System.  However, sustenance of its growth is attendantto professionalisation of its management, inculcating good corporate governance,technology absorption and scrupulous adherence to regulatory framework. I hope thesector will learn from its past experiences and adjust to new realities since banking isI thank the FICCI and all of you for having given me this opportunity to share myShri 6organised by FICCI on May 10, 2001 at Delhi Urban Co-operative Banks: Future Reforms Capoor Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Seminar on Jagdish * Keynote Address by views on this important segment of our financial system.risky business.Concluding Remarkstaken as the proposal has to go through a consultative process.
