Indian Economy : Current Status and Select IssuesProfessor Parikh, Professor Radhakrishna and Friends,I am thankful to Professor Radhakrishna for giving me the opportunity to be herefor the release of India Development Report 2004-05.  The Report prepared byIGIDR, released today, is unique in several respects. It addresses contemporarypolicy issues unambiguously and is more issue-based than technique oriented.At the same time, it is based on thorough research with scholarly inputs. Beingissue-oriented, the Report captures both macro and micro aspects, especially theinstitutional aspects of development and human welfare. While being highlyanalytical, drawing on theory, the Report has no ideological biases and oneshould be delighted to note the India-centric nature of the policy prescriptions.This Report is special in the sense that it lays significant emphasis on welfareand the social sector. I have no hesitation in strongly recommending this Reportto students and scholars alike and to the policy makers and analysts as well. Nodoubt, there are some areas where the observations in the Report do not fullyconform to the policies being pursued by RBI, but such differences in approachdo help fine tune the policies better; though most of the differences arise from theassumptions made: the assessment of risks in alternate paths, weights to beattached to relevant factors, operational feasibility contingent upon the politicaleconomy, the institutional considerations, etc. So, let me compliment all theauthors, and in particular Dr. Parikh and Dr. Radhakrishna for this illuminatingvolume.I will take the opportunity, not to comment on the Report which is highlyrecommended for detailed reading, but to supplement it with a few remarks oncurrent status of the economy and refer to select issues.On October 26, 2004, we set out in the Mid-Term Review of Annual PolicyStatement for the year 2004-05 that the overall GDP growth for the year 2004-05would be in the range of 6.0 to 6.5 percent. Subsequent developments indicatethat while monsoon conditions and sharper rise in oil prices had a moderating2effect on growth, the manufacturing sector and exports have been performingbetter than expected. With the economy growing at 7.4 percent in the first quarterand 6.6 percent in the second, the GDP growth in the first half of the year worksout to be about 7.0 percent. Unless there are totally unexpected shocks, inspiteof some adverse impact of Tsunami which is localised, the projected GDP growthfor the year in the range of 6.0 to 6.5 percent should materialise comfortably.In response to the impact of Tsunami, RBI has adopted a three-trackapproach. First, ensuring supply of currency, banking services with relaxations inprocedures, as appropriate, liberal provision and restructuring of credit forconsumption as also resuming productive activities, finance for rebuilding housesand coordinating with state governments, NABARD, NHB and commercial banks.This process is still underway and the RBI’s Task Force constituted for thepurpose is directly in communication with over 40 branches of commercial bankscatering to the affected areas. Second, monitoring of financial markets, whichremain largely unaffected. Third, assessing the impact which indicates enormoushuman suffering and considerable localised loss of assets in both public andhousehold sector but with marginal impact on overall growth and the externalsector and manageable additional expenditure in the Central and State budgets.The Mid-Term Review devoted considerable attention to issues relating toprice-stability and inflation expectations. The WPI inflation, on a year-to-yearbasis decelerated to 6.4 percent during week ended December 25, 2004. In viewof several uncertainties and the fact that all indirect effects of increases in oilprices domestically are yet to be fully transmitted, the projection at around 6.5percent made in the Review, continues to be valid. CPI (Industrial workers)inflation, year-on-year, rose to 4.2 percent in November 2004 from 3.1 percent ayear ago. In this regard, it is necessary to reiterate the serious concernsexpressed in the Review in regard to price stability and inflation expectations forthree reasons. First, inflation is a major problem for the poor. Second, stabilisinginflation expectations is critical to ensuring enhanced investment activity in theprivate sector, which is a crucial element of current strategy for growth andwelfare. Finally, our economy is now more integrated with the global economy,3and hence, maintenance of price-stability is critical for ensuring financial stability.In this background, both monetary and fiscal policies give considerable attentionto price stability, as part of a growth-oriented strategy. The hard earned gains inthis regard could be reversed if there is a perception of dilution in commitment tocontain undue inflationary pressures. In assessing the risks of higher inflation itis, therefore, important to capture not only the probability and magnitude ofadverse impact of policies on inflation but also the damage that could be doneboth to price stability and inflation expectations in the event, even with very lowprobability, the risks do materialise. Hence, there is a need to continue todemonstrate, in a credible fashion, by words and deeds, commitment of bothmonetary and fiscal authorities to stabilise inflation expectations.The government finances present a mixed picture since the presentationof the Review, with greater comfort in regard to the Central government’sborrowing programme and some discomfort at the trends in revenue deficitrelative to Budget Estimates. The conduct of market borrowing programmes ofseveral States continues to be a matter of concern.A distinguishing feature of the current year has been the strong growth inbank credit. Non-food credit expanded by 18.1 percent in the current financialyear upto December 24, 2004. The growth in credit for housing and consumerdurables continues to be a matter of some concern to the extent it reflects oncredit quality, but a source of comfort is that the overall credit growth of late isreasonably well dispersed across sectors. Though credit growth has shown anuptrend, money supply (M3) growth has remained subdued at 7.2 percent. Byand large, the monetary trends are within the projections made in the Review.The financial markets generally remained stable. Though there wasupward movement in interest rates in money and government securities marketsin November, the interest rates have since reverted closer to levels in October2004. The yield spread between highly rated corporate paper and governmentsecurities increased. Furthermore, the spread between long term and short termgovernment securities has declined.4In the credit markets, the benchmark prime lending rates remain generallyunchanged though interest rates for housing have marginally firmed up.  Publicsector banks increased their rates for deposits of over one year.In the external sector, conditions in our forex market continue to beorderly.  Global developments in regard to output growth, currency markets, etc.have not been divergent from our expectations in the Review and may continueto be so though uncertainties in regard to oil prices will continue, albeit in amuted fashion.  Since March 2004 the rupee has tended to appreciate againstthe US dollar and depreciate against other major currencies, primarily reflectingthe weakening of US dollar.  There are, however, some developments during thecurrent year which are noteworthy.  First, foreign exchange reserves increasedby US$18.2 billion, from US$113.0 billion at end March 2004 to US$131.2 billionas at end December 2004.  Nearly sixty per cent of the reserve accretion in thecurrent financial year has come in two months (November and December) –perhaps indicative of the volatility in portfolio flows.Second, the trade-deficit on the balance of payments basis doubled toUS$12.3 billion in the second quarter from US$5 billion in the first quarter –reflective of surge in imports – both due to increase in oil-prices and pick up ininvestment activity.  There is no reason to believe that the trend will not persistfor the rest of the year which may have a potential for a large trade-deficit duringthe year as a whole.Third, the current account of the balance of payments which was in asurplus of US$3.2 billion in the first quarter turned into a deficit of US$6.4 billion,reflective of not only surge in trade-deficit but also moderation in the invisiblessurplus.  It is, therefore, possible that the current account for the year as a wholemay be marginally in deficit or very marginally in surplus.  Despite the surge intrade-deficit, a strong case for further liberalisation of trade and rationalisation oftariffs persists since the beneficial effects of such liberalisation are evident.5Fourth, the capital account of the balance of payments shows that in thesecond quarter, external commercial borrowings and short term creditmoderated, while there were outflows under banking capital.  NRI depositscontinued to register net outflows.  Overall, however, the current trends do pointto continued surpluses in balance of payments, with possible marginal deficit inthe current account being more than compensated by continued strong inflows,particularly on account of inflows on Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and FIIflows.Our emphasis in management of capital account has generally been onexternal debt as recommended by Rangarajan Committee, more than a decadeago, but there are several reasons, for exploring an appropriately active butnuanced management of non-debt flows at this stage.  The magnitudes of FDI/FII flows are tending to be large and volatility has perhaps increased.  The impactof such flows on the stock markets is discernible, but perhaps less evident at thisjuncture in corporate ownership and control.  The possible issues that need to beconsidered if one were to achieve a better management of non-debt componentsof capital flows that will address emerging concerns are :First, a view needs to be taken on the quantity and quality of FII flows.While quotas or ceilings, as practised by certain countries, may not be desirableat this stage, there is merit in our keeping such an option open and exercising itselectively as needed, after due notice to the FIIs.Second, there is scope for enhancing quality of flows through a review ofpolicies relating to eligibility for registration as FIIs, and assessment of risksinvolved in flows through hedge funds, participatory notes, sub-accounts, etc.Strict adherence to ‘Know Your Investor’ principle, especially in regard to flowsfrom tax-havens, including beneficial ownership would enhance quality.Third, price-based measures such as taxes could be examined thoughtheir effectiveness is arguable and hence may not be desirable.6Fourth, FDI flows, as currently defined, also include transfer of equity fromresidents to non-residents and a disaggregated analysis of FDI through severalroutes could enable a policy-intervention, as appropriate on quantities andquality.Fifth, since there are several routes by which non-residents could holdshares and voting power over Indian corporates, reporting and monitoringarrangements could be considered for assessing the aggregate shares ofresidents (other than government) and non-residents in larger corporates andthose in sensitive sectors in particular.  Such monitoring could help timely policy-responses on several fronts.Finally, consistent with the principle of hierarchy of capital flows, a viewcould be taken on relative policy emphasis on sources and types of investmentthat need to be encouraged.  For example, it is well recognized that giving betterincentives to foreign investors over domestic investors results in scope for“round-tripping” and inefficiencies. Similarly, if avenues for portfolio flows orequity-transfers from domestic to foreign investors are easily available andattractive, the flows under FDI defined in terms of adding to domestic production-capacities will tend to be smaller.  Attention to these may simultaneously addressmicro or institutional issues relating to corporates, volatility issues relating tocapital flows and financial markets, and above all ensure high-quality inflows offoreign savings which is more important to our country at this stage ofdevelopment, to provide a healthy supplement to the domestic savings.Ultimately our unswerving objective has to remain a sustained growth rate,moderate inflation and distributive justice, in an atmosphere of overall stability.It has indeed been a pleasure listening to the illuminating remarks of Dr.Deshpande, Dr. Chandra Mohan, Dr. Narsimha Reddy and Dr. Parikh. Let meconclude by expressing, once again, my deep appreciation of the excellent andpioneering work undertaken by IGIDR on developmental issues.Thank you.
