I am indeed pleased to be here to discuss an important topic like risk management. This is allthe more so in an area like finance, where risk and its management has assumed greaterI would first attempt to discuss the renewed interest on risk management in recent years dueto changing risk perception in financial institutions followed by an overview of the types ofrisks and the strategies for risk management. Thereafter, I propose to deal with the role of theBoard and organisational issues involved in risk management. This would be followed by theinitiatives taken by the Reserve Bank in this regard. Finally, I would raise certain issuesrelating to management of risks. As banks account for a predominant share in the financialRisk has been present always in the banking business but the discussion on managing thesame has gained prominence only lately. Bankers world-wide have come to realize that thegrowing deregulation of local markets and their gradual integration with global markets havedeepened their anxieties. With growing sophistication in banking operations, while lendingand deposit-taking have continued to remain the mainstay of a majority of commercial banks,many have branched into derivatives trading, securities underwriting and corporate advisorybusinesses. Some banks have even expanded their traditional credit product lines to includeasset securitization and credit derivatives. Still others have greatly increased their transactionprocessing, custodial services or asset management businesses, in the pursuit of increased feeincome. As a consequence, the issue of risk management has gained new recognition inWith improvements in information technology, more and more banks will possibly ventureinto the relatively new world of on-line electronic banking covering apart from traditionalbanking, providing of bill presentation and payment services. This would mean an increase inthe diversity and complexity of risks. Banks would have to develop risk management systemsOut of the four risks confronting financial institutions viz., credit risk, interest rate risk,foreign exchange risk and liquidity risk, the credit risk remains the predominant risk for mostbanks, despite changes in banking over the last few years. You will recall that during theAsian financial crisis, non-performing loans in Indonesia, Malaysia, South Korea andThailand soared to over 30 per cent of total assets of the financial system. The costs ofthat are rigorous and comprehensive, yet flexible enough to address newer risks they assume.recent times.sector in India, I may refer to banks frequently in my talk today.significance.Risk Management in Financial Institutionsdealing with the crisis have been enormous, involving massive transfer of resources. Even innormal times, credit risk attracts considerable amount of attention of credit planners and isextremely important.As you may be aware the credit risk depends on both internal and external factors. Theexternal factors are the state of the economy, swings in commodity prices and equity prices,foreign exchange rates and interest rates, etc. The internal factors are deficiencies in loanpolicies and administration of loan portfolio which would cover weaknesses in the area ofprudential credit concentration limits, appraisal of borrowers’ financial position, excessivedependence on collaterals and inadequate risk pricing, absence of loan review mechanismand post sanction surveillance etc. Such risks may extend beyond the conventional creditproducts such as loans and letters of credit and appear in more complicated, less conventionalsecuritized assets.The second category of risk that has gained prominence is interest rate risk. Interest rate riskarises because banks’ fix and refix interest rates on their resources and on the assets in whichthey are deployed at different times. Changes in interest rates can significantly impact the netinterest income, depending on the extent of mismatch between the times when the interestrates on asset and liability are reset. Any such mismatches in cash flows (fixed assets orliabilities) or repricing dates (floating assets or liabilities) expose banks’ net interest marginA third important category of risk pertains to foreign exchange risk. The risk inherent inrunning open foreign exchange positions have become pronounced in recent years owing tothe wide variation in exchange rates. Such risks arise owing to adverse exchange ratemovements which may affect a bank’s open position, either spot or forward, or a combinationThe final major category of financial risk is liquidity risk. The liquidity risk arises fromfunding of long-term assets by short-term liabilities or resources, thereby making theliabilities subject to rollover or refinancing risk. Those banks that fund their domestic assetswith foreign currency deposits with them may be particularly susceptible to liquidity riskwhen sharp fluctuations in exchange rates and market turbulence make it difficult to retainBeyond the four basic financial risks, banks have a host of other concerns. Some of them, likeoperating risk, are a natural outgrowth of their business. Banks employ standard risk2sources of financing.of the two, in any individual foreign currency.to variations.tranches of forms, such as credit derivatives or avoidance techniques to mitigate them. In other cases, for instance, where counter-party riskis seen as significant, it is evaluated using standard credit risk procedures. Likewise, mostbankers would view legal risks as arising from their credit decisions or, more likely, fromabsence of proper procedure while finalising a financial contract. It does not require veryThese are just some of the risks that banks must manage, and clearly the list I have set forth isnot exhaustive. In particular, banks in emerging market economies are subject to a unique setHow do we try to manage these risks . Irrespective of the nature of risk, the best way forbanks to protect themselves is to identify the risks, accurately measure and price it, andmaintain appropriate levels of reserves and capital, in both good and bad times. However, thisis often easier said than done, and more often than not, developing a holistic approach toassessing and managing the many facets of risks remains a challenging task for the financialsector.What then are the optimal strategies to manage these risks? In managing credit risk, the keyissue is to recognise the need to apply a consistent evaluation and rating scheme of allinvestment opportunities. This is essential in order for credit decisions to be made in aconsistent manner. Prudential limits need to be laid down on various aspects of credit, viz.,benchmark current debt/equity and profitability ratios, debt service coverage ratios,concentration limits for single/group borrower, maximum exposure limits to industry etc.There should be provision of some flexibility to allow for very special features. There needsto be developed a comprehensive risk scoring system that serves as a single point indicator ofAs for managing interest rate risk, most commercial banks make a clear distinction betweentheir trading activity and their balance sheet exposure. As regards trading book, Value-at-Risk (VaR) is presently the standard approach. The VaR method is employed to assess thepotential loss that could crystallise on trading position or portfolio due to variations in marketinterest rate and prices.  For balance sheet exposure to interest rate risk, banks rely on ‘gapreporting system’, identifying asymmetry in repricing of assets and liabilities commonlyknown as gap and putting in place a gap reporting system. This is often supplemented withbalance sheet simulation models to investigate the effect of interest rate variation on reported3earnings over a medium-time horizon.diverse risk factors of counter-party.of risks as a result of the financing and investment cycles in their countries.sophisticated tools to cover such risk.Coming to foreign exchange risk, limits are key elements of risk management in foreignexchange trading, as they are for all trading business. As a general characterisation, bankswith active trading positions have tended to adopt the VaR approach to measure the riskassociated with exposure. For banks which could not develop VaR, some stress testing isrequired to be conducted to evaluate the potential loss associated with changes in theexchange rate. This is done for small movements in the exchange rates, as well as forhistorical maximum movements.The final point is the measurement of liquidity risk. There are several traditional ratios forliquidity risk measurement, viz., loans to total assets, loans to core deposits, ratio of largeliabilities to earning assets and loan losses to net loans. In addition, prudential limits areplaced on various liquidity measures like inter-bank borrowings and core deposits vis-à-viscore assets.Several points need to be tackled as regards positioning appropriate risk managementstrategies. Worldwide, there is an increasing trend towards centralising risk management withintegrated treasury management to benefit from information synergies on aggregate exposure,as well as scale economies and easier reporting to top management. The primaryresponsibility of understanding the risks run by the bank and ensuring that such risks areappropriately addressed should be vested with the Board of Directors. At organisational level,overall risk management needs to be vested with an independent Risk ManagementCommittee or Executive Committee of the top Executives entrusted with the responsibility ofidentifying, measuring and monitoring the risk profile of the bank that reports directly to theBoard of Directors. The Committee should develop policies and procedures, verify themodels used for pricing complex products and identify newer risks impacting the banks’balance sheet. Finally, adherence to risk parameters of the various operating departments ofthe bank should also be overseen by the Committee.Observers are by now unanimous in their view that developing sound and healthy financialinstitutions, especially banks, is a sine qua non for maintaining overall stability of thefinancial system. Keeping this in view, the Reserve Bank has issued broad guidelines for riskmanagement systems in banks last year. This has placed the primary responsibility of layingdown risk parameters and establishing the risk management and control system on the Boardof Directors of the bank. However, the implementation of the integrated risk managementcould be assigned to a risk management committee or alternately, a committee of topexecutives that reports to the Board. The risk management guidelines also require banks to4constitute a high level credit policy committee to deal with issues pertaining to creditsanction, disbursement and follow-up procedures and to manage and control credit risk forthe bank as a whole. The Reserve Bank has further advised banks to concurrently set up anindependent credit risk management department to enforce and monitor compliance of therisk parameters and prudential limits set by the Board or Credit Policy Committee. Thepresent set of guidelines are purported to serve as a benchmark to the banks, which are yet toHowever, it is to be recognised that, in view of the diversity and varying size of balance sheetitems as between banks, it might neither be possible nor necessary to adopt a uniform risksmanagement system. The design of risk management framework should, therefore, beoriented towards the bank’s own requirement dictated by the size and complexity of business,risk philosophy, market perception and the existing level of capital. While doing so, banksmay critically evaluate their existing risk management system in the light of the guidelinesissued by the Reserve Bank and should identify the gaps in the existing risk managementIn addition to the risk management guidelines, the levels of transparency and standards ofdisclosure have gradually been enhanced over the years so as to provide a clearer picture ofbalance sheet to informed readers. Accordingly, from the year ended March 31, 2000, anenhanced set of disclosures are required to be disclosed by banks as ‘Notes to Accounts’ totheir balance sheet. These include maturity pattern of loans and advances, maturity pattern ofinvestments in securities, foreign currency assets and liabilities, movements in NPAs,maturity pattern of deposits, maturity pattern of borrowings, and lending to sensitive sectorslike capital market and real estate. Such disclosures and transparency practices are aimed atimproving the process of expectation formation by market players about bank behaviour andeventually lead to effective decision-making in banks. In addition, RBI has laid down creditconcentration norms, both for individual borrowers as well as to a group as a whole. TheseThe banking industry is clearly evolving towards higher levels of risk managementtechniques and approaches. However, several issues need to be addressed by the bankingFirst, risk management is closely related to ALM. Any mismatch between assets andliabilities increases risks, whether it is interest rate risk, credit risk or liquidity risk. The5system in this regard. I would flag a few of them for you to dwell over.limits presently stand at 20 per cent and 50 per cent of the financing institutions’ capital fund.practices and the policies and strategies for complying with the guidelines.establish an integrated risk management system.recent experience of the South East Asian economies clearly demonstrated the need forhaving effective risk management techniques. Accurate risk identification and classificationof past losses into expected and unexpected losses would help in positioning comprehensiveinternal controls. Not a simple proposition, it requires in-depth study and analysis of financialand other markets.Secondly, the evaluation of credit rating continues to be an imprecise process. Over time, oneshould expect that the banking industry’s rating procedures should be compatible with ratingA third area where improvements seem warranted is the analysis of  outcomes fromlending. Credit losses are, currently not precisely related to credit rating. They need to bemore closely tracked by the banking industry than they currently are. In short, credit pricing,Fourthly, interest rate risk approaches include both the trading systems and balance sheet riskanalysis. On trading systems, there has been considerable improvement. The VaRmethodology has converted a rather subjective hand-on process of risk control to a morequantitative one. However, several questions still remain unanswered. The first of these isthat the whole approach of VaR is dependent upon estimated distribution of returns. Theseare the key inputs to the risk measure, but the true  distribution is unknown. Estimatesare obtained from either historical data or Monte Carlo simulation, but in either case, theestimated distribution is not unique. This problem in risk management will need to beFinally, as banks move more towards off-balance sheet activities, the implied risk of agencyactivities must be better integrated into overall risk management and strategic decisionmaking. Currently, they are ignored when bank risk management is considered or are at afairly primitive stage. If reasonable exposure estimates are to be obtained, and the true costsof risk absorption are to be factored in the operations, much more needs to be done includingbuilding up of a strong Management Information System (MIS) backed up by a soundTo conclude, risk management systems have attracted considerable attention in the financialsector. Considerably more work needs to be done. The current state of risk management ismerely a beginning. Many questions still remain unanswered, many questions have beenanswered only superficially and for certain others, we have no complete and comprehensive6database.examined by the banking industry.ex-antecredit rating and expected losses ought to be demonstrably linked.ex-postsystems elsewhere in the capital market and have the same degree of objectivity.answers. It is here that the  management science professionals have a clear role to play in thisimportant task.Before I close, I thank the organisers of this seminar for this opportunity and wish you all theThank You.Keynote address delivered by Shri Jagdish Capoor, Dy. Governor at One Day Seminar onRisk Management in Financial System at Lala Lajpat Rai Institute of Management, Mumbaion October 6, 2000.7best in your deliberations.
