Overcoming Challenges in a Globalising Economy :Managing India’s External Sector*Y.V. ReddyDear Friends,I am thankful to the Foreign Policy Centre for giving me this opportunity tobe with you this evening and share India’s experience in regard to managingits progressive integration with the world economy. I would like to confinemyself to the issues relating to the external sector. Perhaps one of the mostsuccessful aspects of India’s structural reforms is the strength anddynamism in the external sector. The memories of June 1991, when theforeign exchange reserves fell to a level equal to barely a week’s imports, areway behind us. Our journey from these problems to the position of comfortthat we enjoy today has been exciting.Today, I propose to dwell on how we have been benefiting from aglobalising economy while minimising the attendant risks. The focus is onspecific areas relating to the balance of payments and financial integrationwhich transformed a hitherto inward-looking nation into a vibrant,internationally competitive economy, gradually integrating with the rest ofthe world.Merchandise TradeA key objective of structural reforms instituted in the aftermath of thecrisis of 1991 was to correct for the implicit anti-export bias built up duringthe first three and a half decades of planning and to reap thecompetitiveness and efficiency gains for the economy from a more opentrade regime. What were the major elements of the reforms?First, arrangements were put in place for the move towards a market-determined exchange rate. Second, since 1992 the trade policy imbibed a* Lecture by Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the India Programme of The Foreign PolicyCentre, London on June 23, 2005.medium-term perspective. Third, a key aspect of the trade reforms has beena substantial reduction in import tariff rates and a drastic rationalisation ofthe tariff structure, including their dispersion. Fourth, concerted efforts havebeen made to dismantle the panoply of non-tariff barriers that waspredicated upon the balance of payments reasons under the GATT. Fifth, theReserve Bank of India has undertaken several measures to ensure adequateand timely availability of bank credit for trade finance at competitive interestrates. Sixth, there has been a policy thrust for creating appropriateinstitutional arrangements for supporting a vigorous export drive. Theseinclude export processing zones, special economic zones, overseas bankingunits and technology parks.India has engaged herself constructively in multilateral tradenegotiations under the WTO. Within its multilateral commitments, India hasforcefully articulated its position which reflects the concerns of thedeveloping countries. In tune with the worldwide spread of regional tradingarrangements and our belief that such arrangements act as prelude toprogressive multilateral trade liberalisation, India has entered into severalpreferential trade agreements.These reforms in the trade policy regime have unlocked entrepreneurialenergies. India’s merchandise exports have been rising at a rate of over 20per cent per annum, in US dollar terms, in recent years. As a result, thesecular decline in India’s share in world exports from two per cent in 1950 to0.5 per cent in the 1980s has been halted. This share began rising in the1990s and is currently at 0.8 per cent. The export strategy envisages adoubling of India’s share in the world merchandise trade by 2008-09.ServicesTrade policy reforms undertaken since the 1990s have shed theirtraditional focus on merchandise trade and encompassed a wide range oftradable services, reflecting India’s competitive advantage in business2services, technical and professional services. The EXIM policies of recentyears have selected services for special focus. India accepted the obligationsunder Article VIII of the IMF’s Articles of Agreement and instituted currentaccount convertibility in 1994. Besides, there has been a progressiveliberalisation of the exchange control regime. Foreign direct investment (FDI)has been permitted in a host of services in order to take advantage ofmodern technology, with some restrictions on financial services, taking intoaccount the current stage of development and openness. Further, increasingavailability of speedier and cost-effective money transfer arrangementsthrough the banking channels and post offices has resulted in significantincrease in the use of formal channels for remittance transfers.Exports of services have risen consistently by over 20 per cent perannum in recent years. Within services exports, software and IT-enabledservices have been growing at an average rate of 46 per cent annually sincethe mid-1990s. Over the years, skill content of Indian labour has been risingand the traditional markets of the Middle East have given way to the US,Europe and other industrialised countries. For the external sector, this naturaladvantage has translated into significant inflows in the form of remittancesfrom Indians working abroad. Workers’ remittances are nearly four per centof India’s GDP now and have provided considerable and sustained support toIndia’s balance of payments.Trade and Current AccountA discussion on the recent trends in trade and current account willperhaps be in order. A distinguishing feature of India’s external sectordevelopments during the fiscal year 2004-05 was the expansion of themerchandise trade deficit to more than five per cent of GDP from an averageof a little below three per cent of GDP during 1990-2004. Underlying thisexpansion in the trade deficit was a surge in oil imports on the back of thesoaring international crude oil prices and the pick up in investment demand3as well as the growing strength of domestic industrial activity. This trend inimports may continue in view of the possible strengthening of upturn ofactivity in the economy. However, an intrinsic link between merchandiseimports and exports has emerged and become entrenched so that the largeexpansion in imports is also spurring vigorous export growth. Given therecent experience, this order of the trade deficit appears to be manageable atthis stage and is consistent with our growth aspirations.Despite the large trade deficit, the current account recorded only amodest deficit of less than one per cent of GDP in 2004-05 after acontinuous run of surpluses over the three-year period, 2001-2004. The hightrade deficit during 2004-05 was to a large extent accommodated by the netinvisible surplus at five per cent of GDP, supported by buoyant servicesexports and sustained remittances from migrant workers overseas. In fact,invisible surpluses have traditionally provided valuable support to India’ sbalance of payments and in recent years, they have taken on the characterof a permanent component in the current account. It is in this context thatwe believe that the current account deficit is sustainable with enoughheadroom available for accommodating even higher levels of investmentactivity.From a cross-country perspective, the Indian experience withmanaging the current account reveals some unique features. First, thelessons of the 1991 crisis brought forth policies which ensured a low currentaccount deficit in the ensuing years. This approach stood us in good stead inwarding off the contagion from the Asian crisis of 1997-98. Second, thesustainability of the current account was ensured by a policy choice for non-debt flows and emphasis on the consolidation and reduction of external debt.Third, the low current account deficit was underpinned by shifts ininternational competitiveness favouring software, IT exports and workers’remittances over traditional exports. Fourth, although the fiscal deficitremained somewhat inflexible, it was not allowed to spill over into the4current account. Finally, the current account deficit being the mirror image ofthe absorptive capacity, it is best assessed over the business cycle ratherthan at discrete points.Capital AccountSince the initiation of gradual liberalisation of the capital account in1991, capital flows have been in excess of current account deficit (CAD)except, in 1992-93 and 1995-96, adding to the reserves. It is interesting tonote that the stock of external debt came down steeply from 28.7 per centof GDP at the end of March 1991 to 17.4 per cent by March 2005. Thedecline in debt reflected the policy-induced shift in the composition of thecapital account in favour of non-debt flows. The level of short-term debtcontinues to be low at US$ 7.5 billion as at the end of March 2005. Asregards the composition of capital flows, there is, of late, almost a total shiftin favour of private flows.  The foreign direct investment increased from lessthan one per cent of net capital flows in the 1980s to 20 per cent of netcapital flows in 2004-05. Total portfolio investment flows on account of FIIs,GDRs and others were US$ 8.9 billion in 2004-05 on top of net inflows ofUS$ 11.4 billion in the preceding year.In brief, given the adverse international experience with unfetteredcapital account liberalisation, we have been risk averse and have adopted apolicy of active management of the capital account.  The compositionalshifts in the capital account have been consistent with the policy framework,imparting stability to the balance of payments. The sustainability of thecurrent account is increasingly viewed as consistent with the volume ofnormal capital flows. The substitution of debt by non-debt flows also givesus room for manoeuvre since debt levels, particularly, external commercialborrowings, have been moderate and can be raised in the event of asustained pick up in the demand for external resources. There is also thecushion available from the foreign exchange reserves.5Since non-debt creating flows are dominating, the emphasis is onencouraging inflows through foreign direct investment, and enhancing thequality of portfolio flows by strict adherence to what may be described as‘Know Your Investor’ principle. Further, in view of entrepreneurial skills inIndia and evolving synergies in a global economy, overseas investment byIndian corporates has been receiving a positive response. Further, prudentialregulations over financial intermediaries, especially over banks, in respect oftheir foreign exchange  exposures and transactions are a dynamic componentof management of capital account as well as financial supervision.Reserve ManagementThe adequacy of foreign exchange reserves is a relevant considerationin the management of the capital account. First, adequacy has to be viewednot only in terms of trade needs but also other short-term liabilities. Second,it is not merely the long-term or short-term debt in terms of original maturitythat is relevant for reserves, but the profile of external debt in terms ofresidual maturity. A trade-related debt which is in the nature of collateraliseddebt may be less severe on reserve requirements. Third, any addition toportfolio flows may warrant comfort through some additions to reserves. Infact, there is merit in presuming that the flows are temporary till there isreason to judge them to be permanent. Fourth, it is necessary to recognisethat reserves provide cushion to manage real and external sector shocks likeoil prices. Fifth, there is usually an opportunity cost of maintaining foreignexchange reserves, but this must be weighed against the financial and non-financial costs associated with volatile and adverse exchange ratemovements. Finally, while the optimal level of reserves is difficult toquantify, attention to level of reserves as a means of self-insurance isessential. In the final analysis, the adequacy of reserves needs to beassessed in terms of a medium-term perspective taking into account thepossible levels of the current account deficits, the composition of capital6flows, the level of international confidence in the ability of the country’spayment position and pace and quality of growth. Viewed from all theseperspectives, the current level of reserves continues to be comfortable.The essence of portfolio management of reserves by the RBI is toensure safety, liquidity and optimisation of returns.  The reservemanagement strategies are periodically reviewed by the RBI in consultationwith the Government.  In deploying reserves, attention is paid to thecurrency composition, duration and selection of instruments.  While there isno set formula to meet all situations, the RBI applies sound portfoliomanagement principles and risk management.Exchange Rate ManagementA major success in external sector management has been thetransition from an administered exchange rate regime to a more flexible,market-based system.  Under the new arrangements instituted in early 1993,the day-to-day movements in exchange rates are market determined. India’scurrent exchange rate policy focuses on management of volatility without afixed target, while allowing the underlying demand and supply conditions todetermine the exchange rate movements over a period, in an orderly way. Tothis end, the RBI monitors closely the developments in the financial marketsat home and abroad, and takes such monetary, regulatory and othermeasures as considered necessary from time to time.The conduct of exchange rate policy is guided by three majorpurposes: first, to reduce excessive volatility in exchange rates, whileensuring that the movements are orderly; second, to help maintain anadequate level of foreign exchange reserves and third, to help eliminatemarket constraints with a view to developing a deep and liquid foreignexchange market. The policy is aimed at preventing destabilising speculationin the market while facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market ratesfor all permissible purposes.7There is a wide consensus that India’s exchange rate policy has stoodthe test of time, despite several domestic and external developments,including the severe currency crises which characterised the 1990s. Recentinternational research on viable exchange rate strategies in emerging marketshas lent considerable support to the exchange rate policy followed by India.Global Economy and IndiaThe debate in India has customarily been on the contours of the publicpolicy in the context of increasing global economic integration.  Morerecently, however, a debate in the rest of the world has been in evidence onthe challenges likely to be faced by the global economy on account ofprogressively increasing global integration of the Indian economy. Hence,there is merit in looking at, perhaps illustratively, some of the globalchallenges of our integration while we move forward in this regard.Over the next half-century, the population of the world will age fasterthan during the past half-century as fertility rates decline and life expectancyrises. In Europe, the demographic profile is already tilted towards the higherage group and by 2050, this is projected to accelerate. Projections suggest aturning point between 2010 and 2030 when the European Union, NorthAmerica and Japan will experience a substantial decline in savings raterelative to investment which may be reflected in large current accountdeficits. Most of the high performers of East Asia and China are in thesecond stage of the demographic cycle. Elderly dependency is expected todouble in these countries by 2025. Their working age populations willincrease modestly first and then shrink. These projections suggest that EastAsia could increasingly become an important supplier of global savings up to2025; however, rapid population ageing thereafter would reinforce ratherthan mitigate the inexorable decline of global savings. India is entering thesecond stage of demographic cycle and over the next half-century, asignificant increase in both savings rate and share of working age population8is expected. The share of the labour force in population in India is expectedto overtake the rest of Asia, including China, by 2030. Looking ahead, therest of the world may increasingly rely on China and India for supplies ofboth labour and capital and this could significantly influence the evolution ofthe global economy. It is evident that China and India will have to give highpriority to generating employment and both are poised for substantialincreases in productivity.The global economy will have to contend with the implications ofthese developments on prices, exchange rates, wages and structures ofemployment in industrialised countries.  Over the medium term, it is felt thatoutsourcing will grow rapidly and may also cover high-end research anddevelopment activities. In manufacturing, China has emerged as a leader andIndia is catching up rapidly.  Though agriculture is heavily subsidised in majorindustrialised countries, such subsidisation would be difficult to sustain froma fiscal point of view, since many of the countries concerned are poised tomeet the mounting pension liabilities not to speak of burgeoning health carecosts of maintaining the deteriorating demographics. One sector where theindustrialised economies continue to show considerable strength anddominance is the financial sector, partly attributable to the confidence factorin financial markets that favours the industrialised economies and traditionalinternational financial centres.  It is essential for India to carefully monitor thedevelopments in both real and financial sectors, and to frame the policies intandem with the global developments so that global integration continues tobe a positive sum game for all countries.Financial IntegrationOn the path of integrating the Indian financial markets with the globalfinancial system, we have chosen to proceed cautiously and in a gradualmanner, calibrating the pace of capital account liberalisation with underlying9macroeconomic developments, the state of readiness of the domesticfinancial system and the dynamics of international financial markets.Unlike in the case of trade integration, where benefits to all countriesare demonstrable, in case of financial integration, a "threshold" in terms ofpreparedness and resilience of the economy is important for a country to getfull benefits.  A judgmental view needs to be taken whether and when acountry has reached the “threshold” and the financial integration should beapproached cautiously, preferably within the framework of a plausibleroadmap that is drawn up by embodying the country-specific context andinstitutional features.  In India, we have been adhering to a cautious andsure-footed approach in our reforms so far and there is merit in doing sosince it enables us to avoid policy reversals on the one hand and build on thepast strengths on the other.The experience of the 1990s has shown that our approach to financialintegration has stood the test of time. Even as we have embarked on ameasured pace of financial liberalisation, we have ensured that we have awell-capitalised financial system by international standards, with low levelsof loan delinquency. Our financial markets are orderly and smoothlyfunctioning and the ability of our financial intermediaries to deal in varioussegments of the financial market spectrum is improving almost continuously.The optimism generated by the recent gains in macroeconomicperformance warrants a balanced consideration of further financialliberalisation. Undoubtedly, it contributes to growth through enhancement ofallocative efficiency in the use of resources, by promoting financialdeepening and by expanding the volume of resource flow to the economy. Atthe same time it is important to recognise the risks to the financial systememanating from stressed macroeconomic fundamentals such as thoseassociated with fiscal deficit, inflation and uncertainties in internationalfinancial markets. Turbulence in the domestic financial systems tends toamplify related distortions and generates undesirable fluctuations in10economic activities.  Further, it also exposes the economy to external shocksand fluctuations in international business cycles.  There could, therefore, bea trade-off in the initial stages while considering financial liberalisation and inpolicy terms, the trade-off takes the form of a choice between measured andpremature financial liberalisation as also appropriate sequencing, the choicebeing contextual and often judgmental. In general, the downside of apremature financial liberalisation would be in the form of financial instabilityand associated social costs of disruption which are significantly higher for adeveloping economy like India.India has made significant progress in financial liberalisation since theinstitution of financial sector reforms in 1992 and this has been recognisedinternationally. External financial liberalisation, in particular, has expanded ata fairly rapid pace. At this stage, the optimism generated by impressivemacroeconomic performance accompanied with stability has given rise topressures for significantly accelerating the pace of external financialliberalisation. It is essential to take into account the risks associated with itwhile resetting an accelerated pace of a gradualist approach.First, India’s public debt and fiscal deficit as a proportion of GDP iscurrently among the highest in the world, but it has been financed almostentirely from domestic savings. There is a commitment to fiscal consolidationin the medium term with the implementation of the Fiscal Responsibility andBudget Management Act, 2003. In the interim, however, before embarkingon any faster pace of external financial liberalisation, the possible spill-overeffects of fiscal deficits into external sector need to be carefully evaluated.Second, it is widely recognised that financial instability can lead tohigh variability in real activity and, as the Asian financial crisis has tellinglydemonstrated, even cause interruptions in the growth process. Financialdistress has resulted in macroeconomic and welfare losses.  Resilience andflexibility in the real sector of the economy are essential to deal with surgesof capital flows, large reversals and associated fluctuations in financial prices11that become inevitable with accelerated liberalisation of financial sector.  Atpresent, some inflexibilities in pricing policies and restrictions on domestictrade constrain the response of the real sector.  In general, therefore, lowlevel of system flexibility at the current juncture is a major constraint oneconomic agents and financial market participants in responding to highlyaccelerated financial liberalisation and dealing with its downside risks.Third, the adequacy of foreign exchange reserves is often cited as aconsideration for significantly accelerating the pace of financial liberalisation.Foreign exchange reserves are, in the final analysis, a cushion to withstandboth cyclical and unanticipated shocks. Therefore, reserve adequacy may bea necessary condition but not a sufficient one for speeding up financialliberalisation. There is a clearer recognition today that the net benefits fromfinancial liberalisation in respect of any developing country would beenhanced only if complementary policies in non-financial sectors arefollowed.Finally, the existing international financial architecture is not adequateto prevent or mitigate the domestic and external effects of financial crisis inlarge economies like India. The impact of instability in times of crisis appearslargely to be borne by the home or domestic public sector rather than theglobal private sector.  The issue of setting the pace of financial liberalisationrevisits the issue of trade-off between sustained growth and a growth ratethat could potentially turn volatile and unstable. While it is necessary to addto the pace of growth, it is also equally important to minimise the risks ofinstability and experience shows that more than desirable pace of financialliberalisation was often followed by financial instability and crises.Thus, the recent experience in many countries shows that periods ofimpressive macroeconomic performance generate pressures for speedierfinancial liberalisation since everyone appears to be a gainer from furtherliberalisation, but the costs of instability that may get generated are borne bythe country, the government and the poorer sections. Avoiding crises is12ultimately a national responsibility. The approach to managing the externalsector, the choice of instruments and the timing and sequencing of policiesare matters of informed judgment, given the imponderables.ConclusionOver the years, India’s commercial and financial linkages with the restof the world have been increasing with trade liberalisation and openness onthe capital account. This is reflected in the transmission of internationalimpulses to the real sector and domestic financial markets. Trends ininternational prices have now significant influence on domestic prices. Indiancorporates and institutions are increasingly accessing international marketswith consequent diversification benefits. While this process has providedimportant opportunities, it has also brought in new challenges and risks,necessitating fine-tuning of macro policies in a much broader canvass andcontext. India is, thus, moving from a focus on managing external sector toimplementing an optimal integration of domestic and external sectors, withthe global economy.Thank you.13
