Future of Rural Banking*I am grateful to the Ram Reddy Memorial Trust for giving me an opportunity todeliver this endowment lecture.  I knew Ram Sab since 1960 and, like some ofyou here, we developed abiding affection towards each other.  To me, he was indeed,a friend, philosopher and guide in every sense of the word.  He won people’s heart,made academic contributions and built lasting institutions, and he achieved all thiswithout ever displeasing or hurting any one.  A scholar and a gentleman to the core, Icannot think of anyone in India who has contributed as much to advancement ofhigher education as he did.  He simply, with one stroke or may be two, one inHyderabad and one at all-India level, made higher education open, virtually to all.  Ifeel greatly honoured at being called upon to be with you, since some of us havegrown up in the last three to four decades, as part of one extended family of RamReddy garu. Since we are aware of his abiding interest in rural areas, especially thedynamics of rural development, I will speak on Future of Rural Banking.  I hope toreflect in the lecture, the pragmatism and analytical rigour that Ram Reddy Sab wouldalways insist upon.Banking in Ancient IndiaLet me start by sharing with you some features of banking in India in ancienttimes since you may still find traces of such ancient banking practices in isolated ruralLike in many other aspects, we have a long t radition of banking.  Evidenceregarding the existence of money-lending operations in India is found in the literatureof the Vedic times, i.e., 2000 to 1400 B.C.  The literature of the Buddhist period, e.g.,the evidence of the existence of sresthis, or bankers.  From the laws of Manu, it appearsthat money-lending and allied problems had assumed considerable importance inWhat were the interest rates? The role of interest rates was recognised inancient India. Interest rates were prescribed by almost all Hindu law-givers Manu,Vasistha, Yajnavalkya, Gautama and Baudhayana as also Kautilya.  A common basenumber was 15 per cent per annum – what the banker-economist Dr. Hindu rate of interest. Incidentally, this is higher than current Prime Lending RateIt was not as though everyone used to get loans at PLR.  Only prime borrowersgot at PLR, though the basis was different then. According to Manu and Vasistha, theinterest rates were not to vary depending on the risk involved or the purpose for whichthe money was borrowed.  But, they were directly linked to the caste classification ofthe borrowers.  Brahmin was to be charged 2 per cent, Kshatriya 3 per cent, per cent and Shudra 5 per cent per month. However, Chanakya’s interest rate structurewas risk-weighted since the rate of interest increased with the risk involved in theborrowers’ business. The interest rate worked out to be 15 per cent per annum forgeneral advances.  The traders were charged a rate of 60 per cent per annum.  WhereVaishya 4(PLR) of many banks!Thingalaya callsancient India.Jatakas, and recent archaeological discoveries supplyareas in our country.Reddy Respected Professor Khan, distinguished academics and friends,the merchandise had to pass through forests, the traders had to pay 120 per cent perannum while those engaged in the export-import business handling sea-borne cargoAgain, it was not everyone who could take up banking business. Only menbelonging to the Vaishya caste could take up the money-lending profession.  In otherwords, in ancient times, your caste gave you What about disputes and debt recovery? Manu specified the punishments to begiven in case of disputes arising about loan repayment and listed 18 types of disputes.When a creditor sued the debtor for recovery of money, it was the duty of the king toensure that the creditor got back his money.  Manu permitted the king to employ allmeans, fair or foul, to recover the dues, for example, torturous punishment like killingthe debtor’s wife, children and cattle or obstructing his movements. Manu held theview that a defaulter could not absolve himself of his debt burden even by death.Chanakya said that sons should pay with interest the debt of a deceased person or co-debtors or sureties. Was a spouse, i.e., husband or wife responsible to pay for thedebts incurred?  Yes, and no.  Wife was exempted from debt burden of her husband ifshe had not given her assent to his borrowings.  However, for the debt incurred by awife, her husband was liable for repayment.  Perhaps, this was the background inwhich one of the committees on rural indebtedness concluded that “the Indian farmeris born in debt, lives in debt and dies in debt”.Approach to Rural BankingThe Reserve Bank of India has a mandate to be closely involved in mattersrelating to rural credit and banking by virtue of the provisions of Section 54 of theRBI Act.  The major initiative in pursuance of this mandate was taken withsponsoring of All-India Rural Credit Survey in 1951-52.  This study made agency-wise estimates of rural indebtedness and observed that cooperation has failed but itmust succeed. The Report of the Committee on Directions is still considered a classicon the subject, and two of the four members were, incidentally, from Andhra Pradesh.This is the origin of the policy of extending formal credit through institutions whileviewing local, traditional and informal agencies as usurious.  In the first stage,therefore, efforts were concentrated on developing and strengthening cooperativecredit structures.  The Reserve Bank of India has also been making financialcontributions to the cooperative institutions through evolving institutionalWhile enacting the State Bank of India Act in 1955, the objective was stated to be theextension of banking facilities on a large scale, more particularly, in rural and semi-urban areas.  SBI, therefore, became an important instrument of extending rural creditto supplement the efforts of cooperative institutions. In 1969, 14 major commercialbanks were nationalised and the objective, inter alia , was “to control the heights ofeconomy”.  The nationalised banks thus became important instruments fornext step to supplement the efforts of cooperatives and commercial banks was theestablishment of Regional Rural Banks in 1975 in different states with equityparticipation from commercial banks, Central and State Governments.2The advancement of rural banking in addition to cooperatives and State Bank of India.arrangements, especially for refinancing of credit to agriculture.licence to banking and not RBI!had to pay 240 per cent per annum.By 1982, to consolidate the various arrangements made by RBI to promote/superviseinstitutions and channel credit to rural areas, NABARD was established. Thoughseveral efforts were made to increase the flow of institutional credit for agriculturaland rural lending, there were mismatches in credit and production.  Field studiesconducted to determine the reason, revealed that it was due to absence of effectivelocal level planning.  It was felt that with the establishment of large network ofbranches, a system could be adopted to assign specific areas to each bank branch inwhich it can concentrate on focussed lending and contribute to the development of thearea.  With a view to implementing this approach, RBI introduced a scheme of“Service Area Approach” for commercial banks. To further supplement theinstitutional mechanism, the concept of Local Area Banks was taken up in 1996-97As regards cost of credit, for most of the period, the administered interest rate regimewas applicable for bank lending and this included concessional terms for prioritysector. Currently, all interest rates on bank advances including in rural areas arederegulated and there is no link between priority sector and interest rate, though thereare some regulations on interest rates by size of advance i.e. below Rs. 2 lakh inAs regards policy measures to enhance flow of credit to rural areas, apart fromavailability of credit lines from Reserve Bank of India, the concept of priority sectorwas evolved to ensure directed credit.  Currently, the stipulation is that domesticcommercial banks should extend credit to the extent of 40 per cent of the total netbank credit to priority sector as a whole, of which 18 per cent should be specificallyfor agriculture. Out of the target of 18 per cent for agriculture, at least 13.5 per centshould be by way of direct loans to agriculture and remaining could be in the form ofWhere a bank fails to fulfil its commitment towards priority sector lending, it iscurrently required to contribute to Rural Infrastructure Development Fund set up byNABARD.  NABARD in turn provides these funds to State Governments and stateowned corporations to enable them to complete various types of rural infrastructureprojects.It is pertinent to recognise that there are a large number of credit linked programmessponsored by the Government for direct assault on poverty.  In programmes relatingto self-employment and women welfare, the multiplicity of programmes has beenreduced by having a comprehensive and consolidated programme namedSwarojgar The financial sector reforms, which were introduced from 1991 onwards were aimedat transforming the credit institutions into organisationally strong, financially viableand operationally efficient units.  The measures introduced include reduction inbudgetary support and concessionality of resources, preparation of DevelopmentAction Plans and signing of Memoranda of Understanding with the major controllers,and introduction of prudential norms relating to income recognition and assetclassification for RRBs and cooperative banks.  The lending rates for theseinstitutions have also been deregulated. Other  measures of liberalisation include3Yojna. Swaranjayanti Gram for indirect loans.respect of commercial banks.and in-principle approval has been given for 8 Local Area Banks.allowing non-target group financing for RRBs, direct financing for SCBs and CCBs,These measures have contributed to many RRBs turning around and becoming morevibrant institutions.  In the case of cooperative banks, there is greater awareness of theproblems of officialisation and politicisation and initiatives in this regard includeRecently, several policy initiatives have been taken to advance rural banking.These include additional capital contribution to NABARD by RBI and Government ofIndia, recapitalisation and restructuring of RRBs, simplification of lending proceduresGupta Committee recommendations, preparation of a special credit plans bypublic sector banks and launching of Kisan Credit Cards.  Finally, a scheme linkingself-help groups with banks has been launched under the aegis of NABARD toaugment the resources of micro credit institutions.  A Committee has gone intovarious measures for developing micro credit, and has submitted its report, which isunder the consideration of RBI.  In respect of cooperatives, a Task Force under thechairmanship of my esteemed and affectionate colleague Shri Jagdish Capoor, DeputyGovernor has been constituted to review the status and make recommendations forimprovement.Undeniably, these initiatives have enabled a very wide network of ruralfinancial institutions, development of banking culture, penetration of formal credit torural areas and a counter to the dominance of moneylenders.  These initiatives havealso financed modernisation of rural economies and implementation of anti-povertyand self-employment programmes.  However, for the purpose of focussing on thefuture, generalisation on some concerns regarding the current approach to rural creditand banking would be appropriate.Firstly, the cooperative banks have different layers and many of them havesignificantly large non-performing assets ( NPAs).  Many cooperatives areundercapitalised.  The public sector banking system also exhibits NPAs, and some ofthem have so far been provided with recapitalised funds.  The RRBs also exhibitNPAs and these have been recapitalised from Government of India so far, whichwould imply a total recapitalisation of double the amount provided by Government ofSecondly, according to the All-India Debt and Investment Survey, 1991-92,the share of debt to institutional agencies in the case of rural households has increasedmarginally from 61.2 per cent to 64 per cent between 1981 and 1991.  However, itmust be noted that this figure relates to debt outstanding and the overall share of theinstitutional credit in the total debt market is likely to be smaller than what this figureThirdly, the cost of financial intermediation by the various rural financialinstitutions is considered to be on the high side. The difference between the cost ofresources made available to NABARD by Reserve Bank of India and the commercialrates of interest at which the cooperative banks lend for agriculture in  the deregulated4interest rate regime is also considered to be on the high side.indicates.India.as per the Pradesh. Andhra legislative actions on cooperative banks in and liberalisation in investment policies and non-fund business.Fourthly, empirical studies indicate that institutional credit is more likely to beFifthly, empirical studies also indicate that relatively backward regions haveless access to institutional credit than others do.Sixthly, the non-availabil ity of timely credit and the cumbersome proceduresfor obtaining credit are also attributed to the functioning of the financial institutions,Finally in regard to Government sponsored schemes, there has been overlap inaccountability in as much as the beneficiaries are identified on a joint basis.  Bankshave been indicating that An important development in the formal segment of the rural financial markets is thegrowing significance of non-banking financial companies, in particular, in hirepurchase and leasing operations.  They also finance traders of agricultural inputs andoutput.  The NBFCs have only recently been brought under the regulatory regime ofRBI.  While their importance is recognised in financing diversified rural agriculture,Problems, prospects and solutions to many of the issue s mentioned have beenresearched and debated, primarily with a view to strengthening, revamping or re-orienting rural financial institutions.  However, there is merit in viewing the problemsof rural credit and rural banking in a wider context.  In this regard, it will be useful toFirst, services sector is getting increasing importance in the rural areas also -from coffee shops to cable television operators.  Assessing and meeting of creditneeds of this sector is important.Second, the integration between rural and urban areas has increasedsignificantly, with the result, mobility of labour, capital, products and even creditThird, commercialisation of agriculture, particularly the increasing role ofcash crops like cotton has resulted in substantial role for suppliers’ and buyers’ credit.Thus, fertiliser and pesticide are supplied to farmers on credit, often on deferredpayment basis. In such deferred payment arrangements, credit terms are built intoprice and hence it is difficult to isolate terms. Similarly, the commission-agentsadvance money towards purchase of output from farmers, which amounts to providingcredit and includes an element of forward trading.  These arrangements are oftenentered into on a voluntary basis. The present banking system does not generallyencourage financing the transactions of this nature. However, a few non-bankingfinancial companies do provide indirect finance for such purpose.5between the two is increasing.recognise some dynamics of rural economy.Dynamics of Rural Economyits extent and scope of operations has not been adequately researched.NPAs are proportionately more due to this overlapping.though this is equally valid for rural and urban banking.available for well to do among the rural community.Fourth, compared to cereal production, other food items, including poultry and fishare growing at a faster pace. In other words, rural agriculture is getting increasinglyFifth, in areas where commercialisation of agriculture has reached significantlevels, the traditional landlord-based tenancy is replaced with commercial-basedtenancy. Where intensive cultivation of cash crops such as cotton is called for, this hasbecome quite common.  However, the present credit and banking procedures do notSixth, given the diversified activities, and large work force in rural areas, thereis increasing recourse to multiple occupations to earn a decent livelihood. Forexample, a small farmer is also a petty trader and may also be a satellite based cabletelevision operator in the village. The end-use specification and monitoring of creditSeventh, to the e xtent employment and indeed incomes could be seasonal,especially for agricultural labour, there is reason to seek and obtain consumptionloans. Such assurance is possible with prosperity in rural employment. PresentEighth, while there is significant commercialisation and diversification of ruraleconomies, progress is very uneven in different parts of the country.  So, there are stillmany areas, where exploitation of tribals by money lenders or of agriculturallabourers by landlord-money lenders, still persist.  Norms and procedures of credit,Ninth, from the data on credit deposit ratios, it is clear that is a conduit for net transfer of financial savings from rural to non-rural sectors.  Onthe other hand, a major part of informal markets would be local and hence savingsAs mentioned earlier in the approach to rural banking, the basic thrust of ourpolicy has been to promote institutional credit and eliminate or ignore informalfinance.  However, in reality, while formal credit has expanded its share, informalfinance continues to be significant.  The idea of promotion of Self-Help Groups andmicro financing is an indirect admission of necessity of informal finance. The futureof rural banking cannot be appreciated without fully understanding both formal andinformal rural credit markets, especially their linkages.  Since in the earlier sections,organisation and functioning of the formal credit system in the rural areas has beenexplained, in this section nature of informal markets and the linkages will beThe informal financial market is legal but officially unrecorded and comprisesof unregulated financial activities i.e. outside the orbit of officially regulated financialintermediaries.  In the informal financial transactions, one could treat borrowing andlending among friends and relatives as occasional and not part of such an informalmarket.  Consequently, there are three broad types of informal financial transactions,6explored.Rural Credit Markets : New Realitieswould be locally deployed, within the rural areas.the banking systemtherefore, need to be different to meet varying circumstances.arrangements in formal credit markets are inadequate to meet such requirements.is more difficult in such circumstances.cater to the working capital needs of such commercial based tenancy relationship.diversified in terms of products and processes.viz., well-defined group, tied-lending/borrowing; and untied lending/borrowingactivities. In the literature on well-defined groups, there are three broad types namelyRotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCA) ; Accumulated Savings andCredit Associations (ASCRA) and hybrid forms of both. There are some variationsunder each category. Basic characteristics of these groups are that they are voluntaryin nature, usually among equals, with little or no outside support or interference.Often, members have some special bonds based on religion, caste, status,neighbourhood, etc.  In brief, there is no patron-client framework.  In essence,therefore, these arrangements among well defined groups, though important, shouldnot in my view be included in the concept of informal financial markets. In the recentpast, there have been efforts to provide a bridge between formal financial markets andthese well defined groups in the form of ‘micro-finance’ initiatives.  However, theseinitiatives do not constitute marketisation of activities of well defined groups.  Thus,the informal financial markets are those which are outside the orbit of officiallyregulated institutions.  These informal debt transactions may involve  tied  debtThe general approach, at least at the policy level, to informal market whether tied orpositive  since informal debt market has been historically equatedwith either landlord or moneylender. The transactions are considered to be expensive,especially in view of what is held to be of usurious nature of interest rates. It isconsidered to be financing unproductive expenditures since consumption needs arefinanced.  Sometimes, it is said that there are often unequal and exploitativearrangements, say, between the landlord and the tenant or the agricultural labourer.prima facieYet, the fact remains that informal debt markets do prevail, and studies haveshown that in some areas in our country, they account for 70 to 80 per cent of debttransactions.  Studies have also shown that many poor people have no access toinstitutional credit.  The arrangements in informal debt markets are said to be flexible,and sometimes have in-built risk sharing arrangements.  These credit arrangements doprovide for smoothening of consumption and production requirements.  Transactioncosts in terms of certainty, timeliness, procedural requirements, number of trips, etc.are somewhat negligible although there may be hidden costs in tied lending.Moreover, while formal markets tend to cater to less risky borrowings, informalmarkets provide for the more risky borrowings and thus serve a purpose.  Finally, ithas been stated in the literature that financial repression like directed credit, highreserve ratios, interest rate ceilings, branch licensing, etc. make informal financialPerhaps, one way of reconciling the conflicting views on usefulness of informal creditis to recognise some emerging realities of both formal and informal markets.  ThisFirst, it is no longer the case that the money lender and informal financing  are alwayssynonymous, in view of the dynamics of rural economy already described involvingsuppliers credit, buyers credit and credit for services sector.7would also help a rethink on approaches to rural credit and rural banking.markets relatively attractive and popular. not desirable. Finally, it is held that, since these are unregulated, they are untied, has not been transactions  and  untied  debt  transactions.Second, informal markets are less significant now than before, and have to facecompetition or at least accept benchmarking of formal credit.  The concept ofmonopoly of moneylender in rural areas is not true in many areas now.Third, when informal financial market is linked to socially undesirable activities,there is certainly a cause for concern though the available evidence shows that such aFourth, bank credit is really not severely restricted to what can be officiallydetermined as productive, since most of the credit-card financing by the banks is, infact, financing of consumption and at interest rates comparable to those prevailing inthe rural informal debt markets.  In other words, it is no longer unethical for banks tofinance consumption credit through the credit card route. Credit card business, so far,is an essentially urban phenomenon. Hence the financing of consumption by informalmarkets in rural areas cannot be frowned upon when it is being done by banks throughFifth, the real extent of informal markets is grossly understated in any survey thatviews data on outstanding debt since the turnover of debt is admittedly much lowerfor public institutions than for private lending. The turnover-differential is on accountof several factors, including preference for short term finance and better recovery-Sixth, the social significance of informal credit is more than its proportion in financialterms since the poorer sections draw far larger amounts from informal than formalmarkets.Seventh, a significant part of informal market is through leasing, hire purchase,deferred payment, etc. with finance often provided by NBFCs.  The informal marketis providing a range of financial products, which the formal banking system is notable to.Eighth, studies have demonstrated that expansion of literacy and education tends toincrease the access of rural folk to formal credit, reduce the informal transaction costsin dealings with formal credit institutions and improves their resistance tomalpractices attributable to landlord or moneylender.  The exploitative nature ofinformal markets is more pronounced in tribal or less developed areas whileproductive nature of informal markets is more pronounced in prosperous villages.Indeed, one can argue that in many areas, the formal credit structure has provided apositive institutional alternative to the moneylenders and thus marginalising his roleHaving recognised that one cannot wish away informal markets, sometentative generalisations on the relative roles of formal and informal markets and onthe linkages between them would also be necessary to capture the emerging but8complex realities.  Such generalisations are possible on the basis of empirical studies.Linkages in Rural Debt Marketsin providing credit to rural masses.performance in informal markets.their credit card business.link is more a metropolitan or urban phenomenon rather than a rural one.First, the formal credit has a tendency to flow more easily to agriculturallydeveloped regions and to relatively larger farmers leaving the backward regions andsmall farmers to be largely served by the informal market.  This phenomenon isgenerally explained by four factors viz. poor-resource endowment features of theborrower, poor personal factors (education, social contact etc), underdevelopment of aregion and higher transaction costs.Second, as per empirical studies, t ransaction costs associated with formalcredit include fees for procuring necessary certificates (open), travel and relatedexpenses including loss of wages etc., and informal or unofficial commissions(hidden).  The transaction costs vary with type of credit agency involved, the type ofThird, uncertainties and delays usually associated with formal credit can alsobe treated as additions to the transaction costs.Fourth, the true cost of borrowing from the formal credit system is thus higherthan nominal cost if the above informal transaction costs are also included.  To theextent some transaction costs are fixed, the effective cost of borrowings for smallerFifth, t here are usually hidden costs or concealed interest rates in respect ofinformal credit also, which have to be added to the nominal costs to arrive at the truecost.  These hidden costs generally relate to tied lending, tied to land, labour, input oroutput.  The tied advance in respect of labour is particularly relevant for migratorylabour.  The hidden costs are usually in the form of undervaluation of labour andSixth, the choice between formal and informal credit depends on both the access andrelative true costs.  Thus, recourse to informal credit, admittedly at far higher nominalcosts, is to be explained partly in terms of effective costs and  the extent of supply ofSeventh, in assessing relative roles, both supply and demand side bottlenecksof formal credit need to be appreciated.  The former relate to asset-based lendingpolicies and complex formalities and procedures while the latter relate to poorendowment, lower education and social-contact, usually caste-based in backwardregions.  Viewed differently, a larger role for informal credit may arise due to lowlevel of commercialisation and monopoly power of moneylender; and it may alsoarise due to high level of commercialisation of agriculture when supply from formalEighth, it is also necessary to recognise that, to the extent informal marketstend to lend to borrowers who are relatively less creditworthy, risk-premium is boundto be higher.  This would also get reflected in higher nominal interest rates in informalmarkets and indeed higher true cost, though it may not be so high if it is net of riskIt is clear that the critical issue in respect of informal credit is the manner inwhich the linkages among the participants in the market operate and result in varying9premium.channel cannot match significant demand for credit.formal credit.output of borrowers and overvaluation of inputs supplied by lender.loans tends to be relatively higher than for a larger loan.borrower and farm-size.degrees of hidden costs.  It is possible to make some exploratory postulates here.First, trader-lenders are likely to provide most of production-credit, while farmer-lender or moneylender is likely to provide most of consumption credit.  It is, ofcourse, possible that some individuals combine the functions of farmer, trader andmoneylender. Second, informal markets are unlikely to finance credit for investmentpurposes, given the time preference.  Third, the levels of education are likely toreduce the scope for gross overvaluation or undervaluation in linked-transactions.Fourth, the inter-linked transactions among parties with equal bargaining power arelikely to minimise the hidden costs.  Fifth, from the supply side, farmer-lenders maytend to be associated with land and labour market linkages while trader-lender islikely to be associated with input-output markets.  On the demand side, agriculturallabour may be associated with land and labour markets while the farmer-cultivatorwith input-output linkages.  In the process, it is likely that a farmer would be aborrower from a trader and a lender to agricultural labour, a common phenomenon invillages.  It will, therefore, be over simplification to divide the rural population intolenders and borrowers or exploiters and exploited.  Sixth, similarly it is necessary toappreciate the role of linkages in credit-risk-mitigation.  In fact, the risk reducingelement of linkages are not built into formal credit-channels. Incidentally to the extentthe transaction costs are front loaded in respect of formal credit , there is no incentiveto repay while the true costs of informal credit are spread out.  Seventh, in terms ofbargaining power among the class of borrowers, the agricultural labour and migratorylabour appear to be weakest except in agriculturally prosperous areas where labour-shortage is acute to cater to agricultural and other operations.  Similarly, thedifferential in bargaining power between large and small borrowers is similar to thatIn brief, the linkages between formal and informal markets are complex,contextual and dynamic.  The two markets appear to compete with and alsosupplement each other.recognise that the role of banks, which is central to formal credit inrural areas, is fast changing.  Many non-banks are providing avenues for savers andfunds for investment purposes.  Banks themselves are undertaking non-traditionalactivities. Banks are also becoming what are called universal banks and are alreadyproviding a range of financial services such as investments, merchant banking andeven insurance products. Similarly, non banks are also undertaking bank likeactivities.  At present in India, these are mostly confined to urban areas, but they willAnother development relat es to the gradual undermining of the importance ofbranches of banks. The emergence of new technology allows access to banking andbanking services without physical direct recourse to the bank premise by thecustomer.  The concept of Automated Teller Machines (ATMs) is the best example.At present, ATMs are city oriented in our country. It is inevitable that ATMs will beThe technology-led process is leading us to what has been described as virtualbanking.  The benefits of such virtual banking services are manifold.  Firstly, it10Technology and Rural Bankingwidely used, in semi-urban and rural areas.sooner than later spread to rural areas.We should between large corporates and small-industrialists in urban areas.confers the advantage of lower cost of handling a transaction. Secondly, the increasedspeed of response to customer requirements under virtual banking vis-à-vis banking can enhance customer satisfaction.  Thirdly, the lower cost of operatingbranch network along with reduced staff costs leads to cost efficiency.  Fourthly, itallows the possibility of improved quality and an enlarged range of services beingavailable to the customer more rapidly and accurately at his convenience.  It may notbe possible to deny these facilities to rural areas in our country since, if banks do notprovide them, some non-banks will do it.Another development relates to the increasing popularity of credit cards,which are bound to reach rural areas.  Many Public Sector Banks are already in creditcard business.  In fact, multi-purpose cards could be a facility that IT could usher infor rural population.  The potential can be illustrated with SMART cards. SMARTcards – which are basically cards using computer circuits in them thereby makingthem ‘intelligent’ – would serve as multipurpose cards.  SMART cards are essentiallya technologically improved version of credit and debit cards and could be used also asATM cards.  They could be used for credit facilities at different locations by theholders.  SMART cards could also be used for personal identification and incidentallyFor the spread of virtual-banking and SMART ca rds to rural areas, it isessential that electric power and telecom connectivity are continuous and supplies donot drop especially during the hours when a bank’s transactional activity is atrelatively high levels. The banks could, under such assured supply conditions acquirethe required banking software and also put in place the necessary networking forproviding anywhere banking facilities in rural and semi-urban areas also.Like banks in other parts of the world, Indian banks will have to get interes tedin providing diversified range of financial products and services along with those thatthey are already providing, by using technological advances. As the level of educationin rural areas rises and affluence spreads, customers will start seeking efficient,quicker and low cost services. As the financial system diversifies and other types offinancial intermediaries become active, in rural areas, savers would turn towardsmutual funds or the savers themselves decide to deploy part of their financialsurpluses into equities and debentures as also other fixed income securities. The bulkof bank deposits in the rural areas are currently longer term deposits and as thesecome down, there would be a distinct shortening of the average maturity structure ofbank deposits with an increase in asset liability mismatches. The spreads that thebanks now enjoy will progressively shrink making it more difficult for them tosurvive.  As more and more intermediaries enter rural areas with greater level oftechnology, traditional banking business will come under pressure.  In order to facethe competitive pressures being exerted by the recently set up market savvy banks,banks which have extensive branch network in most of the existing and potential richIt is clear that significant progress has been made, since independence, inexpanding bank branches and banking habits in the rural areas, through a variety ofinstitutional innovations.  An impressive segment of rural economy has been brought11Issuesrural and semi-urban areas may have to provide such services.for monitoring credit usage.branchinto the ambit of formal financial intermediation, mainly through the public sectorbanking system, and to some extent, through cooperatives and RRBs.  The future ofbanking in rural areas would, however, depend on several factors that have beendescribed, namely, how the current concerns are addressed taking into account thedynamics of transformation in rural economies, the new realities in credit markets, thelinkages between formal and informal markets, and the impact of financial as well asintermediation.Consequently, public policy will have to address several issues to ensure asound and efficient banking system in the service of rural areas.  The more importantIn the past, the major instruments of public policy were cooperatives andpublic-sector banking system.  However, with the diversification of ownership ofpublic sector banks and the overall thrust of financial-sector reform, a review ofinstitutional arrangements, mainly in the incentive-framework for credit-deliveryappears necessary. Similarly, in the area of cooperatives also, a reduced role forGovernment including in providing refinance is being advocated.  This desirableapproach would also need a review of institutional arrangements, in particular inFurther, there are new institutions and n ew forms of financial intermediationthat are emerging – be it mutual funds or more important for rural areas, non-bankingfinancial companies.  Any approach to rural-development should consider capturing,at least the activities of non-banking financial companies as part of formal ruralMoreover, in many parts of the country, growth of literacy and diversificationof the economy have brought about new characteristics and linkages between formaland informal financial markets in rural areas.  The latter does play a significant part inrural economy.  Hence the two markets should be treated as competing and co-existing, and in fact the policy should seek to utilise informal markets also for publicinterest.   A small beginning has been made in this direction, through initiatives onmicro finance. A policy of analysing and monitoring of rural financial markets as awhole is critical for the future and devoting attention only to banks and cooperativesmay not suffice.  I would hasten to add that a policy-focus on informal markets doesnot at all imply extending regulation to informal markets. In fact, the Report of TaskForce on  micro-finance of NABARD (1999) has recommended extending regulatoryframework for micro-finance institutions, and in my view this recommendation isfraught with difficulties. Funding by banks and regulated NBFCs of micro-financeinstitutions should be encouraged and guidelines provided, but regulation of micro-prima facieIn any case, research, and micro studies encompassing both formal andinformal segments would help the policy makers appreciate relative roles and linkagesin rural financial markets as a whole. In other words, policy analysis should perhaps12consider expanding its attention from rural banking to rural financial markets. wise. finance institutions may not be financial markets.debureaucratising the cooperatives. delayering and Approachof such issues relate to the approach, institutions, supply, cost, and related policiestechnological progress on the systems of financial Enhancing effective supply of credit in such rural financial markets would be alogical objective of policy, thus enlarging the current attention to include both directlydisbursed credit by the banking or cooperative sectors and indirect supply.  Similarly,reducing the true cost of credit-availability to rural areas would be yet anotherobjective, expanding the attention of policy to include both nominal cost of creditfrom banking or cooperative sector and true cost in formal and informal markets.  Inan increasingly deregulated environment, this objective would imply attention tocompetitive efficiency involving procedural-simplification also, in respect of banksFinally, t he approach may expand from delivery of credit to rural areas tomaking available financial services and products to savers, investors and consumers inthe rural areas.  In other words, it should be recognised that rural financial marketscomprise both depositors or savers and borrowers or investors.Among the institutions involved in rural credit, cooperatives have a specialthe  RBI.  There is full appreciation of the problems and efforts are underwayto workout a package for revival and may be, rebirth of rural cooperative banks by aCommittee headed by Deputy Governor Shri.Jagdish Capoor.  The Committee wouldnaturally address issues relating to legal framework, and incurring costs of addressingproblems related to overhang of the past.  In addition, the Committee, I trust, wouldconsider desirability of cooperative banks’ foray into non-fund-based activities, suchas fee-based financial services on behalf of mutual funds or insurance-products.  Thecooperatives could, in fact help, retail Treasury Bills and Government Securities inrural areas.  Diversified financial products will be increasingly demanded andsupplied in the rural areas, and cooperatives should not be left out of this trend ofproviding multiple-products through a single window.  This would also imply, goingbeyond the somewhat closed loop of preferred financial relations within cooperativesystem into a multiple contacts between cooperative banks and other financialutilising technological improvement.Commercial banks are being reformed in accordance with recommenations ofNarasimham Committee.  The RRBs are being recapitalised.  These efforts in regardto banks would presumably recognise the trends in providing financial services toenable them to exercise necessary flexibility and dynamism that is warranted by fastchanging world.  Similarly, the future role of NABARD could be addressed becausethe organisational setup, funding and activities will have to reflect the basic logic offinancial sector reform viz. changing roles of owner, regulator, refinancing, subsidisedSome analysts argue that supply-leading strategy in regard to rural credit hasnot been successful, since institutional spread and directed-lending have not had thedesired impact.  While accepting that demand has to play its role, and real-demandalso implies negotiating strength of the borrower in respect of financial institutions, itwill be inappropriate to conclude that supply should necessarily follow demand.Mere presence of rural credit institutions, does not amount to availability of supply.13Enhancing Effective Supplycredit, government-funding and cooperatives.intermediaries, largely place in Institutionsand cooperatives.Similarly, mere prescriptions of priority lending would not ensure supply.  Forexample, prescription of priority-sector lending relates to percentage of creditoutstanding rather than advances.  Further, there is no reward for overshooting thetarget and undershooting is not really penalised  since amounts of shortfall need to beplaced in a fund administered by NABARD with a totally risk-free return of 11.5percent for a five-year advance.  These funds are actually lent to State Governments,thus to an extent replacing rural credit to agriculture with credit to State Governmentfor rural development. While as a transient measure during a period conspicuous forincomplete projects, such an arrangement was justifiable , this should not become apermanent feature as it would have obviously perverse effects. The coverage ofdefinition of priority sector also leads to some difference between apparent supply andeffective supply.  Thus, the base for calculating priority sector excludes commercialbanks' investments, which are expanding rapidly. The procedural bottlenecks resultingAt the same time, there may be some effective supplies which are notreckoned for supply under priority-sector.  There may be funds channeled by banks toThere is perhaps a case for some research and studies on policy of directed lending sothat we could improve on the incentive and policy framework to enhance effectivesupply.  For example, the definition and coverage of priority sector for agriculturecould be revisited and lending to agriculture by banks through NBFC’s could beconsidered for inclusion in priority-sector, as has been done to ensure flow of credit totruck operators.Yet another area in effective supply relates to lending by banks under governmentsponsored programmes, which has significant non-commercial considerations.Several issues relating to both supply and accountability arise due to involvement ofboth Government and banks.  A more transparent approach, for example, byseparately accounting for them as policy-induced lending would help isolate andmonitor this supply, apart from isolating the non-performing assets on this account in of credit has been the negligible use ofbill-discounting for services sector.  Current policies and procedures restrict thisinstrument to goods.  It has been decided by the RBI to constitute a Committee toexplore ways by which bank finance can be made available to service sector. TheCommittee, with representation from public, private sector and foreign banks also isexpected to study international experience, our policies and procedures and makerecommendations in two months.  This important step recognises that about half ofour Gross Domestic Product is in services sector and would also help flow of bankReducing True CostThe major reasons for the true cost of credit from rural financial instibeing higher than nominal costs are mainly scarcity of supply and transaction costs.Enhancing effective supply would be an important strategy of reducing the true cost.Encouraging competition would be yet another strategy.  A review of procedural14tutionsfinance to the growing services sector in rural areas.An important bottleneck in the deliverythe balance sheets of banks.NBFCs. rural area through urban-branches or through other intermediaries such as in delayed supply also, in some ways, amount to erosion of effective supply.requirements, such as eliminating mandatory forms and replacing them with locallydetermined procedures, could also be considered.  All non-verified documentationcould, for instance, be replaced with self-declaration by the borrower.  Repeated visitsand consequent transaction costs can be avoided by several procedural simplifications- going beyond Gupta Committee recommendation.  In particular, growth ofinformation technology and its application in banking would warrant a thoroughArbitrage in financial markets is inevitable and prevalence of such operationscannot be ignored.  Arbitrage between formal and informal markets, and betweenproduction loans and consumption needs is also common. Thus, keeping the true costartificially low in formal markets, the rural financial institutions would encouragearbitrage and erode the clear potential for profit.  Indeed, an appropriate strategy maybe to reduce the difference between nominal and true cost and ensure that true costAs already mentioned, provision of diverse financial products and services inthe rural areas would enhance income to banks and help reduce the admittedly largespreads in interest rates.  Thus, among the efforts to reduce nominal and true costs ofcredit in rural areas would be provision of multiplicity of financial services by ruralfinancial institutions, taking advantage of developments in technology and financialmarkets.There is increasing recognition that, the spread of literacy and generation ofgrowth impulses in the rural sector would be very significant factors in enhancingeffective supply and reducing true cost of rural credit.  More specifically, the desiredspread of technology and trickledown of urban financial products to rural areas wouldrequire concerted action in four areas.  First and foremost, insurance, especially ofcrops, should penetrate the rural areas to mitigate the risks to both farmer and lender.The lack of penetration of insurance is perhaps an important reason for lendersseeking tied and other risk-mitigation arrangements through informal markets.Second, there should be assured supply of electric power so that functioning ofsystems is not disrupted. Third, telecommunication net work needs to be dependableand financial sector needs to ensure a net work.  We, in the RBI, have alreadylaunched INFINET.  Fourth, the institutional and regulatory framework should enablerural financial institutions to operate in diverse financial products and services. We, inthe RBI are currently engaged in a number of initiatives and studies.  We hope tocontinue the process, and focus on rural credit, as mandated by the RBI Act.  Weendeavour.Thank you.* India, at Potti Telugu University Auditorium Public Gardens, Hyderabad, on December 4,1999.15Sreeramulu Dr.Y.Y.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of Reddy Third Endowment Lecture by Prof.G.Ram would seek advice and guidance in this Related Policiesreflects market conditions, including premium for credit risk.review of products, procedures and linkages among rural financial institutions.
