RESERVE BANK OF INDIAFIRST P. R. BRAHMANANDA MEMORIAL LECTUREby Lord Meghnad DesaiLord Meghnad Jagdishchandra Desai, Professor of Economics at the London School ofEconomics and Political Science (LSE), is currently the Director of the Centre for theStudy of Global Governance, LSE. Born on July 10, 1940 in Baroda, India, he was educatedat the University of Bombay. He secured his Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania,USA. He was created Lord Desai of St. Clement Danes in April 1991.DRAINS, HOARDS AND FOREIGNERS:Lord Desai has taught at the London School of Economics since 1965; he was made aDOES THE NINETEENTH CENTURY INDIANProfessor of Economics in 1983 and he established the Centre for the Study of GlobalECONOMY HAVE ANY LESSONS FOR THEGovernance in 1992. He has been a visiting fellow/professor in various Universities ofinternational repute, and a member of various national and international bodies. He hasTWENTY FIRST CENTURY INDIA?also served as a consultant to United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (1966-68), United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (1967-68), International CoffeeOrganisation (1966-69), British Airports Authority (1968), Ministry of IndustrialDevelopment, Algeria (1973-74) and other organisations. Besides this, he is heading variousCommittees constituted in the LSE. He has been both the Chair and the President ofIslington South and Finsbury Constituency Labour Party in London.Lord Desai has written extensively on a wide range of subjects in Economics, viz.International Political Economy, Marxian Economics, Econometrics, Monetary Economics,Macroeconomics, Economic History, South-Asian studies and Globalisation. He has alsoworked extensively on issues relating to Indian politics and problems. He authored7 books, numerous scholarly articles and edited 8 books. From 1984 to 1991, he wasco-editor of the Journal of Applied Econometrics. He has been a member of the EditorialBoards of Journal of Economic Surveys, International Review of Applied Economics,Pakistan Journal of Applied Econometrics, Journal of Quantitative Economics, Journal ofEconomic Dynamics and Control, Ethnic and Racial Studies, Review of Economic Studiesand Review of International Political Economy.Governor and Distinguished GuestsIntroduction:Thank you for doing me the great honour of inviting me to give theInaugural Brahmananda Memorial Lecture. Brahmananda, or PRBas we often referred to him as, was my teacher and an exemplaryperson for many of us. As his students we relied on him to teach us,counsel us, often feed us late in the evenings. He  nagged and cajoledus to work but above all made us think independently. He was alwaysan unorthodox economist- classical when all around were neoclassical,favoured a wage goods led growth strategy while all around wereenamoured of the Mahalanobis capital intensive one, fiercely patrioticin choosing to stay at home and develop his arguments in a distinctlyIndian way and yet widely read in the best literature of economicsfrom around the world. He was also a great editor for the IndianEconomic Journal and nursed many talents in that role. But he wasabove all a superb researcher. It is his monumental monetary historycommissioned by the RBI which I shall refer to several times in mylecture. Indeed my Lecture is not only in his memory but concernsthhis great volume on the 19 century monetary history.thMoney, Income and Prices in 19 Century India [MIP 19] is a mineof information not only on the Indian economy but also on highpoints of monetary history of many other nations. It is a statisticalcornucopia, a storehouse of material on the various Reports on Indiancurrency as well as the thinking of many British and Indian1economists. It contains statistical analysis of the data usingeconomy enjoying an export led growth.  There was indeed a draineconometric tools as well as a theoretical and historical discussionof the export surplus to pay Home Charges. The question I want toof the development of India. Brahmananda has written the story ofexamine is about the likely impact of the drain being eliminated onthIndian economic growth in the 19 century.Indian growth.Indian Economic Growth 1860-1900:The Indian economy was a large one in relative terms. Its populationwas  256 million in 1861  and the total NDP was Rs. 731 crores, with It is a story which has been often recounted though without reliablea per capita income of Rs. 28.60. But in Sterling terms the NDP wasdata. There have been strong views held about the role of British730 million pounds. By 1899, the population was 296 million, theImperialism in holding back India’s growth , the burden of the drain,NDP Rs. 1196 and per capita income Rs. 41.20 The Rupeethe iniquities of laissez faire policy imposed on a country whichdepreciated through this period from around  Rs. 10 to Rs. 15 perwould have preferred an activist national government. MIP 19  allowsPound. So the 1899 NDP was 797 million Pounds. But in PPP terms,us now to reexamine some of those issues. Needless to say there arethe Indian economy was larger than the UK economy in 1871. Angussurprises, some as I shall reveal, not even obvious to the authorMaddison has done a lot of comparative and long run growthhimself. Again as you would expect from me, my reinterpretation ofmeasurement. His measure is the international PPP Dollar at 1990ththe 19 century story is revisionist but it has lessons for theprices. I shall label it M$. In these terms, in 1871 Indian GDP wasst21 century.M$ 134 billion, while the UK in 1870 had a GDP  of  M$ 100 billion.China alone was larger than India in these terms at M$ 189.7 billion.thHow did India’s economy do in the 19 century? The crudeIn 1913, UK had outstripped India with M$ 224.6 billion comparednationalist version is a story of gloom and doom. The British, we areto India’s M$ 204 billion. China was by then M$ 240 billion. Indiatold,  deindustrialised India, sucked its wealth abroad, distorted itswas catching up with China, then at least.economy by integrating it in a world economy and by applying laissezfaire principles retarded its growth. MIP 19 discusses the problemThe Indian economy grew at about  between 1 % to 1.5 % perof the drain and argues about alternatives to the policy of laissezannum between 1861 and 1900 depending on which of the fourfaire. But its statistical picture of India’s growth is not one of gloom1definitions of income given in MIP 19  you choose. The growth ofand doom. Indeed one can say that during the second half of thepopulation was 0.42  % per annum, so per capita income grewth19 century where the data are best available, India was an open1 All the data cited in this Lecture unless otherwise explicitly stated are from MIP 19.2 3between one half to one percent per annum. Angus Maddison’s There was also a structural transformation in the economy. Thus,calculations cover a longer period from the Mughal period onwards. the share of agriculture in total income fell from 56.5% to 45.3 %.He shows no growth of per capita income, but  rather a slight decline India had a share in world trade of about 7 %, and it absorbed ain the 250 years from 1600 to 1857  from M$ 550 in 1600 to M$ 520 quarter of the world silver production and around 10 to 15 % its2in 1857.  In the years covered by MIP 19,  Maddison shows income gold production. India had a net export surplus of 2 % of NDP ingoing up from M$ 533 in  1870 to M $ 599 by 1900 implying a 1861 rising to 3.2 % by 1899. But of course of this surplus aboutgrowth rate of 0.4 % but as  between 1870 and 1913 as 0.54 per half was taken in Home Charges, from  1.1 % in 1861 rising to asannum. [Maddison, 2001]. Thus Brahmananda’s growth numbers much as 2.34 % in 1894 but falling to 2.05 in 1899 (after abandonmentare broadly in line with Maddison’s. of the silver coinage and adoption of the Gold Exchange Standard).The central question for the nationalists was the adverse impact ofCapital stock grew at 2.4% per annum in this forty year period.3the drain on the economy.Thus while per capita income growth was between ½ to 1 %, capitalstock per capita grew at about 2 %. A production function regression The Drain : Its Size and Its Burden:for NDP gives the coefficients of Labour land and capital,The drain was a charge for Imperial purchases of British goods andrespectively  as 0.37, 0.56 and 0.12. This growth of per capita outputservices, service charges for past capital investments and pensionswas partly due to agricultural growth [0.70% p.a.], mainly due to aof retired British India personnel. The issue of whether the chargesmodest  expansion of area under cultivation [ by about one third]were justified or not reverberates through the literature but for myand a spectacular advance of industrial production [8.4 % p.a.].purpose today  I accept PRB’s verdict which is C.N.Vakil’s as wellIndeed  industrial production starting at a very low level of 4 in 1861that about half of the charges were unrequited transfer [MIP 19,reached 99 by 1900 where the base is 1948-49=100. To putp.507]. Dadabhai Naoroji of course developed a powerful critiquethese rates in perspective, the Indian economy grew at only betweenof the drain and Brahmanada says,1.25 % and 1.5 % in per capita terms in the first thirty years afterIndependence and the growth rate of manufacturing has not been“We submit that the Drain theory was a theory, satisfying thesustained at the historic rate of 8.4 % for any forty year patchrequirements of a general theory containing an interconnected modelsince 1900.with applicability for the period ” [ p.507].2 3 Again Maddison makes the Drain a smaller ratio of NDP at 1.0 % in 1868-1872, Maddison dollars are international 1990 PPP dollars [Maddison, p.165 for1.3 %  for 1911-15 and 0.9 % for 1926-30 [Maddison, p.87]. I shall stick withexplanation. In rupee terms , the per capita income in 1900 was  Rs. 37 and Rs. 204PRB’s estimates.at 1948-49 prices. Thus one rupee in 1948-49 was worth three PPP dollars !4 5The drain was in effect a combination of salaries and pensions paid silver was falling against gold), the domestic burden of servicing thein Sterling as well as materials ( stores) bought in London and interest debt was getting heavier during 1870’s and 1880’s. It was only whencharges for East India company investments and Railway and irrigation in the mid 1890’s the Rupee was put on a Gold Exchange Standardinvestments. MIP 19 shows that the Sterling debt was Rs.105 crores that the burden stabilised. The rupee depreciation helped Indian(100 million Pounds) in 1861, peaking in 1894 to Rs. 234 crores exports, of course, but as UK prices in Gold terms were falling over(130 million Pounds) and in 1899 was Rs 179 crores (119 million the period and Indian prices were rising in silver terms, the realpounds)  Home Charges were Rs. 8 crores in 1861, Rs. 29 crores in exchange rate was not as favourable as it could be. The Drain was1894 and Rs. 24.5 crores in 1899. As a proportion of NDP, the debt thus as much a problem for the Government of India vis-à-viswas 13.6 % in 1861 and 15 % in 1899; the drain amounted to between Whitehall as for the nationalist opinion which resented the outflow1 % and 2.5 % of NDP over the same period, which in contemporary of resources. It is interesting to note here that in the USA at thisterms of debt servicing burden is hardly remarkable. Indeed if it was time, there was a strong agitation for a silver reflation of the dollarnot for the fact that the creditor foreigners were rulers of India, the and for cheap credit by the farmers and merchants but the bankersdebt service charge would hardly have had the emotional impact  it and East Coast industrialists wanted sound money and gold. Thedid. Thus for example there was no critique of the drain caused by USA also plumped for a Gold Standard and stopped silver coinage.the rulers of the native states as well as the feudal zamindars who The Indian debate on the exchange rate of the Rupee runs parallelindulged in profligate luxury consumption abroad or of imported with this and the outcome was the same in a free as in a slave country-luxury goods at home. This ‘internal drain’ did not attract the same upward revaluation of the currency.attention since it was native and not foreign rulers who were causingIn his book PRB examines the effect of the drain on  the economy.it. Indeed this internal drain has not even been estimated to the bestHe does this by regressing money supply, net exports, exchangeof my knowledge.rate , the Gold Silver price ratio, etc. on the drain and other variablesBut the strong nationalist feeling was that the quantity of inputs [Chapter 27]. The way of financing Home Charges via sale of councilbought and the price paid for them were both not quite what an bills in London obviously affected money supply since these billsindependent India would have paid. But apart from that, the Drain were bought by British importers of Indian goods and paid to Indiancreated problems of repayment because it was incurred in terms of exporters who in turn cashed them in India for silver. But for variablesPound Sterling then based on gold and paid in Rupees based on such as the Gold Silver price ratio which is exogenous to India, it issilver. Since the Rupee was depreciating against the Pound (since not clear why a regression on the drain tells us anything. In a6 7regression for  the determinants of income,  the real burden of the for interest on the public debt, which is chiefly caused by the Britishdrain even turns out to have a positive and significant coefficient rule” [Naoroji, p.131].[Table 24.1, p.459]. I shall, however, set these regressions aside as IDadabhai’s critique was very powerful not least because in the coursedo not need them either way.of mounting that critique he pioneered the construction of nationalThe time has come to examine this theory of the Drain carefully. income conceptually as well as statistically. Yet in my view, thisThis is not to question  that there was an unrequited transfer from statement exaggerates the size of the surplus in the economy andIndia to Britain but I do wish to question that it was crucial to an diverts attention away from the real cause of poverty which is theexplanation of India’s underdevelopment. Indeed the Drain theory small size of the surplus itself due to the social and economic structurewas not only an impediment to clear thinking about India’s economic which results in low productivity. The problem is that the surplus,growth. It became a general theory of nationalist economic critique drained or not, is inadequate and the task of development policy forof colonial rule and impeded the rapid growth of countries everywhere the leaders of a newly independent country is to raise the surplus4in the Third World. and not hope that stopping the drain would cure all. Indian economicthinking was impeded by too much hope that the stoppage of theThe Drain theory in effect says that there is investible surplus alreadydrain would cure India’s poverty. This is what explains the slowpresent in the home country but that it is drained away abroad by thegrowth in the first thirty years after Independence as I shall argueColonial power. Come Independence, the drain would vanish  andbelow.growth would result by using the drain now retained. To quoteDadabhai Naoroji’s classic statement, First some stylised numbers. Let us suppose that the export surplusof about 3 % of NDP was split 2:1 between drain and home retention.“ The chief cause of India’s poverty, misery, and all material evils isNow it is well known that India was also absorbing a vast amount ofthe exhaustion of its previous wealth, the continuously increasinggold during this period. So we can surmise that around 1 % of NDPexhausting and weakening drain from its annual production by thewas being hoarded as gold while 2 % was being drained. Forvery excessive expenditure on the European portion of all its services,simplicity, I shall assume that the entire sum of the drain  was  anand the burden of a large amount a year to be paid to foreign countriesunrequited transfer. So what would have been the change in growth4of NDP had the entire Drain be retained and invested ? The most blatant case of this thinking was in the case of Bangladesh whose leadersargued when it was East Pakistan that it was being kept in poverty because of a drainto West Pakistan. Since independence, one has failed to locate this surplus.8 9ornaments hoards are estimated as being as much as 50 % of NDPThe Capital output ratio was 1.26 in 1861 and rose to 2.28 in 1900,[Table 8.1a, p.213-215]. Between 1861 and 1894 the value of theso let us say around 2 on average. A one per cent of income wouldhoards grew from Rs. 389 crores to Rs. 576 crores or about 50%.be a half per cent addition to the Capital stock roughly speaking andJust the increment of Rs. 187 crores would have been an extra 8 togiven the coefficient of 0.12 for the Capital Stock variable in the10 % of the Capital stock in any of the years 1861-1894. Thus atincome equations in MIP 19, it would lead to  0.12 x 0.5 = 0.06 %half the drain, the hoards if reinvested would have boosted the growthaddition to the annual growth rate of  NDP. Thus if the 2 % of NDPrate by 0.06  % per annum. But of course no such investment tookdrained had been invested entirely into productive investment, it wouldplace.have added  between 0.12  to, let us say,   at most 0.15 to the growthrate of NDP thus raising it from between 1 to 1.5 % to around,  sayIt could be argued that in the absence of a pro - growth government,1.15 to 1.65 %, or, in per capita terms, 0.70 to 1.20 %.there was no incentive for people to dishoard, and hence, this is nota fair test. If there had been a nationalist government, it would haveThis is not a large and dramatic effect and it is a maximal estimateinvested in growth. Is that true and had such investment been made,since I take the entire 2 % as unrequited implicitly assuming that allwould it have been effective ?the goods and services bought abroad would have been bought athome.  The question is – Would that have been enough to take IndiaThe test of that proposition was carried out in the years afterout of poverty? Note first that the per capita growth rate betweenIndependence. India had Sterling balances accumulated from the1947 and 1980 was very much in the range indicated above, andWar. These balances amounted to Rs. 1724 crores by end of the5poverty by the Head count ratio hardly moved during that period.War in March 1946 and of that sum Rs. 1512 crores [1.134 billionPounds Sterling] were available to the two independent countriesBut the more important question is – Had the drain not occurredIndia and Pakistan in 1947. Of the share India had, after givingwould the money have been invested ?Pakistan its share [which caused much debate], what with buyingpension annuities, and imports of food and stores, capital outflowIt is assumed in the nationalist discourse that investment of the drainonly Rs. 621 crores was left by end of 1949, the new Governmentin productive assets would be automatic. But there are two objectionshaving spent the money in words of C.D. Deshmukh ‘as if there isto that presumption. Firstly, the remaining 1 % from net exports was6no tomorrow.’ After that, there was Sterling devaluation which shrunkhoarded in gold and silver rather than invested. The gold and silver6  I am grateful to Dr. Jadhav for providing me with material on Sterling balances5  Maddison puts the growth rate of per capita income at 1.40 % for 1950-1973.which is incorporated here. The responsibility for errors and interpretation is mine.10 11the purchasing power of the balances in terms of dollars. Therefor this is the expansion in area cultivated which at around one thirdfollowed a pact to spend the balances at a steady rate. By aboutwas more rapid than population growth which was about 16 % over1957, they had been spent and the Second Five Year Plan faced itsthe period. Productivity was of course not rising on land but asresources crisis in 1958 and had to be pruned. So what were the 8irrigated area expanded , agricultural output expanded atSterling balances spent on? One major use was to buy out British0.7 % per annum and food grains at 1.04 %. But the effect of exportsowned assets and transfer them to Indian hands both private andshould also be included here. Since per capita agricultural output7public. This was thus not investment but paper transfer ofwas expanding, some of it was exported. In this period althoughownership, satisfying to the nationalist consciousness but not aprices were falling, the World economy was expanding as a marketproductive use of accumulated surplus. The other was a liberalisationfor Indian exports. Britain was also growing in this period althoughof  imports of consumer goods and some capital goods. It cannotUSA and Germany were catching up with it.  India’s share in worldbe said that the Sterling balances transformed the Indian economy.trade was 7 % according to MIP19. By 1913, India had$ 7 per capita foreign capital ( $ 2.1 billion )  while China had onlyBut more than that, once Independence came, why did the Drain not$3.7 ($ 1.6 billion ). India was plugged into a growing system.stop and replenish the Indian economy?  My view is that by thistime, the drain was not very large since there had been importRoots of India’s Pauperisation:substitution both in personnel and goods as between Britain andIndia. Maddison’s estimates put the drain at 0.9 % of NDP forSo why did India get its image as a poor country? Of course even1926-30. This is nearly 30 % down from the level in the 1911-1915despite the growth of forty years, the absolute level of per capitaperiod. The trend of the economy was downward but even of theincome was still low since productivity was low and stagnant. Thereduced income the drain as a proportion was lower. Thus by theextra output had come from new land irrigated in Panjab andtime Independence came, the drain was a negligible proportion ofelsewhere and a bit more from the fledgling industrial growth. But ofthNDP; though one presumes, in absence of reliable data, the nationalistcourse the first fifty years of the 20 century were much lessleadership was not to know this.favourable for the Indian economy than the forty years of theth19 century. The growth rate of per capita of income was negativeThe period 1860-1900 was thus a period of modest growth but suchfor 1913-1950; Maddison puts it at –0.22%. Even here the sub periodsas had not been seen for the two centuries previously. One reason8 “ The colonial government increased the irrigated area about eightfold. Eventually7 Michael Kidron (1965) Foreign Investment in India [Oxford; Oxford Universitymore than a quarter of the land of British India was irrigated , compared with 5 perPress]cent in Moghul India ” [ Maddison, p.115].12 13are interesting to examine. Maddison’s time series for India’s GDP 3 % (though between 1913 and 1950 Asia’s share of World Exportsshows growth albeit with fluctuations until 1929/30 when income grew from 10.8 % to 14.1 % [Maddison, p.127]).reached M$ 728 from its level of M$ 599 in 1900thThus the first half of the 20 century especially the interwar period[a growth rate of 0.65 % per annum].  It is after that in the next 20thwas a period, unlike the 19 century, of stagnation and evenyears that income declines to M $ 618 by 1947 [ -0.96 % per annum].retrogression in the Indian economy. India was falling behind Asia inOf course it was also in this period that India’s rate of populationits export performance and its per capita income stagnated over thegrowth stepped up. Thus while between 1860 and 1900 rose fromperiod. India’s picture as a labour surplus country with a largely256 million to 296 million [MIP19, p.213] by 1946 therural and poor population comes from this period. Indeed one canpopulation of undivided India was 410 million [0.70 % per annum].say that India began its withdrawal from world economy during this9Hindi hai hum challis karod !period. This trend continued, was indeed encouraged uponThis was also the period in which agricultural growth came to a halt, independence. Indian economic policy became hostile to foreignin area as well as productivity. The data given in MIP 19 say that trade especially once the Sterling balances ran out. This is becauseindustrial output had reached a value of 99 with base 1948-49 as the nationalist logic saw all foreign trade and not just the classic100. So industrial growth also collapsed, presumably after 1929. Home Charges as a ‘drain’ of resources. India was to retain all itsThis was despite a slightly more active industrial policy following output at home, regulate foreign trade exports as well as imports. Itthe Industrial Commission Report of 1916 as well as tariff autonomy was to develop as a self sufficient economy not integrated into thefor India. But the world economy was also shrinking. Trade was world economy.declining due to tariffs and capital movements were drying up. TheAmbition and Reality in Independent India :10world had de-globalised. Britain was also lagging behind the worldin this period unlike in the earlier period. India was plugged into aBut before Independence and before the Second World War whenstagnant if not shrinking world economy.the Sterling balances accumulated, nationalists were confident thatonce the foreign rulers had been thrown out, India will be able to beIt was during this period that India began losing its share of worldprosperous quite rapidly. Thus Nehru summarises the goals as settrade so that by Independence the share was closer to aboutby the National Planning Committee of the Congress Party as follows :9 I do not however subscribe to the Malthusian explanation for the slow growth. I citethe population growth figures for simple accounting of the per capita income growth“The aim was declared to be to ensure an adequate standard offigures.10living for the masses, in other words, to get rid of the appalling I have dealt with this in Desai (2002).14 15poverty of the people. The irreducible minimum, in terms of money, suggest for raising productivity on land was expansion of the unit ofhad been estimated by economists at figures varying from Rs. 15 to cultivation by pooling of land .Rs.25 per capita per month……We calculated that a reallyThe lack of surplus became obvious in the mid 1950’s. Efforts toprogressive standard of living would necessitate the increase of themobilise surplus by taxation along the lines suggested by Prof. Kaldornational wealth by 500 to 600 per cent. This was, however, too big aran into political resistance. Even Nehru’s dream of cooperativejump for us, and we aimed at a 200 to 300 per cent increase withinfarming ran aground thanks to Charan Singh. Yet the strategy often years”[Nehru(1945), p.333].planned development was to invest all in capital goods industry notThis quotation tells us how ambitious the leadership thought it could for export but for building up a self sufficient economy immunebe. A growth rate of 200 to 300 % over ten years [ 7 to 11 % per from foreign trade. It ended in low growth and the persistence ofannum] is to be contrasted with the much more modest goals set out poverty while the Mahalanobis strategy  lasted. Of coursein the Plans subsequently, to say nothing about the even more modest Brahmananda was innocent in all this . He did propose a wage goodsachievements. A minimum living standard of Rs. 15 in pre - War strategy but his model was not mathematically elegant as the11prices would have meant at least twice as much by the mid 1950s. Mahalanobis model was.Thus the poverty level when fixed in the 1960’s at Rs. 15 was wayInternal Drain and Economic Underachievement :below what would have matched expectations of the Independencemovement. The reason for this downward revision is not too far toThe lack of surplus put a brake on growth. In the 1950s, once thelook.Sterling balances had run out and the good harvest of 1954-55 notrepeated, there was inflation. Foreign aid plus deficit financing filledThe shock for the planners of post-independence India was to bethe gap. Luckily for India, the constraint on agricultural productivitythat there was an acute shortage of investible surplus. The expectationwas lifted  during the 1960s by the Green Revolution. This was awas that since the surplus was there and would be enhanced by thehappy combination of foreign technology and private sector, i.e.,drain ending, the priority was how to allocate the resources tofarmers’ response to some government incentives. The windfall ofindustrial development. The real issue was the lack of surplus due tothe Green Revolution was hors du plan Thus a possibility existedthe low productivity in agriculture. Here again agrarian policyconcentrated on land reform and hence the issue of distribution of11 I have discussed this in my article in the Manmohan Singh festschrift . See Desaithe surplus rather than its enhancement. The only policy it could(1998) also reprinted in Desai (2004)16 17of lifting the Indian economy to a high growth path once the food surplus financed industrial investment. But since the industriesgrain constraint had been lifted. But there was an internal drain to enjoyed no comparative advantage and were largely loss making, thecontend with. Brahmananda is eloquent about this in the concluding investment did not lead to rapid growth or elimination of poverty.paragraph of his Chapter 27 on the impact of the drain. Let meIndia’s per capita income did not regain its pre - Independence peakquote him :of 1929 till 1960 according to Maddison’s figures. Poverty numbers“The new dimension on poverty has no direct relation to Naoroji’s did not begin to move down till twenty years later during the 1980s.analysis but there can exist an internal drain, which potentially keeps But by then one important plank of India’s economic dogma hadlarge portions of population below the poverty line. Such a drain been abandoned. The fear of foreign borrowing had been removedcan be inbuilt in economic policy formulation and in planning by the time Mrs. Indira Gandhi came back to power in 1980. Indiastrategies” [MIP 19, p.519]. abandoned the goal of self sufficiency,  i.e., the belief  that there wasenough investible surplus at home. Foreign debt went up from $ 20As an early and prescient opponent of the Mahalanobis strategy,billion to $ 83 billion over the 1980’s [Maddison, p.166]. There wasPRB was entitled to point to this internal drain but he does nota drain of course; the debt had to be serviced. But the GDP growthfurther specify what it is but goes on to talk in general terms aboutrate improved from around 3.5 % in the 1950-1980 period to 5.5 %contracts and exploitation. Let me spell out what the internal drain is.in the 1980s. But the growth was not export oriented as was the casethin the 19 century. There was not a sufficient export surplus toThis is made up of diverting the surplus into capital intensive industriesthservice the ‘Home Charges’ of  20 century. So the economy crashedwhich were surplus absorbing rather than surplus enhancing [ lossin 1991.making in other words ] and into public sector employment at realthwages rising faster than the real growth rate of the economy as theyThere is also parallel to the 19 century a hoard but again it is anhave done till very recently.  Although the public sector labour forceinternal hoard whereby people hoard cash in large amounts. Itsaccounted for only 15 % of the labour force, it absorbed a lot of theestimates vary but it is not less than the 50 % of GDP proportionthsurplus. With other forms of internal drain- subsidies costing nearlythat the 19 century hoard of gold attained. Part of this so called15 % of GDP, the drain assumes alarming proportions. Industryblack money enters the circuit of expenditure in real estate, films andenjoyed a positive tariff of around 45 % and agriculture a negativecrime related activities but a large proportion is just hoarded. It is astariff of about 20 %. Thus as in the Soviet Five Year Plan, agriculturalmuch of a drain as the other one. Since independence governments18 19thhave not only not reinvested the drain effectively but created a new With the 19 century drain, no one was certain if the benefit exceededand larger one. Add to it the internal hoard [ though this may involve the cost and since the rulers were foreign the suspicion was that anysome double counting ].  India is wasting a much larger part of GDP investment they made was not beneficial. While I did not questionstthan when Dadabhai spotted the drain. Perhaps the consolation is that proposition, it is worth pointing out that in the 21 century,that the wastage is not by foreigners but by Indians themselves. India enjoys some advantage in the globalisation game because ofthe English language as well as the legal system that the BritishstLessons for the 21 Century:imposed on India. Not all the railways and canals were entirelyuseless. One should perhaps now sit down and do a careful analysisSince the Indian economy crashed in 1991 and changed its courseof the returns to investments made then and compare it to the costthings have improved tremendously. The growth rate of total andto get a better estimate of the unrequited proportion of the drain.per capita income is now respectable. Nehru’s dream of doublingstincome in ten years required a growth rate of 7 % per annum andBut the lesson for the 21 century is clear. Any drain internal orthis is now for the first time in fifty seven years after independenceexternal should be minimised if not eliminated. A nation where eventhattainable. As in the 19 century, the economy is becoming exportafter nearly six decades of independence a quarter of the populationoriented though as yet India’s share of world exports is nowhereis poor cannot afford to waste resources. The internal drain has to12near what it was then. The pattern of capital import in the Gandhi-be cut. This means budget deficits and for that purpose subsidiesthGandhi decade of 1980s was very much like that in the 19 century-which are all regressive. But its also means eliminating the hoardsat high and fixed interest rates. What is needed is foreign directand harnessing them for development. Let me finally turn to thatinvestment as equity rather than debt. This is the new pattern ofproblem.stcapital imports in the 21 century globalisation as against the fixedthinterest borrowings of the 19 century. China has shown how much Harnessing the Hoards :can be borrowed this way. Thus the ‘drain’ will be there only if theSince I am enjoying the hospitality of a Central Bank, let me try outimported capital benefits the economy, i.e., if it generates profits, ifa policy proposal. The excessive hoards are an example of acuteit is surplus generating.liquidity preference. In the past various schemes have been tried tomake hoarders disgorge without much success.  Now one way to12 As I write this, the new trade policy aims to double the share from 0.9 to 1.8 % bytackle such liquidity preference is to do what Silvio Gessell2009. It is to be hoped that the policy succeeds.20 2113prescribed. He of course advocated stamping money frequently, small recompense for the kind honour you have done me in invitinge.g. monthly, to preserve its value thus taxing hoarding. This is rather me to give this inaugural lecture.inconvenient. I would propose periodic, say  quinquennial, renewalReferences:of the currency.  The present currency should   be replaced, one forone, for a new currency every five years. Bank deposits are of courseAhluwalia, Isher and I.M.D.Little [1998] India’s Economic Reformsno problem and can be automatically converted into the new currency.and Development [ Delhi; Oxford University Press]But cash hoards should be convertible at variable rates. Thus up tothBrahmananda, P.R. [2001] Money, Income, Prices in 19 Centurya certain limit reasonably required for transaction purposes, say  upIndia:A Historical, Quantitative and Theoretical Study [ Mumbai,to one million rupees per person, the conversion should be one toHimalaya Publishing]one and automatic. Beyond that conversion should be permittedonly if the holder can prove that tax has been paid  on the income.Desai, Meghnad [1998] Development Perspectives : Was There AnOtherwise they should be offered zero interest bonds in exchangeAlternative to Mahalanobis ? in Ahluwalia and Little (1998) , alsofor their hoards. These bonds can of course be traded after a decentreprinted in Desai (2004)interval of the reissue.[2002] The Possibility of DeGlobalisation, in Dolfsma andThis scheme is designed to plough the hoards into governmentDennereuther (2002)coffers by way of bonds sold. If the hoards are anything like 50 %[2004] Development and Nationhood : Essays in Political Economyof GDP  then the sale should realise a hefty sum enough to retire aof South Asia [Delhi; Oxford University Press]substantial part of the National Debt. It is of course a tax on hoarding.When the bonds are cashed in a rush by the hoarders the market willDolfsma,W. and C.Dennereuther (eds.)[2002] Globalisation,price them down. Thus the tax on hoarding will be marketInequality and Social Capital [Aldershot, Edward Elgar]determined. Then this scheme is to be repeated every five years orso to discourage rehoarding. Governor I offer you my scheme as aGessell, Silvio [1929] The Natural Economic Order, translated byPhilip Pye [Berlin; Neo-Verlag]13 Silvio Gessell’s ideas contained in his book ‘The Natural Economic Order’ weregiven publicity by Keynes who praised him in ‘The General Theory’ as being betterKidron, Michael [1965] Foreign Investment in India [ Oxford; Oxfordthan Marx in understanding capitalism. Keynes’s hope that Gessell will be read moreUniversity Press]than Marx in the future has not been fulfilled.22 23Maddison, Angus [2001] The World Economy: A MillennialPerspective [Paris; OECD]Naoroji, Dadabhai [1901/1962] Poverty and UnBritsh Rule in India[ Reprinted, Delhi; Government of India Publications]Nehru, Jawaharlal [1945] The Discovery of India [London; BodleyHead]24
