Remarks on capital account liberalisation and capital controls by Dr. Y.V. Reddy,Governor, Reserve Bank of India at theCentral Bank Governors' Symposium convened by the Bank of England in Londonon June 25, 2004I am thankful to Bank of England for the excellent arrangements and well thought outagenda for the 2004 Central Bank Governors' Symposium.As desired by Governor Mervyn King, I will give a brief introduction in this session oncapital account liberalisation and capital controls.Professor Kenneth Rogoff's well-researched messages on effects of financialglobalisation on developing countries are appropriate as governing thoughts for thissession. There is evidence of a threshold effect in the relationship between financialglobalisation and economic growth, and the heightened risks of volatility in capital flowsto developing countries gets reduced only after a particular level of integration. Incontrast, empirical evidence shows that trade liberalisation has had beneficial impact. Areview of evidence provides no road map for the optimal pace and sequencing offinancial integration. Many questions in this regard are best addressed only in the contextof country-specific circumstances and institutional features.In this background, based on the Indian experience, I will present some issues relating tomanaging capital account.First, capital account liberalisation is a process and it has to be managed keeping in viewelasticities  in the economy, and vulnerabilities or potential for shocks. These includefiscal, financial, external, and even real sector – say, oil prices and monsoon conditionsfor India. Professor Rogoff's presentation places special emphasis on governmentborrowings as a vulnerability.Second, caution is needed in moving forward with each step in capital accountliberalisation, recognising that reversal of  any step in liberalisation is very difficult sincemarkets tend to react very negatively to reversals, unless there is already a crisissituation.Third, the capital account itself needs to be managed during the process of capitalaccount liberalisation. There is a hierarchy in the nature of different types of capital flowsin real life. For example, foreign direct investment is preferred for stability, and quantumof short-term external debt, by residual maturity, should not be excessive.  Furthermore,adequate reserves, keeping in view the national balance sheet considerations, whichinclude public and private sectors, provide comfort. Public policy can achieve thesedesirable conditions only through some sort of management of capital account.Fourth, the management of capital account will be effective under enabling conditions,such as, reasonable confidence in macro policies, in particular tax regimes, andsafeguards against misuse of liberalised current account regime to effect capitaltransfers. Sound management will also avoid dollarisation of the domestic economy andinternationalisation of domestic currency.2Fifth, operationally, management of capital account involves a distinction not onlybetween residents and non residents or between inflows and outflows but also betweenindividuals, corporates and financial intermediaries. The financial intermediaries areusually a greater source of volatility amongst these. If such financial intermediariesoperating in the developing countries are owned or controlled by foreign entities /investors, there is perhaps greater tendency to volatility in the flows.  It is noticed thatsuch foreign owned / controlled intermediaries are often influenced by considerationsother than domestic economy and have less appreciation of local conditions – apart fromthe issues relating to cross-border supervision of financial intermediaries by the hostcountry supervisor.Sixth, the prudential regulations over financial intermediaries, especially over banks, inrespect of their forex exposures and forex transactions must be effective and a dynamiccomponent of management of capital account as well as financial supervision.  Suchprudential regulations should not be treated as capital controls.Seventh, capital controls should be treated as only one of the components ofmanagement of capital account. As liberalisation advances, the control-regime wouldcontract, and thus, it is the changing mix of controls that charecterises the process ofliberalisation in management of capital account.Eighth, capital controls may be price based, including tax-regimes, or administrativemeasures. Depending on the legal framework and governance structures, the mixbetween the two would vary.  As liberalisation advances, the administrative measureswould get reduced and price-based increased, but the freedom to change the mix andreimpose controls should always be demonstrably available. Such freedom to exercisethe policy of controls adds comfort to the markets at times of grave uncertainity.Finally, as mentioned by Professor Kenneth Rogoff, a distinction needs to be madebetween de jure and de facto financial integration in general and hence, in the context ofcapital account in particular.  In practice, there are difficulties in measuring the degree offinancial integration.  However, the institutional structures, both of public policy andmarkets, need to be evolved to meet the imperatives of liberalised capital account.  In thefinal analysis, the basic issue in any policy context is whether capital controls lead todistortions in exchange rate or the liberalised capital flows that lead to distortions inexchange rate.  In respect of emerging economies, the conduct of market participantsshows that automatic self-correcting mechanisms do not operate in the forex markets.Hence, the need to manage capital account – which may or may not include specialprudential regulations and capital controls.  There are many subtleties and nuances insuch a management of capital account which encompasses several macro issues andmicro structures.Thank you for your patience.---------------------
