InterviewWeekly > 28 March - 3 April 2013 [ published by La Sentinelle Ltd ]<16“The remedy to improving domestic savings lies in a more ef?  cient banking sector”Weekly speaks to Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao, governor of the Reserve Bank of India, who was recently a guest speaker of the Bank of Mauritius. He talks about the state of the Indian economy, the challenges faced by Mauritius and the policy options available to Central Banks even if some are politically unpopular. By Touria PRAYAG? W hen we heard that the governor of the Bank of Mau-ritius had invited you over, our reaction was that he had in-vited himself. You actually are on the same wavelength on all monetar y pol icy issues. Is t hat a coincidence? I don’t think it’s coincidental because if you look all over the world, at the core, all Central Banks face the same challenge which is balancing growth and in?  ation. Look at Japan and the US today: it’s the Federal Reserve having to adjust its policy to the ?  scal stance of government. In a way, the different perceptions of government and the Central Bank are largely replicated everywhere. Interview > your English news magazine [ issue n° 35]PHOTOGRAPHER: KRISHNA  PATHER“People should force politicians to take dif?  cult decisions which are in the long-term interests of the country.”Dr. Duvvuri Subbarao, governor, Reserve Bank of India.<17Of course, the details vary according instrument. After all, mathemati- ? You mean Prime Minister to t he cou nt r y.  Mau r it ius, for exa m- cally, for every objective, you need Abe demanding that the Japa-ple, is a small economy; India is a one variable. So if you have one nese Central Bank be more ag-large one. Mauritius has an income policy variable, you have one interest gressive in its monetary policy? of $10,000 per capita. We are at rate. But to believe that you can con- Yes, but the Bank of Japan has, I $1500. trol in?  ation, reduce unemploy- bel ieve, a v iew t hat it is a lso i mpor t ant ment, stimulate growth and control for other structural reform policies  “This ? Does that make the prob- ?  nancial stability with that one in- and the ?  scal stance of the govern-lems different? strument is, I believe, asking for too ment to be conducive for the mone-balance or I don’t think so because the is- much. As interest rates are impor- tary policy to deliver on its mandate. trade-off sues are the same: balancing growth tant for getting the growth-in?  ation and in?  ation and providing an envi- balance right, you have to have ? The argument of the min-between ronment of price and ? nancial stabil- other policies in place for monetary ister of ?  nance and the econom-ity so that investors and consumers policy to work effect ively. Li ke ? scal ic players here is that our rupee in? ation can make informed choices. But the policy, external sector policy and is overvalued. Do you think it is?mechanics of the problem can differ. exchange rate policy. and growth (Long silence)For example, how do you set interest that people rates ? How does moneta r y t ransm is- ? Historically, there has ? Come on, tell us!sion take place? Then looking at the been ?  scal dominance over Central Banks don’t take a view talk about, external sector, what is your policy monetary policy. Why has that on the exchange rates. (Hesitates). on the exchange rate? changed? The opinion of the Reserve Bank of I don’t That changed after the 1970s India is that the exchange rate should subscribe ? Coming to the exchange when monetary policy setting and be largely market-determined and rate, is in?  ation our biggest en- Central Banks became independent. that Central Banks should intervene to.”emy? Isn’t lack of growth a big- Now, after the crisis, the fear is that only to manage volatility or to prevent ger enemy? once again monetar y policy is com- economic disruption. I believe that is I wouldn’t say bigger or smaller. ing under ?  scal policy dominance the policy in Mauritius too. Wheth-You need growth – rapid growth– meaning that ?  scal policy is set in- er the exchange rate is becoming and you need an environment of dependently and monetary policy volatile or becoming disruptive to the price stability. I would say the price has to adjust. What has to happen is macroeconomic stability is a judg-stability is a necessary condition for that monetary policy has to be set ment call that the Central Bank has growth. It would be futile to believe independently by an independent to make. that you can have growth in a time Central Bank taking into account its of rapid in?  ation. This balance or assessment of the macro-economic ? Only the Central Bank?trade-off between in?  ation and situation and there has to be some I believe so, because why do gov-growth that people talk about, I degree of coordination. For in- ernments take a position on the ex-don’t subscribe to because there stance, if monetar y policy is accom- change rate? Because they believe might be some trade-off in the short modating, then ?  scal policy has to that a certain exchange rate has im-term but in the medium to long be tight so that there is adjustment. plications for importers and export-term, you need price stability for If both are accommodating, there ers. Right?investors and consumers to make will be in?  at ion. Again, on exchange informed choices, a necessary con- rate, as economies are getting more ? Yes. And doesn’t it?dition to stimulate growth. open, you can have imported in? a- Maybe in the very short term. I tion through the exchange rate. So believe that export competitiveness ? But when you talk of the your external sector policies have to is determined more by productivity long term, the state of the econ- be appropriate. That’s a long answer hopefully one will strive for growth levels rather than by the exchange omy in many countries does to your question. and the other will strive for stability rate. I don’t think that any country not give that breather. Many and we will have an ideal situation. has been able to gain an extended companies don’t have time to ? You are talking about the competitive advantage through the wait for things to stabilize. And independence of the Bank, but ? But there are no meeting manipulation of the exchange rate.if they close down, workers are this almost invariably creates a grounds are there? laid off.   clash between the minister of No, there are no meeting ? Your minister of ? nance But to believe that monetary ?  nance and the governor of the grounds but received wisdom today said “we will go on the path of policy by itself can stimulate Bank. Is that conducive to good is that an independent Bank has growth alone if others are not growth and answer all problems is government? served all jurisdictions very well. We willing to support us”. And these incorrect because monetary policy should improve upon that, not cripple ‘others’ are probably you. Do is just one instrument. There doesn’t have to be a clash. it. It’s okay for governments to set the you have the same con? ict that A difference of opinion is quite un- mandate for the Central Bank but we have here?? Isn’t it the most impor- derstandable. You see, governments once that’s done, they shouldn’t dic- I wouldn’t call it a con? ict, but tant one? traditionally have a bias towards tate how that mandate should be there are de?  nitely differences of It is an important one. But you growth and the Central Bank’s delivered. And that’s the issue opinion and differences that we cannot expect to solve all the macro- dharma is to manage in?  ation. If the that’s being played out in countries talked about earlier are quite natural economic problems with that one Central Banks act independently, like Japan. depending on where you are coming your English news magazine [ issue n° 35] < Interview InterviewWeekly > 28 March - 3 April 2013 [ published by La Sentinelle Ltd ]<18from. I also want to say that I have to reduce the subsidies. is not just the poor who get sub- is even talking about Singa-excellent liaisons with our ? nance sidies. A lot of the non-poor are pore. Do you know why? minister. ? Subsidies on food? getting them as well and some of (Evasive) No, I have never ? Is that why he calls you On food, fertilisers and pe- the poor are not getting subsidies. thought about why nobody is talking “others”? troleum products. about Singapore. It depends also on (Laughs) I don’t know where ? So what you are asking the con?  dence of the regulatory and in which context that statement ? Isn’t that politically sui- for is not actually to eliminate jurisdiction in these countries.was made but I can quite under- cidal? subsidies but to target them.stand if he has a different take on That is what I am saying. In t he Target and streamline. Because ? Do you think that Singa-the growth-in?  ation balance. short term, there are political costs. subsidies of this size are unsustain- pore has a better regulatory But in the medium term, it is good able, so we are asking for streamlin- system?? It is more than a take. He for the economy. ing and we are asking for targeting. It would be unfair for me to say is saying that you are not sup- That is one thing: politically un- that.porting him. ? Are you asking for the popular but necessary. Then you I cannot really interpret what poor to pay the full price of the have to raise investment. ? Forget about now. Let’s he said. I’ve admitted that there food they eat? talk about the period when you have been differences of opinion Otherwise the poor will pay ? What is the point of com- were there…but we have a good mechanism of the price anyway through in? a- ing up with suggestions which It’s not as if, even if you are a ? -managing those differences. tion. It is a question of how the will never work? There is no nance secretary, you have a complete poor get the best deal out of the government that will commit world view of which jurisdiction is ? The picture you painted economy. I believe that ? scal con- political suicide, is there? more effective. So, it would be inap-of the economy of India is not solidation is actually an anti-pov- I believe governments do take propriate for me to answer the ques-a very rosy one. Is it as bad as erty measure. Today, in India, it politically dif?  cult decisions. In his tion.  About the India-Mauritius it sounds? speech in Israel, President Obama DTAA, what I have understood is I don’t know but growth this said politicians will not take dif? - that it is up for some renegotiations year is going to be the lowest in a cult decisions unless people ask to prevent and minimize abuses. decade. In?  ation has come off the t hem to do so. So in t r uly funct ion- There is round-tripping and there is peak but is still quite elevated. We ing democracies, people should a need to prevent that. are going to have historically the force politicians to take dif? cult highest current account de? cit this decisions which are in the long- ? Yes. But the money year. And investment has deceler- term interests of the country. Poli- comes out from India. So ated. So there are challenges. But I ticians have to look beyond tomor- shouldn’t this prevention hap-also said in my talk that the India row to see what’s coming ? ve years pen in India?growth story is still robust. India’s from now. It should happen in India and promises are still there. The growth it should happen in the other part-drivers are all intact. And if we do ? You were ? nance secre- ner countries. India should make the right things from now on, we tar y to the government of India sure there is no money generated can make the promises come true. between 2007 and 2008 and you through money laundering and were secretary to the Prime around the world there should be ? When you say that, you Minister’s Economic Advisory no jurisdiction where this round-do not sound very convinced Council before that, so it is not tripping is possible. It’s both a ques-that the government will do the unfair to ask you about your tion of opportunities too.“To believe right things.  Are you? take on the Double Taxation that Well, the government is doing Avoidance Agreement ? What do you see as the some of the right things. But this is (DTAA), is it? major speci?  c challenge for the monetary a democracy. All democracies go No, I would prefer not to answer Mauritian economy?through the struggle to do things that question because that is some- You need to improve your do-policy by that are politically unpopular in the thing that has developed in the last mestic savings in order to reduce itself can medium term. But in the short two or three years after I have been dependence on foreign sav ings. You term, there might be a political cost. away from the government. need to generate domestic savings. stimulate For that you need to have a com-? What are these `right growth and ? But you did not go into petitive and ef?  cient banking sector things’ in a nutshell? hiding after that. You must be which can give a higher rate of return answer all The ?  rst thing is ? scal con- aware of the press articles in to the savers but at the same time give solidation in India. To contain the the Indian newspapers. competitive rates of interest to the problems is ? scal de?  cit is very important for I believe that both governments borrowers. That means that the net incorrect.”monetary policy to be effective have agreed to rework the agree- interest margins of the banks must and contain in?  ation. It is impor- ment in order to prevent abuse by be sma l l. I n ot her words, ban ks must tant for the savings rate to go up, irregular, unlawful investors. be more ef?  cient in ? nancial inter-it is important for the govern- mediation. If you accept that improv-ment’s quality of expenditure to ? There is a lot of talk in ing domestic savings is a challenge, improve so the biggest thing to do India about round-tripping the remedy lies in the banking sector for ?  scal consolidation in India is through Mauritius and nobody becoming more ef?  cient. ?Interview > your English news magazine [ issue n° 35]
