*Bank of England’s Seminar on International Financial Architecture July 5, 2002Today’s topic is a very large one and the time available to us is relatively short.To make the maximum use of the time available to me, I will make four broad pointsrather than deal with any specific issues relating to the international financialarchitecture. These, we can deal with later in the seminar during the question/answerperiod.The First point that I want to make is that we need to recognize that the period ofthe 90s, despite many gains, has seen many more financial crises than the earlier decades.The most distinguishing characteristic of this period is a marked increase in volatility inexchange rates and capital flows. The swings in these areas have not only been large, butalso unpredictable and unanticipated. Thus, we have seen a large number of currencycrises, for example, in Mexico, Russia, East-Asia, Brazil and currently Argentina,Turkey, and emergence of currency pressures in Brazil and Paraguay again. Exchangerates of industrial countries, notably dollar, Euro and Yen have also shown both short-term volatility and large medium-term movements.Capital flows, particularly to emerging markets, have similarly been volatile, witha boom phase being followed by an abrupt and equally large reversal. Another feature ofthe abrupt movement in exchange rate is that while crisis initially occurs in one or twocountries, their adverse effects can be felt across the world. In the light of the recentevents following the Argentina crisis, it is also not clear whether the contagion effectfrom one country’s problems to others has actually been contained, as was assumed onlya month ago.As I said, there have been real gains also in terms of benefits from higher capitalflows and more flexible exchange rates. However, it is also a fact that the internationalfinancial environment has become substantially more uncertain, unpredictable andunstable in the 90s than in the previous half-century.The Second broad point that I want to make is that the present internationalfinancial architecture, which was designed at Bretton Woods after World War II, was fora different era altogether – one of fixed exchange rates, preponderance of “official” andstable capital flows, and temporary current account deficits which could be met withtemporary access to IMF credit. The Bretton Woods architecture was not designed tocope with the instability and volatilities of the kind that I referred to earlier. Having said this, it has to be recognized that, particularly after the Asian crisis,there has been some progress in strengthening the structure of the old architecture.Various high level forums such as G-7, G-33, G-20 and international institutions such asIMF, World Bank and IOSCO have been busy in analyzing the past experience and inintroducing ways and means of imparting greater transparency, early detection, bettersupervision, higher capital requirements, more sustainable exchange rate regimes,stronger standards and codes, and involving the private sector in resolving crises. Someimprovement has also been effected in IMF financial facilities, such as contingencyfinancing facility, to provide quick and higher access in the event of a crisis. However, itis also clear that these efforts, while having improved our understanding of the causesand consequences of financial volatility, and perhaps also helped in devising someprecautionary measures, do not amount to a new international financial architecturewhich can cope with the new realities.I am also not sure that given the large volumes involved and short period overwhich a crisis can manifest itself, whether workable international solutions to theweaknesses in the present architecture are feasible within a reasonable time?My Third point is that today – whether we like it or not -most of the responsibilityfor coping with the burden of instability and volatility is that of the country itself.From our own experience in India, I believe that there are three fundamentalrequirements for a country to prevent a financial crisis:? Careful monitoring and management of exchange rates without, - I emphasiswithout - a fixed target or a pre-announced target or a band. Flexibility inexchange rates is essential, but so as the ability to intervene, if and whennecessary;? A policy to build a high level of foreign exchange reserves which takes intoaccount not only anticipated current account deficits but also “liquidity at risk”arising from unanticipated capital movements;? A judicious policy for management of the capital account. Short-term bankingcapital for financing investments and growth has to be avoided, while foreigndirect investment and portfolio investment have to be encouraged. The point issimply that in respect of foreign direct investment and portfolio investment, thereis a “cost” involved for the foreign investor in quickly reversing such flows. Thiscost is not present in respect of fixed-interest banking capital, particularly short-term capital.I am glad to inform you that these three broad principles have guided us in Indiaduring the 90s in the management of our external sector, particularly after the Asian crisisof 1997. The results have been extremely positive. We have doubled our foreignexchange reserves in the last three years  - and increased them several times over sincethe beginning of the 90s. They are now adequate to take care of all reversible capitalflows as well as current account deficits, and are more than required under theconservative “Guidotti rule” (which suggests reserves coverage for one year’s capitalaccount liabilities).  India’s short-term debt is also very low – and Central Bank’sforward liabilities have been reduced to less than 1 per cent of reserves.This has gained us the confidence of the markets. This has been more than evidenteven during the recent period of uncertainties.Similarly, we have a flexible but managed exchange rate system. According to thelatest assessment by the IMF and other authorities, our exchange rates have been lessvolatile than other emerging markets. Our exchange rate by any criterion ofcompetitiveness is also believed to be broadly realistic and competitive.We have also witnessed a substantial increase in capital flows particularly foreigndirect investment, and much greater confidence by foreign investors in our macro-economic stability.Finally, and the Fourth point that I want to make, is that international institutionsand international community must play a supportive role in resolving a crisis whenever itoccurs. For an agency, such as the IMF, to play such a role, the essential requirementsare:? A substantial increase in its lendable resources in line with increase in the sizeof international capital flows in the 90s.? A greater automaticity in the availability of finance, subject to a countryfollowing reasonable macro-economic policies. The best way to achieve thisobjective would be to make IMF facilities “automatic” provided the annualArticle IV consultations with the country have been positive and favourable.? A third requirement is to provide developing member countries with a muchlarger voting power than now. It is one of the ironies of the last forty yearsthat, although developing countries as a group, have grown much faster thanthe developed countries and their relative economic strength in terms ofoutput and trade has increased substantially, their actual voting power inBretton Woods institutions has tended to decline! To sum up, let us recognize that the present Bretton Woods international financialarchitecture was not equipped to deal with the problems of instability and volatility inexchange rates and capital flows which have characterized international financial marketsin the 90s. Let each country take measures to build its own safety walls by providing forhigher reserves, more realistic policies to regulate capital flows, and careful monitoringof exchange rates. Finally, let the international institutions play a supportive role throughhigher and more automatic access, subject to annual performance review. Theseinstitutions must also be made less ideological and less political with greater voice for allmember countries rather than for a handful of industrial countries.[I believe that what I have said is also in line with the “Middle Way” prescriptionof Mervyn King and is capable of being built into the present architecture.]* Based on remarks made by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at thesymposium of Central Bank Governors hosted by the Bank of England in London on July5, 2002
