1Banks in India: Challenges & OpportunitiesSmt. Arundhati Bhattacharya, Chairman, State Bank of India, Shri. Deepak Parekh,Chairman HDFC, Shri. V. G. Kannan, Chairman, SBI Cap Securities Ltd., Shri. ManiPalivesan, Managing Director, SBI Cap Securities Ltd, distinguished panelists andparticipants. It is a pleasure to address the BFSI Conference 2014 which features paneldiscussions on topical issues in banking. The first panel discussion, interestingly, is onDisruptive Themes for Next Decade. The word disruptive is usually used with a negativeconnotation and therefore to be chosen as the theme for the panel discussion is a bolddecision. On a careful rethinking, it seems disruptions can be used as synonym forchallenges posed by paradigm shifts in the environment, thereby questioning the waythings are done today. These challenges are opening the opportunities which banksshould harness if they want to remain relevant in the financial service space in India.Therefore, in my address I intend to focus on some of these challenges & opportunities.2. As at end-March 2013, there were 155 commercial banks including 151 scheduledcommercial banks (SCBs) of which Regional Rural Banks were 64. The total number ofbank offices at end-March 2014 is estimated to have reached 1,15,014  and the populationper office, 1,10,052. In terms of the regional spread of the bank offices, while NorthEastern region accounted for about 2 per cent (2,785 bank offices), Southern regionaccounted for about 28 per cent (30,925 bank offices). Despite such vast expansion ofbanking network, banking penetration still remains relatively low. According to theCRISIL’s financial inclusion index, Inclusix, which covers three parameters of branchpenetration, deposit penetration and credit penetration, at all India level, the index isplaced (on a scale of 100) at 40.1 in 2011, reflecting under penetration of formal bankingfacilities in most part of the country. While the Southern region witnessed highest financialinclusion with index at 62.2, North-Eastern region registered lowest with 28.5. Under-penetration is evident in terms of number of ATMs and POS per million population also. InIndia, it stood at about 94 and 695 respectively as compared to, say, 1200 and 4853respectively in Russia. The credit to GDP ratio is at around 53 per cent, which is lowcompared to the credit-GDP ratio of many advanced & developing economies. Hence,there is a need for much greater banking and credit penetration going forward. This is sobecause despite efforts to develop the corporate bond market, the Indian financial systemremains bank-dominated with commercial banks accounting for over 60 per cent of thefinancial sector assets. It is, therefore, essential for the Indian economy, striving for anaccelerating, sustainable and inclusive growth in the medium to long-term, to have ahealthy and growing banking system.1 Keynote address delivered by Shri Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor at the BFSI Conference 2014organized by SBICap Securities on June 12, 2014 in Mumbai. The speaker gratefully acknowledges thecontributions of Shri. Prakash Baliarsingh, Smt. Nilima Ramteke and Shri Tulasi Gopinath of the ReserveBank of India.3. Indian banking in future is, thus, expected to grow exponentially supported bytechnology intensive processes and customer friendly models with focus on convenienceand cost effectiveness. A report titled Indian Banking 2020: Making Decade’s Promisecome True brought out by the Boston Consulting Group in 2010 had identified ten broadtrends for the Indian banking. These and a few other areas which should receive theattention of banks seeking opportunities for sustainable growth are summarized below:-i. Retail banking will be immensely benefited from the Indian demographic dividend. Itis important to note that the middle class population is expected to touch 200 million2by 2020 and 475 million by 2027 . This would imply mortgages would grow fast andlikely to cross ` 40 trillion by 2020;ii. Another segment that will provide huge opportunities will be the financing ofaffordable housing for growing ‘low’ & ‘middle’ class;iii. Rapid accumulation of wealth in rich households will drive wealth management to10X size;iv. “ The Next Billion” consumer segment will emerge as the largest in terms ofnumbers and will accentuate the demand for low cost banking solutions andinnovative operating models, throwing up a big market of small customers;v. Branches and ATMs will need to grow 2X and 5X respectively to serve the hugeaddition to bankable population. Low cost branch network with smaller sizedbranches will be adopted;vi. Mobile banking will come of age with widespread access to internet on mobilereaping the benefit of the high mobile density in the country;vii. Banks will adopt CRM and data warehousing in a major way to reduce customeracquisition costs and improve risk management. Banks will have to understand andadopt new technologies like, cloud computing and invest significantly in analyticsbased on big data;viii. Margins will see downward pressure both in retail and corporate banking, spurringbanks to generate more fees and improve operating efficiency;ix. Banks will discover the importance of the SME segment for profitability and growthand new models to serve SME segment profitably will be found as more than threefourth of the segment is still waiting to be served;x. Investment banking will grow 10X, driven by demand from corporates fortransaction support and capital market access; andxi. Infrastructure debt will surpass` 45 trillion — half of which will be on bank’s books.It will touch the ALM limits of banks and will require a significant upgrade of banks’risk management systems.2 Report of Ernst & Young : China and India: tomorrow’s middle classes2 |Pagexii. The focus of agricultural financing will be on areas like end-to-end supply chainmanagement, various aggregation models of financing, organic and other nicheareas of agriculture. Rural banking predominantly will have to harness branchlessmodels and alternative channels of service.xiii. Although banks will continue to focus on domestic business, given the rising trendof globalization, cross-border banking business will need more attention. As per arecent World Bank report, India retained its topmost position with US$ 70  billion inremittances in 2013 followed by China (US$ 60 billion), the Philippines (US$ 25billion), Mexico (US$ 22 billion), Nigeria (US$ 21 billion), Egypt (US$ 17 billion),Pakistan (US$ 15 billion) and Bangladesh (US$ 14 billion). Apart from remittancesand deposit & investment related transactions originating from the growing Indiandiaspora, India has been witnessing a significant increase in trade finance andoutward direct investments. In other words, banks will need to gear up to reap thebenefits of increasing business arising out of globalization of India and resident andnon-resident Indians;xiv. It has now been realized that manufacturing will have to be one of the key drivers ofgrowth though in the recent past, with moderation in the growth rate, the sector also3witnessed a slowdown. A recent report of the McKinsey Global Institute observesthat for making a substantial improvement in the standards of living of the Indianpeople and alleviating poverty, about 115 million new non-farm jobs will have to becreated between 2012 and 2022 and of these, about 27 million new jobs need to becreated in manufacturing. The required growth rate in manufacturing sector outputneeds to be at least 10 per cent a year, probably higher. The NationalManufacturing Policy envisages share of manufacturing in GDP to 25 per cent by2022. Achieving this rate of growth would require significant amount of financing bythe banks.4. Against this evolving milieu of opportunistic trends, I feel it is appropriate to takestock of the challenges facing banks going forward in terms of strategies and businessmodels that they will need to adopt more specifically from the regulatory and paymentsystem perspectives. I intend to highlight some of the major challenges.Challenges from the regulatory perspectiveRe-orientation of the Indian Banking Structure5. As the economy expands, a greater quantum of resources will be needed forsupporting the growth process. The Indian banking sector also needs to catch up the likely3 From poverty to empowerment: India’s imperative for jobs, growth, and effective basic services,February 20143 |Pageacceleration in the credit to GDP ratio as the economy expands. To support the economicthgrowth as envisaged in the 12 Five Year Plan, the banking business needs to expand4significantly to an estimated ` 288 trillion by 2020 from about ` 115 trillion in 2012. Giventhis, there is a need for reorienting the banking structure to make it more dynamic andflexible, while ensuring safety and systemic stability. There is enormous scope forincreasing the size and capacity of the banking structure. Accordingly, the Reserve Bankcame out with a set of guidelines for licensing of new banks in the private sector inFebruary 2013. The process of licensing culminated with the granting of “in-principle”approval to two applicants who would set up new banks in the private sector within aperiod of 18 months.6. While announcing the decision to grant “in-principle” approval to the two applicants,the Reserve Bank indicated that going forward, it would use the learning experience fromthis licensing exercise to revise the guidelines appropriately and move to grant licencesmore regularly on “tap” basis. Further, Reserve Bank would work on a policy of havingvarious categories of “differentiated” bank licences which will allow a wider pool of entrantsinto banking leading to greater banking penetration and more competitive environment.Reserve Bank has, accordingly, been working on the relevant guidelines for licensingpayment banks and small banks.7. Eventually, over the years, as visualized in the Discussion Paper, the reoriented thebanking structure may comprise four tiers. The first tier may consist of three or four largeuniversal Indian banks with domestic and international presence along with branches offoreign banks in India. The second tier is likely to comprise several mid-sized bankinginstitutions including niche banks like Payment Banks with economy-wide presence. Thethird tier may encompass old private sector banks, Regional Rural Banks, and multi stateUrban Cooperative Banks. The fourth tier may embrace many small privately owned localbanks and cooperative banks.Competition8. W. Chan Kim & A. Renee Mauborgne in their ‘Blue Ocean Strategy’ have shownthat companies can succeed not by battling competitors, but rather by creating BlueOceans of uncontested market space. These strategic moves create value for thecompany, its buyers and its employees, while unlocking new demand and making thecompetition irrelevant. Unlike the Red Ocean Strategy, the conventional approach tobusiness of beating competition, the “Blue Ocean Strategy” tries to align innovation withutility, price and cost propositions. Similarly, financial sector reforms have brought aboutsignificant structural changes and created several blue oceans. A manifestation of this4Banking Structure in India-The Way Forward, Discussion Paper, Reserve Bank of India, August 2013.4 |Pagedevelopment is reflected in the increase in bank competitiveness. The share of publicsector banks (PSBs) in total banking assets, which was 90 per cent on the eve of reformsin 1991 has since declined to around 72 per cent, a decline of roughly 1 percentage ayear. In a move that is further expected to increase competition in the domestic bankingindustry, the Reserve Bank released the framework for setting up of Wholly OwnedSubsidiaries (WOS) by foreign banks to India in November 2013, besides the frameworkfor new universal banks and differentiated banks, such as, small banks and paymentbanks, which is in the offing. As I mentioned above, new banks are set to enter bakingsector. Further, banks are facing increasing competition from non-banks including NBFCs,MFIs and tech companies. Going ahead, there may be increase in the non-bank related5financing activities through innovations like Peer-to-Peer (P2P) lending , direct consumerlendings and social investing. With increasing competition, banks, will need to tap intountapped business opportunities. This would also call for harnessing resources at thebottom of the pyramid. Small customers are as important to their business growth as bigbusiness opportunities. The challenge before banks would be to make the best use oftechnology and innovation to bring down intermediation costs while protecting their bottomlinesBasel III implementation9. The implementation of Basel III framework will throw various challenges for banks.In particular, the adoption of Basel III capital requirements by Indian banks would pushdown their return on equity (RoE) to an extent. Investors have a wider choice and thestocks of the manufacturing sector may be preferred to banking sector stocks and, assuch, it may perhaps be difficult to convince the investor community to invest in Indianbanks in the short-term. It is, however, expected that by looking at the benefits ofimplementation of Basel III capital requirements by way of increasing resilience of thebanking system, investors will get adjusted to the new reality. This issue also needs to beseen in a historical perspective to understand the fact that Indian banks have successfullytransited in the past from the regime of no regulatory requirement for capital toprogressively tighter capital requirements and it would be logical to expect that Indianbanks would be able to navigate the current phase as well. Nevertheless, it needs to berecognized that while moderation of growth in RoE is inevitable, the key to cushion thisimpact is to optimise capital and augment efficiency.5 P2P lending also referred to as ‘social investing’, ‘marketplace lending’ or ‘direct consumer lending’ isthe practice of borrowing and lending of money among unrelated individuals and business entities, on theonline platforms, without any role of a traditional financial intermediary like a bank or a non-bankingfinancial institution. Crowd funding is a common term where small amounts of money from large numberof individuals/organizations is raised to fund an art work, social cause or start-up venture through web-based platform. The P2P lending is carried out through the websites of the P2P lending companies, usingdifferent lending ‘platforms’, which charge a relatively small commission for their services.5 |Page10. On June 9, 2014, the Reserve Bank issued guidelines for the implementation of theLiquidity Converge Ratio (LCR), which is a part of the Basel III framework on LiquidityStandards. In India, the LCR will be introduced in a phased manner starting with aminimum requirement of 60 per cent from January 1, 2015 and reaching minimum 100 percent on January 1, 2019. Further, Government securities in excess of minimum SLRrequirements and the Government securities within the mandated SLR requirement to theextent allowed by the Reserve Bank under Marginal Standing Facility (MSF) are permittedto be treated as Level 1 assets for the computation of LCR. Adoption of liquidity standardsunder Basel III may induce changes in funding preferences of the Indian banks reflectingthe fact that availability of and access to quality liquid assets may be a challenge goingforward when the LCR requirement increases incrementally.Capital mobilisation11. In the process of phased adoption of Basel III capital norms, Indian banks ingeneral have a relatively comfortable capital adequacy position to begin with. Risingrequired amount of capital going forward would be, however, a challenge, to which I turnnow. The Reserve Bank issued final guidelines on implementation of Basel III capitalregulations on May 2, 2012. The guidelines became effective from April 1, 2013 in phasesand will be fully implemented as on March 31, 2019. Though there are various estimatesabout the additional capital mobilization by the PSBs arising out of the phasedimplementation of Basel III capital requirements, one thing is clear that the requiredmagnitude of capital in the run up to the full implementation will be substantial. During thelast four years, the Government has infused ` 586 billion in the PSBs. The Governmenthas made a provision of ` 112 billion in the interim budget for 2014-15. PSBs hold morethan 70 per cent of the banking assets. Therefore, capital infusion from the Government ofthis order may not be sufficient. It is also important to note that there has been overreliance on the Government to infuse equity despite headroom available for themanagement of the banks to raise equity from markets. There have not been concertedefforts made by PSBs to shore up their equity capital base from the markets, keeping inview the Basel III capital adequacy requirements. Their internal generation of capital hassuffered mainly due to sharp deterioration in the asset quality possibly due to /adverseselection of assets. The growing pressure on asset quality of PSBs and the threat of ratingdowngrades will further add pressure on the equity of banks. Further, there would befurther requirement of capital based on supervisory review and evaluation process underBasel Pillar II framework.12. With higher additional capital requirements, as discussed above, recapitalisation ofPSBs could exert significant stress on the government’s fiscal position. There are,6 |Pagehowever, several potential options available to meet the challenges of mobilization ofadditional capital. These would include:i. Divestment of Government’s shares in PSBs. Given the present level ofgovernment shareholding in these banks which ranges from 58 per cent to 89 percent, there is substantial ground for raising equity from the market without dilutingthe public sector character;ii. The roles and responsibilities of the Boards of PSBs could be reviewed. Theeffectiveness of the Board and senior management has a moderating effect on therisk profiles, and consequently, overall capital requirements in a bank. TheGovernment, being the owner of the PSBs, could address the governance aspectsconcerning PSBs;iii. In addition to the public and rights issues, banks have other routes available toraise equity in the form of qualified institutions’ placement (QIP) and ESOP. Boardsof PSBs need to explore all the feasible options to raise equity capital.iv. Providing tax incentive to investors’ on investments in banks’ Tier 1 bonds like taxexemption of interest income(in part or in full) with a view to promoting anddeepening the market for these bonds may be useful at this stage;v. PSBs may issue non-voting equity shares to the public thereby while theGovernment can hold less than 51 per cent of the total equity shares, it can stillmaintain at least 51 per cent voting rights of the total voting equity;vi. Similarly, the option of issuance of differential voting equity could also beconsidered. These issuances will allow the Government to maintain their votingrights at the desired level even though there may be a dilution in the economicinterest, i.e., in terms dividend income to the Government;vii. The Government’s stake in PSBs can be diluted below 51 per cent in conjunctionwith certain protective rights given to the Government by amending the respectivestatutes governing PSBs;viii. In this connection, the proposals of the Committee to Review Governance ofBoards of Banks in India (Nayak Committee) to transfer the Government’s shares inPSBs to an investment company viz., Bank Investment Company (BIC), reduceGovernment stakes in PSBs to less than 50 percent and provide more autonomyand professionalism to PSBs which are expected to improve the returns on equityand attract more capital from the market apart from reducing provisionrequirements, etc. are worth serious consideration; andix. As regards distressed banks in private sector, Nayak Committee has alsorecommended that private equity funds, including sovereign wealth funds bepermitted to take a controlling stake of 40 percent.7 |PageAsset quality13. During the quarter ended December 2013, banks collectively held loan provisionsof about Rupees one lakh crores, an increase of 13 percent over the year, indicating thatloan asset quality of banks in India deteriorated considerably The trend of y-o-y growth ingross non-performing advances (GNPA) outstripping the y-o-y growth of advances, thatstarted from the quarter ended September 2011, continues although the gap in the growth6rates is narrowed . The PSBs continued to register the highest level of stressed advancesat 11.3 per cent of the total advances as at end March 2014, followed by the old privatebank at 5.8 per cent. Though agriculture sector showed the highest GNPA ratio theindustry sector showed distinctly high level of restructured standard advances, resulting inthe stressed advances of the industry sector reaching 15.6 per cent followed by theservices at 7.9 per cent as at December 2013. There are five sub-sectors, namely,infrastructure {which includes power generation, telecommunications, roads, ports,airports, railways (other than Indian Railways) and  others infrastructure}, iron and steel,textiles, mining (including coal) and aviation services had significantly higher level ofstress and thus these sub-sectors/segments were identified as ‘stressed’ sectors in thebanks’ lending portfolios. The share of these five stressed sub-sectors to the totaladvances of the SCBs is around 24 per cent. Infrastructure has the highest share at 14.7per cent in the total advances. Among the bank-groups, these five sub-sectors have thehighest share at 27.3 per cent in the case of PSBs.14. It is widely accepted that the economic slowdown has affected the asset quality ofbanks adversely though the impact is not similar across bank groups. Sector-wise andtheir size-wise analysis of asset quality shows that the GNPA ratio of PSBs across thesectors and their size are significantly higher than the other bank-groups. How do we faceupto the challenge of deteriorating asset quality of banks? Though analysts have oftenpointed out that the poor asset quality of the banks, to a great extent, could be attributedto the not so encouraging macro-economic situation, it is expected that the implementationof the new initiatives by the Central Government would address these issues effectively.Skeptics, though may still point out at factors, such as, the threat of ‘El Nino’ which couldresult in poor monsoon, global developments, such as, quantitative easing, etc. andgeopolitical risks, could threaten the performance of banks in India. It is also true that evenwhen general economic outlook is healthy, the asset quality of banks could still suffer due6 The system level gross non-performing advances (GNPA) of SCBs as percentage of total advances,declined to 3.9 per cent in March 2014 from 4.2 per cent in September 2013.The net non-performingadvances (NNPA) as percentage of total advances, also declined to 2.0 per cent in March 2014 from 2.3per cent in September 2013. This improvement in asset quality was due to the lower slippage of standardadvances to non-performing and a seasonal pattern of higher recovery and write-offs that generally take6place during the last quarter of financial year. The stressed advances of SCBs also declined to 9.6 percent of total advances as at end March 2014 from 10.2 per cent of September 2013. This improvement inthe asset quality was observed across all the bank-groups.8 |Pageto inadequacies in credit management. There are no short cuts for proper credit appraisalsand monitoring. Recognising early warning signals and taking timely measures to takecare of the weaknesses observed are very important.15. The Reserve Bank, on January 30, 2014, has issued a ‘Framework to Revitalise theDistressed Assets in the Economy’, wherein banks would recognise at an early stage thestress in their assets and take prompt steps towards resolution/ recovery of distressedassets and detailed guidelines in this regard were issued on February 26, 2014. TheFramework has identified certain structural impediments in the way of smoothresolution/recovery of stressed assets of banks and suggested steps, such as, revampingthe SARFAESI Act, revitalizing DRTs, etc. and rejuvenating Asset ReconstructionCompanies, are also being mooted.16. The Reserve Bank of India has set up the Central Repository of Information onLarge Credits (CRILC) to collect, store and disseminate data on all borrowers’ creditexposures including Special Mention Accounts (SMA 0, 1 & 2) with aggregate fund-basedand non-fund based exposure of ` 50 million and above. The CRILC has starteddisseminating information on large credit which will reduce credit information asymmetryand improve informed credit decision making by banks. Banks will be able to know largecommon exposures and build-up of leverage in the system. Banks will have access toasset classification of individual large exposures by different banks. Banks are required toactivate the Joint Lenders Forum for initiating corrective actions when a lender reports aborrower as SMA2 to CRILC. We have engaged with banks to avoid delay in submissionof data and ensure quality and integrity of data. It is expected that once it stabilizes, theCRILC framework would exert moral pressure/discipline on large borrowers to repay duesin time lest their names appear in SMA2 report and bank managements would be betterequipped to assess the health of their high value credit portfolio for initiating timely action.Governance17. As mentioned earlier, Nayak Committee has made some major observationsregarding governance aspects of banks in India, especially that of PSBs. According to theCommittee, there is a need to upgrade the quality of board deliberation in PSBs to providegreater strategic focus. Further, there are seven themes which appear critical to theirmedium-term strengths comprising Business Strategy, Financial Reports and theirIntegrity, Risk, Compliance, Customer Protection, Financial Inclusion and HumanResources. All other items for discussion should be brought to the Boards by exceptionand should typically be discussed in committees of boards. It is added that, among theseseven themes identified for detailed board scrutiny, predominant emphasis needs to beprovided to Business Strategy and Risk dimensions. Further, the Committee is of the view9 |Pagethat as the quality of board deliberations is sensitive to the skills and independence ofboard members, it is imperative to upgrade these skills in boards of PSBs by reconfiguringthe entire appointments process. Otherwise it is unlikely that these boards will beempowered and effective. For this, the Government has to move towards establishing fullyempowered boards in PSBs, solely entrusted with the governance and oversight of themanagement of the banks. The proposed BIC, which is expected to hold the shares of theGovernment in PSBs, should commence the process of professionalising and empoweringbank boards by reconstituting them and this in turn would help to improve the corporategovernance in a big way. As per the recommendations of the Committee, eventually inphase III, all ownership functions would be transferred by BIC to the bank boards. Theappointments of independent bank directors and whole-time directors (including the CEO)would become the responsibility of bank boards. Equally important from PSBs point ofview would be the quality of the top management particularly from the points of view ofexperience, expertise & continuity. While professionalization and effectiveness of boardsof PSBs emerged as a major challenge, it is no less as issue with many private sectorbanks, say for example, when there is domination of prominent shareholders/CEOs.Private sector banks also need to focus on the skill-set and profile of their topmanagement and the board of directors.Risk Management System in Banks18. The design of risk management functions should be based on size, complexity ofbusiness and the quality of MIS. The banks should have the necessary skill set availableor develop it through proper in-house capacity building. Banks, therefore, will need torefine and re-orient their risk management skills for enterprise-wide risk management. Inaddition, banks need to have in place a fair and differentiated risk pricing of products andservices since capital comes at a cost. This involves costing, a quantitative assessment ofrevenue streams from each product and service and an efficient transfer-pricingmechanism that would determine capital allocation. Generally it is observed that somebanks put the risk management architecture in place to meet the regulatory requirementswithout using the risk inputs for taking business decisions. The risk is not properly pricedfor various products. The most challenging part is the integrity and reliability of data. Itmust be appreciated that Risk Based Supervision (RBS) under which all the banks will becovered by the Reserve Bank over a period of time (28 banks were under RBS last year)is highly data intensive. The risk profile of a bank, its rating, and most importantly, thecomputation of supervisory capital which are the outputs of RBS are determined on thebasis of data and other qualitative information furnished by the banks. It may beremembered that supervisory findings also go towards formulation of regulatory guidelinesand other macroeconomic policies. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the topmanagements/Boards of the banks to ensure that this area is given utmost attention.10 |PageHR Management19. This is an area where most of our banks, especially the PSBs, are found lacking. Intheir eagerness to expand their core business they tend to forget the relevance of humanexpertise which drives their business in a sustainable manner. The complexities of modernbanking and the dependence on IT makes it all the more important why the banks shouldhave requisite manpower with right amount of knowledge and experience at appropriateplaces. Many of the present day ills in Indian banks, e.g., weak appraisal standards, notbeing able to pick up the early warning signals in problem accounts which leads tofraudulent transactions or accounts becoming NPA, recurring customer grievances, etc.can be ascribed to skill gaps in the manpower of the banks. Near vacuum in the seniormanagement over the next few years, lack of expertise in critical areas like IT, riskmanagement, credit appraisal and treasury operations, absence of succession planningfor middle and senior management positions, attracting, retaining and nurturing freshtalent, ad hoc responses to capacity building and poor performance management systemare some of the major HR challenges staring the PSBs. The proposal of universal anddifferentiated bank licenses being available on tap will make it tougher for PSBs to retainwhatever skilled manpower is available with them. In respect of private sector banks, theproblem in many cases relates to the work culture focussing unduly on achievingunrealistic targets by all means. This implies certain aversion towards employment in suchbanks and could have serious reputation risk implications for them.Challenges from the payment systems perspectiveFinancial inclusion through the payments route20. Leveraging technology enabled payment system for electronic transactionsprovides challenges and opportunities to the banks by expanding outreach in terms ofexpanding customer base, offering multiple product choices, achieving cost efficiency,providing assurance in terms of standardization, safety and safety. Despite the impressivegrowth in the volume and value of electronic transactions the same is concentrated inmetros and big cities, thus widening the digital divide. This imbalance is reflected alongvarious parameters, be it the deployment of ATMs, or the POS infrastructure, mobilebanking services, etc.  Needless to state, the vision of financial inclusion, aided throughthe payments path, cannot be achieved unless the rural and semi-urban areas find anequal footing in the policy horizon for banks.21. While the ultimate goal is to migrate most of the payments to electronic mode, wecannot lose sight of the reality that large segment of population is still dependent on cash11 |Pagefor day-to-day requirements. The lop-sided development of infrastructure mentionedabove also contributes to this challenge. Hence, from a perspective of achieving inclusivepayment system, it is also necessary to facilitate remittance and cash-handlingrequirements of a large segment of society, particularly the migrant population, TheReserve Bank has already put in place the policy framework under the Guidelines forDomestic Money Transfer (DMT) and now it is up to the banks to take this forward.Towards this end, experiments like “Cardless cash withdrawal” for the unbanked is gainingground. We have recently given in-principle approval for two entities to take this serviceforward. Of course, for this to gain traction, active participation of and promotion by bankswould be imperative as the delivery channels envisaged in these models are the ATMsand Business Correspondents (BCs).Standardisation and capacity build-up22. While any development in offering electronic services is welcome, stand-alonesystems not only work in silos but also fragment the market to some extent. Hence, as thepayments eco-system matures, inter-operability becomes essential, for whichstandardization in processes and procedures is a pre-requisite. This not only facilitatesuniformity in transaction handling but also enables uniform customer experiences. Arelated point is that of ensuring that systems are not just adequate to meet present needsbut also the growing volumes. Hence, even as the Reserve Bank is building capacity inthe systems operated by it (for instance, the RTGS or NEFT), it is equally important forbanks to review and upgrade their own infrastructure as well in tune with their policy andexpected growth in business.Partnerships with non-banks23. Even as we have adopted a bank led model for achieving the goal of financialinclusion, opportunities have been given to the non-banks to involve themselves inpayments area – whether it is through the BC, White Label ATMS (WLAs) or pre-paid cardroutes. In many of these areas, non-banks need to work in close coordination with banks.It is imperative that banks also see the potential for synergetic growth by partnering withthese non-banks and leveraging on their strengths so as to reap efficiency gains for boththe entities; a case in point is bank-MNO partnership for expanding mobile banking space.We have seen instances of such partnership, particularly with MNOs acting as BCs.Similar developments should occur in other areas too. A word of caution is, however,essential – banks cannot abdicate their responsibilities towards customers, in ensuringsafe and secure services, particularly in scenarios where a large part of the activitiesinvolved in payments are outsourced. In some context, we have also observedconcentration in a few service providers and banks should take cognizance of this.12 |PageSafety and security of payment transactions24. Last but not the least is the consideration towards safety and security of paymenttransactions. This goes a long way in influencing customer behavior in the choice ofpayment methods. While the Reserve Bank has mandated many requirements tostrengthen security and enhance risk mitigation standards for the electronic transactions, itis essential that these are implemented not only in letter but also in spirit. Further, with theincreased volume of transactions, the need for Straight Through Processing (STP)becomes essential. Hence, while catering to large volumes, certain procedural changeswould need to be made. For example, there is the requirement under NEFT and RTGSwhere the credit is afforded to the beneficiary customer’s account solely on the basis ofthe account number given in the remittance request by the sender. While the intentionbehind this policy is to facilitate easier handling of growing volumes at banks through STP,the risk-based approach to handle customer grievance should not be lost sight of andbanks should also seek to proactively address of the payee and redress customer issuesemanating from such electronic transactions. Customer as well as frontline staffawareness and education is crucial in ensuring not only acceptability of the paymentproducts but also their assurance in terms of safety and security.Concluding Thoughts25. Finally, let me conclude by highlighting that the challenges facing banks as theygear up to the task of funding an economy, aspiring to become a middle-income country inthe years to come, are known knowns. But the known unknown is how the banks will beable to adapt to the evolving situation and come on top of it. What compounds the matterfurther is the fact that Indian banks have to operate in an increasingly globalisedenvironment, because of which there will be many factors – regulatory, technological,cross-border financial flows impacting them over which they may not have any control. Inparticular,i. Will the banks be able to mobilise required amount of capital from the market formeeting their current and future business growth and prudential requirements?ii. Will banks be able to understand the varied and dynamic requirements of itsdiverse set of clientele and devise customised products?iii. Will banks be able to do so in a cost effective manner?iv. Will banking be able to attract and retain skilled manpower and leverage them forboth for business growth and risk mitigation without sullying their image asresponsible and responsive employers?13 |Pagev. Will banks be able to enlarge their outreach in terms of customer base and productchoices by leveraging technology enabled payment systems in affordable,accessible, acceptable and assured manner?I am sanguine that in trying to respond to these and the related questions Indian banks willbe able to find ways to convert the challenges into potential opportunities to redeem theirmandate of serving the real economy in an efficient manner. The Reserve Bank, for itspart, will continue to endeavour to ensure an enabling regulatory framework that can actas catalyst in the process.  I wish the conference all success.*************14 |Page
