Value-based Professionals: The Need of the Hour*By V. LeeladharIt gives me great pleasure to be in your midst today. The Institute of CompanySecretaries of India (ICSI) has been a critical player in the Indian endeavour to developprofessionals to protect the interests of the stake holders, to ensure corporategovernance and contribute to public good – a topic which is intrinsically linked to thetheme of today, viz. value based professionals and the broader theme of corporategovernance. These are difficult issues and given today’s audience, we here deal withbroad generic issues rather than particulars.2. In the more innocent days of my youth, perhaps, the term value basedprofessional would have been a tautology. It was then taken for granted thatprofessionals possessed values.  The word profession evoked fields that requireextensive study and mastery of specialized knowledge, such as law, medicine,engineering, accounting, etc. This contrasted sharply with the more humble termoccupation, which referred merely to the nature of a person’s employment.  To conductoneself as a professional – exhibiting "professional behavior" – indicated that theperson's actions remained in accordance with specific rules, written or unwritten,pertaining to the standards of a profession. Indeed, early sociological definitions ofprofessionalism, in particular, involved checklists of perceived or claimed characteristics,which apart from esoteric knowledge or special skills, invariably included ethicalbehaviour.  It also entailed the recognition of a social obligation to apply one’s skill andwisdom for the general benefit or what is termed ‘public good’.3. One practiced a profession. It was in this context that the word mal-practiceevolved. It was taken as the failure to provide professional services with the skill orethics usually exhibited by responsible and careful members of the profession, resultingin injury, loss, or damage to the party contracting those services. It was with professionssuch as medics, accountants, lawyers, that mal-practice was associated and one couldbe charged for the same.  While George Bernard Shaw characterized all professions as"conspiracies against the laity", professionals, nonetheless, were generally deemed tobe a group of people who shared not only common knowledge and skills built upon aformalized framework of learning, but also a common and articulate set of values andethics. It is thus that competence and ethics formed the bedrock of the professional. Onedid not exhort values in professionals – a professional without values was noprofessional at all.4. Today, the world has changed. We no longer live in simple times. The cries forvalues and ethics in business today – the value based professional – stem essentiallyfrom a crisis of confidence. Whether in medicine or in finance, confidence is the linchpinof the professional – confidence in his competence to perform and confidence in hisintegrity.  Till recently, competence was sought to be enforced through jealously guardedbarriers to entry. Self regulation by the fraternity laid out codes of ethics and codes ofconduct. These codes and standards have evolved over the years influenced, to nosmall degree, by crises that affect the profession from time to time.5. The latest round of the crisis of confidence in the corporate sphere has beencatalysed by the unexpected corporate failures of the 1980s, the 1990s and indeed thehigh profile collapses of new millennium. This perhaps added a new dimension in thediscourse related to confidence, and this relates to confidence in the integrity of thesystem as a whole to subserve the needs of the market system, the stake holders andindeed society to provide reliable financial data and information on the ‘full and fair’picture of a company’s accounts and the changes therein.6. Post mortem reports of accounts and of administrative lapses of failedcompanies given by liquidators / regulators / inspectors give us an insight intoaccounting as well as regulatory lapses and provide a stark contrast between the‘true and fair’ picture of the organisation at various points of time in its life and what itwas reported to be.  Often times it has been perceived that practices such as balancedate adjustments, deferring expenses, advancing revenue recognition and judiciousor indeed creative use of complex business group structures, while conforming to theletter were sometimes intended to obfuscate and subvert the spirit of compliance. 7. The general perception is that accounting statements have failed to inform ofthe drift of financial affairs of the company towards impending failure. This has catalyseddebate on issues like accounting standards as well as issues of auditor independenceon the one hand and the issues of integrity and personal deviance, on the other.  Thecausal roots of the recent corporate “misdemeanors” are debatable. At one level, theywere attributed to a swashbuckling ethos and corporate culture initially spawned andmade fashionable by the investment bankers of the 1980s – an era that has oft beenalluded to as the ‘decade of greed’.  This set in motion a period when dramatic financialsuccess received acclaim, flamboyant star operators were viewed as folk heroes andcautionary words from regulators were viewed with distaste. 8. At another level, they are attributable to the changed business environment ofrelentless competition in which firms operate. This competition has brought with itpressures on corporate managements to consistently sustain and enhance their financialperformance and demonstrably enhance shareholder value. The pressures onmanagement, have in the recent past, also spilled over to auditors and how they conducttheir business. These pressures have also brought into focus concepts of earningsmanagement - the quality of earnings and how methods of earnings management maylead to or even constitute fraud. The accounting, regulatory and ethical failuressubsuming the system, the cultural ethos and individual deviance have squarelyresituated professional values and ethics and the broader governance issues onto thecentre stage of boardroom concerns. 9. The general dismay was, in fact, not with insolvencies per se but withunexpected collapses where the financial statements, regulatory warnings did notpresage what was to come. The un-serviceability of accounts to give a true and fairpicture of what lay in store, the inaction of regulators to gauge the pulse of theforthcoming events and the ethical failures of the organisational culture or of individualsthat perpetuated acts of commission or omission painted a picture of a systems failurethat often got blurred with the media focus on personalities and on deviant behaviour.This in turn has brought back into focus the quest for codes and standards as well as theissue of values and ethics in business. 10. While the quest for codes and standards, in generic terms is, in some ways,never ending, the endeavour in accounting and finance, nonetheless, is geared toimprove the reliability of financial statements. This makes them more credible andincrease shareholders' confidence. Confidence in financial statements reduces the costof capital and makes the markets more efficient. Thus, in a market economy, qualityaccounts, audits and the integrity of professionals create an enabling environment foreconomic efficiency and corporate growth. 11. Historically, the importance of published accounts was brought into focus by theUK’s Companies Act of 1844. This, over time, gave rise to the quest for standards,codes and quality in accounting in market based economies has been to shore upinvestor confidence by setting strong and binding accounting and auditing standards.  Itwas thus that financial audits were preformed by auditors who were independent of theentities whose financial statements they audited. The purpose was to reduce incentivesfor conflict of interest which would compromise professional judgement. The earlyattempts in modern times to build binding standards date back to the early 1930s in therun up to the period when the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) wasestablished in the US in 1934. It is interesting to recall some of the issues that arose inthe 1930s which are redolent of the debates of today. One was whether audits should beperformed by private firms or government auditors and another was whether the rulesfor the auditing profession would be set by auditors themselves or by outsiders. 12. The first issue of government auditors vs. private firms was resolved 1933 infavour of private firms. The second issue of whether auditing standards and rules shouldbe set by those who laboured in the trenches, viz., the auditors themselves or byoutsiders who were essentially the users of the accounting services was morecontentious and was settled in the late 1930s - in 1939 to be specific. The issue wasresolved narrowly, and not without considerable lobbying, in a 3-2 vote in favour of theauditors themselves setting their own accounting and auditing standards, i.e., regulatingthemselves, thus formalising the regime of self regulation. 13. This debate has come a full circle today, when the consensus has once againveered in favour of "outsiders" having a prominent, if not dominant, say in the setting ofaccounting standards in the quest for accounting quality. The recent events - high profilemisstated earnings and frauds - have in no small measure helped catalyse thisdevelopment. The underlying purpose of the endeavour for quality has been to restorethe confidence of the stakeholders, the regulators and the society at large in the qualityof the attest functions performed by accountants and the integrity of the professional. 14. It is in the context of this background, perhaps, that almost half the members ofthe Peer Review Board of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India set up in 2002,are drawn from industry, banking, academics, etc. In the international arena, thedominance of outsiders is even more pronounced - the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 inthe US envisages that of the 5 members of the Accounting Board only two members canbe Certified Public Accountants. In some ways this reflects a movement to resituate theneeds of the consumer of accounting services over the compulsions and convenience ofthe provider of these services. 15. At a fundamental level, this marks a substantial change that has been broughtabout in the recent times in the governance of the auditing profession.  In fact, the movein the 1980s towards ethical behaviour got gradually subsumed under the expandednotion of corporate governance, renewed discussions on which emanated from theCadbury Report of 1992.  Over time, the voluntary nature of self regulation andcorporate governance has metamorphosed into an overlay of additional layer of rulesand compliances such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. Essentially, this is premised on twopillars : (a) the mechanism by which Corporations are directed and controlled; and (b)the mechanism by which those who direct and control a corporation are supervised. 16. In matters relating to Corporate Governance, Secretarial Practices play a criticalrole. In India Secretarial practices have evolved over a period of time in differingbusiness environments and have had different usages. The need to harmonise andconsolidate the diverse Secretarial Practices in use in India, has given rise to the questfor standards and codes in this area too.  Towards this end, the Institute of CompanySecretaries of India (ICSI) has constituted a Secretarial Standards Board (SSB) with theobjective to formulate secretarial standards based on applicable laws, businessenvironment and best secretarial practices. The Establishment of this Board representsa significant step towards harmonization, integration and standardisation of diverseSecretarial Practices prevalent in the corporate sector. These standards lay down theprinciples’ which companies are expected to adopt and adhere to in discharging theircorporate responsibility. 17. It is heartening to note that this has been a collaborative endeavour withconsultations across the sector. It is thus that the SSB comprises eminent members ofthe profession and is represented by the regulatory authorities such as the Departmentof Company Affairs, the Securities and Exchange Board of India and your institute’ssister professional bodies such as the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India and theInstitute of Cost and Works Accountants of India.  We trust that the Guidance Notesdeveloped by SSB and the clarifications given by it on issues arising out of the standardswill contribute to better corporate governance. 18. We as regulators at the Reserve Bank, too, have sought to catalyse conditionsfor good corporate governance. We have been at pains to emphasise that compliancewith regulatory requirements is the minimum requirement of good corporate governanceand what are required are internal, peer and market  pressures to reach higher thanminimum standards prescribed by regulatory agencies. A critical element of ourendeavors has been the transparency aspect that is emphasized by expanding thecoverage of information and timeliness of such information and analytical content.Importantly, especially in the post-reforms phase, the central bank has reiterated severaltimes over that deregulation and operational freedom must go hand in hand withoperational transparency. 19. This also brings us to the moot question: What does it take to be a value basedprofessional? This is a difficult question. There are, perhaps, qualities that individualsneed to possess to make ethical decisions. First, recognising ethical issues andreasoning through ethical consequences of decisions. Second, the ability to look atalternate points of view and deciding what is right or appropriate in a particular set ofcircumstances. Third, the ability to deal with ambiguity and uncertainty and making achoice on the best information available. 20. The pace of technical change, scientific innovation, and cultural interchange inthe global world of today, increasingly confronts us with situations of conflicts andunanticipated ethical challenges where we are forced to make decisions we are notprepared to make but cannot avoid. Often times, the existing moral knowledge andethical guidelines prove inadequate or simply do not provide answers to modern moralproblems. Worse, the pace of change is such that similar situations cannot be replicatedin stable and recurrent conditions and it is therefore very difficult to look to or constructethical guidelines for a fast changing present. What individual professionals, groups andorganizations need to do in such situations is to acquire skills and methods that givethem the ethical competence and confidence to handle ethical issues that may arise ineveryday professional life. 21. Essentially what we need to know is how to apply our personal or organizationalprinciples to concrete moral problems. Moreover, there can be a disconnect betweenindividual and organizational values which leads to internal conflict and dilemmas.Worse, there can be a disconnect between the stated and prevailing values in anorganization. We all have, at some point or the other, faced conflicts between loyalty andintegrity. We are confronted with issues of dissent and how to deal with dissent.Emerging commercial structures such as outsourcing bring with it their issues ofenjoining the agent to profess the values of the principal they represent.  Besides, acorporate reality check indicates that we have to increasingly live with issues whichrange from black and white areas such as false and misleading claims, fraud andmanipulation, etc. to more grey issues such as concealment of information, conflicts ofinterest, coercion, vulnerabilities, principal-agent problems and fiduciary duties. 22. Ethical dilemmas for individuals arise not from issues of corporate misconductsuch as whether a particular practice is unfair, questionable, misleading or intended todeceive. It arises from one’s own personal beliefs, moral values and commitment to rightaction. They are in short challenges to one’s integrity. It arises from questionablebehaviour in others or being pressured to indulge in questionable behaviour ones’ self byjust getting a job done.  It can be fostered by the demands of the times or organisationalpressures in the form of explicit instructions to do things that may be considered sleazy.It need not necessarily arise because the organization or superiors are corrupt but couldgrow out of the intense pressure to get a job done or, for that matter, from anorganizational culture or a leadership that fosters an environment in which unethicalbehaviour takes place. 23. What is needed is a psychological approach to ethical competence where onecan anticipate moral problems, recognize them and address them squarely withconfidence. In resolving ethical dilemmas that professionals may be confronted with,communication plays an important role to explain first to one’s own self and then toothers convincingly the basis of the decision taken and why that was the best in thecircumstances. At an organizational level, it needs all the leadership qualities,communication skills and sensitivity to inculcate a culture that raises the level of ethicalawareness and carries the organization and the group along with credibility andconfidence.  And confidence is what the quest for the value based professional is allabout. 24. It is thus not in codes and standards alone that a culture of the value basedprofessional may be moulded. Nor in processes and compliance. While these areimportant, there are views that we need to cautiously work out the fine balance betweenprocesses and outcomes. In today’s politically correct world of form, there are thereforeincreasingly cries for substance – indeed, one school of thought, in the accountingprofession itself, feels that obsession with compliance begets a creativity that subverts.This brings the word dialectics, more associated with bohemia, revolution and theintellectual, squarely into the lexicon of the staid accountant and regulator. Value basedprofessionals is not just about compliance alone, but living up to the spirit of compliance.These are difficult issues indeed, and we have more questions than answers. Today Isign off with a call for more innocent times and leave you with a chiasmus (wheremeaning is reversed as in a mirror image): I trust that value based professionals valuethe profession they profess and value the values they profess to value. I leave it to youto pause and ponder.* Valedictory address of Shri V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, delivered at theWestern India Regional Council of the Institute of Company Secretaries of Indiaon June 10, 2005 at Mumbai.
