49 JalanGovernor, Reserve Bank of IndiaColomboOnthWednesday, 25 August 1999*******Governor thIt is a great honour for me to deliver the 49 Anniversary Lecture of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka.  I am thankful to Governor Jayawardena for this invitation.  I havehad the privilege of knowing Governor Jayawardena personally over a long period oftime, and have been an admirer of his immense knowledge and wisdom in the conduct ofmacro-economic and monetary policies. Under his stewardship, the Central Bank of SriLanka is now one of the leading central banks in the developing world with markedexcellence in financial and monetary research and policy. The contribution of the Bank inthe overall socio-economic development of Sri Lanka has also been immense.  I am2. The subject of my talk, as you know, is “International Financial Architecture:Developing Countries Perspectives”.  This is an opportune moment to reflect on thissubject as considerable international discussion has already taken place.  The developingcountries’ stake in equitable and workable solutions to the problems affecting the worldeconomy is naturally very great. What I have to say to you today is more by way ofreflections and some loud thinking in order to advance our collective views on matters ofinterest to developing countries rather than final conclusions. To begin with, it may beuseful to understand why there is so much interest now in the new architecture; on whatlevels the debate has been conducted so far, and how effectively developing countrieshave participated in this debate.  I would then like to deal with some of the majorelements of the debate with special reference to developing countries, including theevolution of India’s views and policies on some of these issues.  Finally, I propose toAtthgrateful to all of you, including so many old friends, for being here today.Jayawardena and friends,Bimal byDeveloping Countries’ PerspectiveInternational Financial Architecture: Anniversary Lecture – Central Bank of Sri Lankahighlight the institutional arrangements that have emerged, or are in the process ofemerging, in order to facilitate effective co-operation among developed and developingWhy the Debate Now?3. The global crises that occurred after July 1997 have generated enormousinternational concern over financial stability in the world. The concern translated itselfinto a debate on how to prevent such crises arising in future and how to manage, suchcrises, if  they do arise. Naturally, such a debate included a review of appropriateness ofexisting international financial arrangements and the need for redesigning sucharrangements. Various facets of relevant reforms considered in the last 18 months or socame to be referred to as the International Financial Architecture (or IFA, for short). Atthe outset, it may be useful to recall the reasons for considering  a new IFA in the contextof the current crisis.4. First, the recent crisis was sudden and unanticipated. Neither the countriesthemselves nor the credit rating agencies nor the international financial institutionsanticipated a crisis of such magnitude. Second, the speed with which the crisis gottransmitted to other countries took the financial community by surprise. New technologymade capital flows easy and fast; it also made the transmission of panic easy. Third, therewas evidence of failure of market mechanisms as was generally understood, necessitatinga review of relative roles of the State and the market in financial systems. Fourth, whenthe failure of markets resulted in systemic threats, the burden of market failure got shiftedto Governments and the public sector. This burden was borne, to a large extent, by theGovernments of borrowing developing countries, rather than lending or developedfinancial centres, though “irrational exuberance” in lending and borrowing areinseparable.  Fifth, although the international financial institutions, in particular the IMF,came to the rescue of the affected countries, there were questions regarding the timing,content and adequacy of their assistance package. Sixth, the contagion spread across andbeyond the region to  developed countries also. Global interdependence was no longermerely a slogan or one-sided affair.  It became clear that developments in developing5. The experience w ith the Asian crisis led to the perspective that internationalfinancial architecture as it existed was inadequate to meet the new realities. It started withexpression of dis-satisfaction by several experts and some countries on the role of creditrating agencies, and to some extent, on the role played by the International MonetaryFund (IMF). As the debate proceeded, there occurred a distinct shift in emphasis infavour of considering micro-economic aspects in addition to  macro-policies, such asfiscal and monetary management. There was also a shift from abstractions to institutionalaspects such as corporate governance, regulatory structures, and transparency. Someattention was also given to mechanisms whereby the Government could ensure marketaccountability, and not merely market efficiency, lest the burden of market failure shifted1Features of the Debatecountries were important for stability in the entire financial world.countries on monetary and financial issues.entirely to Governments. Finally, the debate had to recognise that the divide betweendeveloped and developing countries or OECD and non-OECD countries was not asmeaningful as it was thought to be. The developing countries themselves represented awide-range with different degrees of openness of their economies, and consequentlyLevels of the Debate6. The debate on IFA occurred at different levels and in different fora. It occurredwithin the international financial institutions, particularly the IMF and the World Bank.Discussions were also held in the United Nations.  Intellectuals from both developed anddeveloping countries, such as, Krugman, Sachs, Bhagwati, Lal Jayawardena, mydistinguished predecessor Dr.Rangarajan, and Deputy Governor Reddy expressed theirviews on various aspects of the IFA and exercised influence on the direction and thecourse of the debate. The private sector in major financial centres participated in thedebate particularly through the Institute of International Finance. The voluntaryinternational organisations consisting of national level regulatory and supervisory bodies,such as ,  International Organisation of Securities Commission and InternationalAssociation of Insurance Supervisors took this issue on board. Policy discussions werealso conducted under the auspices of the traditional groupings, such as, the G-7 ofdeveloped countries, and G- 24  of developing countries  where Sri Lanka is currently inthe Chair.7. The debate within these different fora and at different levels contributed tostructured and formal discussions in the Development Committee and InterimCommittee, especially the latter, which are formally charged with the responsibility ofguiding the international community in matters relating to global economic co-operation.The discussions in these formal groupings were aided by informal and expanded highlevel official meetings of developed and developing countries. Among  these, a mentionmay be made of G-22 sponsored by USA, and G-33 sponsored by G-7. These laterresulted in another  Group known as the Financial Stability Forum. India has beeninvolved in almost all the discussions where developing countries have been  represented,and an effort has been made by our representatives as well as representatives of certainother developing countries, including Sri Lanka, to present the developing countryperspective on various issues.Main Issues in the Debate8. The debate on IFA has covered a wide spectrum of policy issues. However, Ipropose to focus on those which are of particular significance to developing countries,viz., the exchange rate, the policy on reserves, the role of the external private sector, themanagement of capital flows, strengthening the financial system, transparency codes andstandards, reform of international institutions and new arrangements for international2liquidity.different degrees of integration with the global financial system.9. Appropriateness of the exchange rate regime is considered to be one of the majorfactors relevant to the Asian crisis. The debate is not new and there are, as always,differing views on an appropriate exchange rate regime. One view is that a fixedexchange rate can promote domestic macroeconomic and financial stability by providinga firm nominal anchor. However, it has been pointed out - and more sharply after theAsian crisis - that there are risks associated with a pegged exchange rate regime. This reflected in the fact that most of the currency crises in the past two years have occurred incountries with pegged exchange rates.10. A widely expressed view is  that countries should eschew variable peg regimes infavour of either something much harder or the voluntary adoption of “managed floating”.Currency board is an option that has been favoured by some developing countries,particularly small open economies. But in most countries, the growing consensus seemsto be in favour of a flexible and floating rate regime. While there is also acceptance of thehard reality that the degree of flexibility has to be “managed” in order to avoid unduevolatility and panic, there is as yet no consensus on the modalities and the rules whichshould govern such “managed flexibility”. The recent experience of interventions byCentral Banks of some industrial countries in the management of the Yen-Dollar/Yen-Euro exchange rates, as also recent market developments and the on-going debate on theEuro-Dollar exchange rates, vividly illustrate the problems associated with devising a setof hard-and-fast rules concerning an appropriate exchange rate regime, which is valid forall countries.11. There has also been some debate on the policy measures that can be taken by thecentral bank to keep exchange rate movements “realistic” and relatively orderly. Thebroad consensus can be summed up as follows. There is a fair degree of agreement thatstability in the exchange rate is well served by the stability in the conduct of monetarypolicy. An increasing number of central banks, particularly in industrial countries, aredirecting monetary policy to the sole objective of price stability. Countries are alsoincreasingly announcing near-term inflation targets explicitly.  Transparency inobjectives, intermediate targets and operating instruments are expected to play a role inanchoring expectations. However, in spite of cautious policies, if there are unanticipatedor unacceptable movements in exchange rates, it is also generally, but by no meansunanimously, held that central banks must be prepared to move interest rates in order tostabilise expectations. In these situations, direct intervention in foreign exchange marketsby the central bank may also become necessary, although the precise extent and modalityof intervention is likely to depend on individual country circumstances, especially thesize and depth of the market and the size of a country’s foreign exchange reserves. It hasbeen recognised that developed countries, and in particular the central banks of majorfinancial centres, are in a position to intervene in the exchange market on behalf of eachother. However, such options are not available to most developing countries. Thisimposes additional challenges to the central banks both in tactics of intervention in the3forex markets and the need for supplementary monetary and administrative measures.isThe Exchange Rate12. Let me, at this point , briefly touch upon the exchange rate policy in India. Theexchange rate policy has evolved from the rupee being pegged to a market related system(since March 1993). The exchange rate is largely determined by the market, i.e. demandand supply conditions. The objective of exchange rate management has been to ensurethat the external value of the rupee is realistic and credible as evidenced by a sustainablecurrent account deficit and manageable foreign exchange situation. Subject to thispredominant objective, the exchange rate policy is guided by the need to reduce excessvolatility, prevent the emergence of destabilising speculative activities, help maintainadequate level of reserves, and develop an orderly foreign exchange market. The Indianmarket, like other developing countries markets, is not yet very deep and broad, and ischaracterised by uneven flow of demand and supply over different periods.  The marketis also characterised by a few major players, and lumpy public sector demands,particularly on account of payments for oil imports and servicing of public debt. In thissituation, the Reserve Bank of India has been prepared to make sales and purchases offoreign currency in order to even out lumpy demand and supply in the relatively thinforex market and to smoothen jerky movements. However, such intervention is notgoverned by a predetermined target or band around the exchange rate. While it is notpossible for any country to remain completely unaffected by developments in theinternational exchange markets, fortunately we have been able to keep the spillovereffects of the Asian crisis to a minimum through constant monitoring and timely action,including recourse to strong monetary measures, when necessary, to prevent the13. There has always been a continuous but inconclusive discussion on the optimumlevel of reserves. Traditionally, the adequacy of reserves of a country has been mainlylinked to import requirements. Recent experience has, however, shown that countries,which were holding large levels of foreign currency reserves in relation to imports, didnot necessarily escape the crisis. These countries had large reserves, but these reservesdisappeared quickly as they tried to defend their currencies. Some part of the reservescould not be accessed when it was most required by these countries since they wereinvested in illiquid assets. Further, there was no transparency with regard to the precisefigure of unencumbered reserves.14. In the aftermath of the Asian crisis, the emphasis has now shifted from measuringthe adequacy of foreign exchange reserves only in relation to imports to  measuring theusable or unencumbered reserves  in relation to short-term liabilities, in particular short-term debt. A notable suggestion on this subject for emerging market economies is countries should manage their external assets and liabilities (and the so-called “liquidityat risk”) in such a way that they are always able to live without new foreign borrowingfor up to one year. In other words, usable foreign exchange reserves should exceedscheduled amortisation of foreign currency debts ( assuming  no rollovers) during thefollowing year. This has implications both for the level of reserves and debt managementsince this implies a limit on the size of the debt, in particular short-term debt and debt that4is falling due for repayment.thatInternational Reservesemergence of self-fulfilling speculative activities.15. The link between short-term debt and reserves has come to the fore in the IFAdeliberations. There is a cost  to building up reserves through large debt flows since thecost of debt would generally be higher than return on reserves. At the same time, a highlevel of reserves satisfies the need for liquidity, offers insulation against unforeseenshocks and acts as a source of comfort to foreign investors. The essence of reservesmanagement being safety and liquidity, it stands to reason that all investments made outof reserves should be of top credit quality and excellent liquidity. Hence, the return on16. In India, we have been steadily building up reserves by encouraging non-debtcreating flows and de-emphasising debt creating flows, particularly short-term debt. Infact, this strategy, coupled with the maintenance of acceptable level of current accountdeficit and market determined exchange rate regime were cornerstones of the policy ofexternal sector management recommended by the Report of the High Level Committeeon Balance of Payments, ( Rangarajan Committee) in April 1993. In the context of thechanging interface with the external sector, and the importance of the capital account,reserve adequacy is now evaluated by RBI in terms of several indicators and not merelythrough conventional norms, such as, the import cover. Thus, for instance, we assess ourreserves in terms of the volume of short-term debt and stock of portfolio investmentsalso. As a matter of policy, as far as possible, foreign exchange reserves are kept at alevel which is adequate to withstand both cyclical and unanticipated shocks.17. As of now, our foreign exchange reserves are about US $ 33 billion, whichincludes $ 2.7 billion of gold and $ 30.3 billion of foreign currency assets.  Our foreignexchange reserves were only $ 5.8 billion in March 1991. The last three years sawincreases in reserves of the order of $ 4.7 billion in 1996-97, $ 2.9 billion in 1997-98 and$ 3.1 billion in 1998-99, i.e. a cumulative $10 billion despite the East Asian crisis and anumber of other domestic and external pressures on the foreign exchange situation.Forward sales of foreign currency, net of forward purchases, are at present lower than $ 1billion or less than 3 per cent of gross reserves. In the interest of transparency, India hasalso decided to publish figures on RBI’s forward liabilities every month.  Our policy ofbuilding and maintaining adequate level of reserves while at the same time constrainingdebt, especially short-term debt, has served us Involvement of the 18. The role of external private sector lenders and banks in forestalling a debt crisis,and more broadly in external liability management is assuming importance. Efforts toinvolve the private sector lenders in liability management has many objectives, viz., bringabout more orderly adjustment process, limit moral hazard, strengthen market discipline,and help protect countries against volatility and contagion. The key issue concerning therole of the private sector lenders in forestalling and resolving the crisis is whether byinvolving the private sector, the overall costs associated with foreign exchange crisis canbe reduced, either by smoothening the crisis-resolution process, or by reshaping the5External  Private Sectorwell  during the Asian crisis.reserves and the cost of borrowing are not strictly comparable.incentives under which private institutions operate. The idea is to institute mechanisms in19. While there is a consensus regarding the need for the private sector to share theburden, discussions in various fora have centred on the “mode” of burden sharing.  Ideasthat are being considered include contingent credit lines, embedded call options, debt-service insurance, bond covenants, bankruptcy procedures, debt standstill and creditor-debtor councils.20. Basically, these mechanis ms bind private sector participants to either provideadditional funds, or reduce debt service burdens in times of crisis without creating moralhazard or disrupting normal market conditions.  For instance, it has been suggested thatcountries could contract market based Contingent Credit Lines with commercial banks totrigger liquidity support in times of crisis. If the credit lines were fairly priced, they couldprovide effective insurance against adverse market developments. Similarly, it has beenproposed that standstill arrangements, which allow private sector to extend additionalcredit when there has been default on existing debt, should also be considered. Suchmechanisms are considered essential since absence of such arrangements makes itpossible for banks holding short-term interbank claims to leave the market unscathed  orsignificantly reduce their exposure, which contributes to a perverse incentive structureinequitable burden sharing - and panic. Creditor-debtor councils could serve to improvethe flow of information. Similarly. bond and debt covenants could introduce sharingclauses and provisions for the modification of terms by qualified majorities in order tospeed up the negotiation process.21. From the official sector, the IMF has decide d to establish a Contingent CreditLine (CCL) as a precautionary mechanism to ward off financial crisis. This is expected tosupplement and not substitute the contingent credit lines from the private sector, as in thecase of Argentina. This support would be available to members who are undertakingsound macro policies but are affected by “contagion”. The CCL is expected to signal tothe market the confidence of the IMF in the policies of the country and boost confidence22. It remains to b e seen how flexibly the eligibility criteria in the new IMF facilitywill be operated in practice. For success of the scheme, it seems necessary to ensure thatperformance criteria are in fact appropriate and objective so that there is no room forsubjectivity or introduction of political and other non-economic considerations. Thescheme is likely to succeed in avoiding potential problems only if it is operated in a moreor less automatic way subject to certain pre-determined quantitative and objective criteriabeing satisfied by the country.  For example, one such test could be the extent ofoutstanding short-term liabilities in relation to a country’s net reserves. Another testcould be a pre-specified and agreed level of fiscal deficit or the level of aggregatedemand. As long as a country is following policies which satisfy these and similarquantifiable criteria, it should be able to use this new facility without further ado.6in the market.place before any crisis takes place – so that resolution of the crisis is more orderly.23. After the Asian crisis, there has been an e xtensive debate on the issue of capitalaccount liberalisation and controls. The issues that are being debated now relate to thedesirability, form and content of capital controls, risk containment strategies in external24. It is widely agreed that a major source of vulnerability in the Asian crisis was theaccumulation of short-term liabilities of banks and corporates and poor quality of riskassessment. Overall, there appears to be a consensus now in favour of developingcountries' restraining the inflow of short-term capital. There is, however ,  a growingdebate on the means by which short-term flows can be controlled. Important suggestionsrelate to effective monitoring, imposition of Tobin Tax, which is a tax on spottransactions, and  unremunerated  reserve requirements as prevalent in Chile. Theempirical evidence on effectiveness of Chile's approach, though oft-quoted, is however,25. There has also been a suggestion to  impose an increased capital requirement oninterbank transactions to bring about greater discipline on cross-border interbank market.It is self evident that just as there is no irresponsible borrowing without irresponsiblelending, there is no short-term borrowing without short-term lending. Unfortunately, inpractice, the current policy is biased in favour of short-term bank loans rather thanmedium term or long term loans to developing countries. Thus, by and large, short termloans to a country are likely to enjoy a higher credit rating than longer term loans,irrespective of the overall record of a developing country in meeting its debt service26. The current Basle Accord provides that all claims on banks countries and short-term claims (i.e. up to one year) on banks incorporated in non-OECDcountries should carry a risk weight of only 20 percent, whereas long-term claims onbanks in non-OECD countries carry a risk weight of 100 per cent. The New CapitalAdequacy Framework, which has just been issued by BIS as a consultative paper forcomments is reviewing this particular norm. The proposed guidelines, however, seem topermit the use of ratings of international credit rating agencies for imposition of riskweights. As mentioned above, there is an inherent bias towards short-term credit in creditrating agencies’ assessments. Hopefully, the BIS will address this issue while finalising27. Basically, three positions signif icant to developing countries seem to haveemerged from the discussions on cross-border capital movements. First, while the longer term efficiency of relatively free capital movements, a case has been  made forcapital controls either as an emergency measure or as a temporary measure in a crisis.This is based on the view that under some circumstances, financial markets do notfunction well.  Second, it is felt that  emerging markets should not liberalise capitalaccount in a hurry, without prior action for strengthening their financial systems.Financial markets are prone to rapid changes in perceptions and expectations because of7obligations.reiteratingthe guidelines.incorporated in OECDnot entirely conclusive.debt management, and the desirable sequencing of capital account liberalisation.Management of Capital Flowspoor information and  herding. In developing countries, these are also typically thin andvolatile. Third, it is widely agreed that capital account liberalisation should be supportedby a consistent macroeconomic framework, stable exchange rate policies and stronginstitutional framework in the financial markets. There is also a developing consensusthat controls, when necessary, should be temporary; they should be imposed on inflowsrather than outflows and they should be  market-based rather than direct and, as far aspossible, they should be focussed on short-term volatile flows.28. A related issue is the possibl e amendment of the IMF’s Articles to extend itsjurisdiction over the Capital Account. The IMF itself has acknowledged that there is nounique path that defines an orderly capital account liberalisation. In fact, the path andspeed at which countries can traverse across this path will depend to some extent on thesafeguards that the new international financial architecture can provide. It is worthwhileto note that a significant amount of liberalisation of capital account has already taken29. From the view point of developing countries, it needs to be  recognised thatexternal capital has benefits and acts as a complement to domestic savings. However,short-term reversible flows can also have negative effects on the economy, particularlyduring periods of political or economic uncertainty. While large inflows pose policydilemmas for macro-management, large sudden outflows can impose extensive damageto the financial sector and also result in a disporportionate output loss. It must beunderstood that merely by lifting all capital controls, the markets of a developing countrydo not get as deeply integrated as a developed  country's markets. As such, each countrywould need to decide on its own path of capital account liberalisation with regard to thetiming and sequencing. This in turn is likely to depend upon the extent of stability andinstitutional structure of the domestic financial sector. Taking all these factors intoaccount, at this juncture, it does not seem necessary to embark on a time-consumingprocedure for amendment of IMF’s Articles in order to promote capital account,. At the present time, a constructive consultative process between the IMFand member countries on these issues should be adequate to achieve the objectives in30. India’s policy on the capital account has been predominantly influenced by therecommendations of the Rangarajan Committee, mentioned earlier. The Committee’srecommendations with regard to discouraging short-term flows stand vindicated by thecurrent international consensus on the need for controlling short-term debt. In India,short-term debt is carefully monitored with differential treatment  between trade and non-trade related debt and is subject to a quantitative ceiling. Deposits by Non-ResidentIndians are also controlled through specification of interest rates or interest rate ceilingsfor different maturities. As a result of these efforts, the average maturity of our External31. India has cautiously but systematically moved, over a period of time, from acomprehensive control regime to current account convertibility and market-determinedexchange rate.  We have managed our capital account to ensure growth with stability,8Borrowing  is about six to seven years. Commercial view.liberalisationplace in the developing countries under the existing Articles.while consistently adding to our foreign currency reserves. Like several other developingcountries, we also experienced, and managed, phases of excessive capital movements.There were periods of capital surge during 1993-95, and also two major episodes ofvolatility in flows in the second half of 1995-96 and again during 1997-98. Duringperiods of exchange rate volatility in the wake of the East Asian crisis, there were majorimponderables involved, both externally and internally, and contagion and herdbehaviour had to be guarded against.  In these situations, a co- ordinated policyframework and careful calibration of policy instruments resulted in an effectivemanagement of capital flows without intolerable shocks on the performance of the32. In sum, I believe that the policy of cautious movement towards capital accountliberalisation that has been adopted by us continues to be valid. Liberalisation of capitalaccount has to be viewed as a process and not as a single event. It has  to be embarkedupon cautiously as part of overall economic reforms as well as an assessment of the33. In the debate on the IFA, increased  recognition has been given to three   pre-requisites for the efficient functioning of the financial sector, viz., a well designedinfrastructure, effective market discipline, and a strong  regulatory and supervisoryframework.34. A well designed infrastructure has many elements. First, it requires a proper legaland judicial framework. A second  element relates to fostering good corporategovernance. A third element is comprehensive accounting standards and a system ofindependent audits. The International Accounting Standards Committee has donesubstantial work related to this aspect. A fourth aspect relates to an efficient payments35. Effective market discipline also requires a good credit culture and well developedand functioning equity and debt markets with a wide variety of instruments for riskdiversification. The Basle Committee is reviewing its existing capital adequacyguidelines. The BIS has recently circulated a consultative paper to discuss the new capitaladequacy framework. The Committee has proposed a new standardised approach for therisk weighting of book assets. The Asian crisis has demonstrated that problems can arisewhen excessive leverage is coupled with excessive concentration of risk. Improving theassessment and management of risks is, therefore, another 36. International consensus has already been reached on what constitutes soundpractices in many areas of banking supervision and securities regulation. The BasleCommittee has released the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision and theInternational Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO) has produced similarguidelines for securities industry. Individual countries themselves are taking steps todevelop markets ,  review  their ongoing regulatory and supervisory procedures and adopt9area which requires attention.and settlement systems. Core principles are being established in this area also.Strengthening the Financial Systememerging scenario relating to international economic and financial architecture.economy.international best practices. Countries are also making efforts to strengthen the legalenvironment in which the financial systems are operating. Appreciable steps have alsobeen taken to improve bankruptcy procedures.37. In India, financial sector reforms were undertaken in the early stages of economicreform, pursuant to the recommendations, of the Committee on Financial Sector Reforms( Narasimham Committee), which submitted its report in 1992. This was followed byanother Committee on Banking Sector Reforms ( Narasimham Committee II), whichsubmitted its report in 1998. As a result of measures taken pursuant to therecommendations of these Committees, the adoption of prudential norms relating tocapital adequacy, income recognition, asset classification, provisioning standards andvaluation of investment portfolio in India are now close to international best practices.Asset-liability management is being put place in the banking system.  Supervisorypractices by the Reserve Bank of India have been closely patterned on the lines of theBIS Core Principles of Bank Supervision. In some aspects, the Indian standards arestricter than international standards.38. Supervision of non-bank financial companies (NBFCs) is also conducted by theReserve Bank of India. The prudential norms applied for the NBFCs closely resemblethose for banks’ capital adequacy. Capital adequacy ratio for  NBFCs is currently 12 percent. Asset classification, provisioning and income recognition norms have also beenprescribed. Both, off-site and on-site supervision methods have been adopted, andCAMELS (capital, asset quality, management, earning, liquidity, systems and control)pattern is used to rate and evaluate NBFCs. ALL NBFCs are required to publish theiraudited balance sheets.39. However, there is a lot more work that needs to be done in order to make ourfinancial system deeper and more vibrant. A number of Committees have been set up toadvise the Reserve Bank and Government on further steps. A Technical AdvisoryCommittee on Money and Government Securities Markets has been established as aconsultative forum to advice the Reserve Bank of India on an on-going basis. Similarly, aTechnical Advisory Committee has been set up  to advise on the legal infrastructure. AGovernment committee is also looking into the legal and judicial aspects. An RBIcommittee is working on the weak banks issue. Our urban cooperative structure is beingreviewed. Another area of work relates to the review of deposit insurance system. Anational debate is also taking place on the desirability and other aspects of movementtowards universal banking.  We have also constituted an internal group to study theconsultative paper of the BIS on the proposed new capital adequacy framework.Transparency in Systems and Developing Standard Codes 40. During the on-going debate on IFA, an influential view was that the informationmade available to the markets by the official sector or by corporates or even by financialintermediaries, prior to the crisis, did not reflect realities in the emerging economies. Thepractices of disseminating information as well as its reliability, timeliness, and quality10varied sharply from country to country. Hence, considerable attention has been devotedin the recent debate to developing uniform transparency codes and standards. Forinstance, IOSCO is coordinating with other agencies, such as the InternationalAccounting Standards Committee, to develop proper accounting and disclosure rules forthe securities market. A noteworthy feature of the exercise is that these efforts encompassthe private sector also as many of the standards, e.g., accounting, auditing, bankruptcy,corporate governance, and securities market regulation require to be implemented at the 41. The IMF has also developed voluntary standards in certain areas in the financisystem. The Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency was recently approved. TheCode of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies is nowbeing developed. The transparency policies listed in this Code are purported to focus onclarity of roles, responsibility and objectives of central banks, processes for formulatingand reporting of monetary policy decisions, public availability of information and42. It is, however, important to recognise that while transparency is of paramountimportance as it enables and improves the understanding of the stance of policies bymarket participants, the quality and content of transparency has to be appropriate and intune with country circumstances. Given the divergence in institutional development andthe nature of relations between various arms of national governments, it seems unlikelythat a uniform code could be universally valid at this stage. It stands to reason that theaccent shouldbe on voluntary adoption and gradualism rather than a “big bang”. It is also importantthat the manner in which these international standards are monitored does not degenerateinto categorising countries as performers and non-performers. The goals of transparencycould be best served by a balanced and symmetric evolution of information as between43. So far as India is concerned, consistent with democratic traditions and free press,an impressive degree of transparency in provision of information is already in place.India is one of the earliest members of the SDDS of the IMF.  The RBI provides up-to-date weekly data on all relevant macroeconomic and financial indicators through theWeekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin. In addition, the RBI and Governmentdisseminate as much information as possible through monthly, quarterly and annualpublications. Commercial banks in India are also required to maintain disclosurestandards on par with those of international banks. This has been achieved by mandatingdisclosure of some of the essential strength indicators and performance relatedparameters as part of commercial banks’ balance sheets. In fact, since April 1997, evenbefore the onset of the Asian crisis, Indian banks have been disclosing capital adequacyratios (both Tier I and Tier II separately) ,  percentage of NPAs to net advances, provisionmade towards NPAs, and  gross and net value of investments. Since March 1998, banksin India have been asked to disclose further information regarding interest and non-interest income as a percentage of working funds ,  operating profit as a percentage ofworking funds, and information on the financial position of subsidiaries. With effect from11the authorities and the market participants.accountability.alcorporate level.April 2000, the Reserve Bank of India has also advised banks to disclose maturity profileInternational  Financial Institutions44. The discussions on the future shape of international financial institutions haverevolved round three  pillars. These are strengthening the existing financial institutions,45. There is consensus that international financial institutions (IFIs) must adapt to thechanging environment if  they have to maintain their effectiveness. Some  generalagreement on the principles that should guide efforts to enhance the effectiveness of IFIshas also been reached. These include arrangements to enhance accountability, aninclusive process that facilitates a broad range of countries and other institutions, and amore participative and open decision making process.46. The debate on strengthening the role of international financial institutions has alsocovered the role of rating agencies. The ratings given by of these agencies seemed tohave influenced the decisions of investors in Asia greatly and after the crisis, questionshave arisen on the public accountability of rating agencies. An issue that is being debatedis whether ratings should be used as they are or should rating agencies themselves beregulated. This assumes critical importance in the context of the consultative paper ofBIS on the proposed New Capital Adequacy Framework, which envisages the possibility47. A proposal has also been put forward to create a new international institutioncalled World Financial Authority(WFA)  or a Board of Overseers of major InternationalInstitutions and Markets with powers for oversight and regulation globally. Variousmodels have been envisaged for the proposed WFA. One proposal would entail theestablishment of a body with responsibility for setting regulatory standards for allfinancial enterprises – funds and insurance companies as well as banks, and off-shore andon-shore entities. National regulators would remain responsible for implementingstandards promulgated by WFA. Another model might be for the WFA to serve as anumbrella organisation into which the existing bodies could be brought together. It ishowever, well recognised that setting up such an institution would be a complex process.As an intermediate step, a suggestion has been made in the Development Committeerecently for setting up a new and Permanent Standing Committee for Global FinancialRegulation. This intermediate proposal seeks to bring together not only the World Bankand the IMF, but also the Basle Committee and other regulatory groupings on a regularbasis.48. In response to these proposals, the major industrialised countries have now set upthe Financial Stability Forum with representatives from the finance ministries, centralbanks and regulatory authorities of G-7 countries, as well as from the IMF, World Bank,Basle Committee, IOSCO, International Association of Insurance Supervisors, BIS,OECD, Committee on Global Financial System and  Committee on Payment and12of assigning risk weights according to ratings.creating new institutions, and establishing new groupings.of loans and advances, investments, and lending to sensitive sectors,Settlement System.  It has been proposed that the Forum should be broadened byincluding participants from other industrial countries and emerging economies in order to49. Finally, new arrangements are being discussed on the provision of internationalofficial liquidity to countries or financial markets, including the question of IMF beinggiven the authority and the means to act as the lender of the last resort. The initiativesunder consideration in this area can be summarised as follows.50. It is generally agreed that  the IMF should continue to play an important role inproviding international liquidity. The major issues regarding adequacy of funds relate toincrease in quotas, SDR allocation, sale of gold to augment the resource base, andincreased borrowing from members. Proposals for enhancing the accountability andlegitimacy of the World Bank have also received some attention. In this context, there isa suggestion that the Interim Committee could be transformed into a Council ofMinisters. Reforming the Development Committee along similar lines has also been51. As regards the proposal to establish an inter national lender of last resort, one lineof argument is that there is no such need. A better approach to crisis management, it hasbeen argued, would be to reform the debtor-creditor relationships, including introductionof provisions for orderly debt workouts and arrangements for temporary standstills. Anumber of other questions have also been raised. Who would function as the lender oflast resort? Some favour the IMF, while some others favour a complementary facility forunconditional official lending. Could the IMF function without being able to createreserves? What would be the modalities for access? Would access to funds attractconditionality? What would be the extent of moral hazard? These questions are still beingdebated.52. In order to enforc e emergency standstill and orderly debt workouts, a suggestionhas been made to set up an international bankruptcy court, but this has not been foundfeasible. As an alternative, UNCTAD has suggested establishing an independent panel todetermine whether the country concerned is justified in imposing exchange restrictions53. Thus, there is no shortage of new ideas on new institutions and new arrangements.However, a fair guess, at this point of time, particularly with improved prospects ofcountries in East Asia, is that the present institutional structure will remain more or lessConclusion54. Let me now conclude.  I have traversed a fa irly large ground, and I do not proposeto take much more of your time by attempting a summary of all the issues.  I would like13in tact with some changes in operating procedures and management structures.with the effect of debt standstills.suggested.New Arrangementsmake it more effective.to end by highlighting a couple of “over-arching” issues, which deserve to be speciallykept in view as we workout the arrangements for financial co-operation in the newmillennium. An important consideration that the international community must payattention to is the hard reality that these new arrangements cannot operate successfullywithout equal partnership between developed and developing countries, or betweencapital surplus and capital borrowing countries.  The recent history has forcefullydemonstrated the close linkages between all countries across the globe, whether they arelenders or borrowers.  The recent move to involve developing countries more closely inthe discussions on the New Financial Architecture are, therefore, welcome. But theseefforts have not yet gone far enough. The institutional arrangements for decision makingon the new financial architecture still remain too heavily weighted in favour of industrialcountries .  An important priority in the coming months is to find ways and means of55. Despite many challenges, and despite the ir somewhat lopsided voting structure,by and large, the Bretton Woods institutions have served the international communitywell.  As such, the current consensus that there is no urgent need to create newinternational institutions is perhaps right. Current focus is on measures to make theexisting Bretton Woods institutions more effective and responsive.  In order to achievethis objective, it is now essential to provide greater representation to developing countrieson the Boards of these institutions, and to provide them with a larger voting power.  It isone of the ironies of the last forty years that although developing countries, as a group,have grown much faster than the developed countries over this period and their relativeeconomic strength in terms of output and trade has increased substantially, their actualvoting power in Bretton Woods institutions has tended to decline! This needs to becorrected in the next round of Quota exercises in the IMF and capital increase in theWorld Bank.56. ly, for the developing countries, including countries in our region, it is ofutmost importance that we accord the highest priority to strengthen our banking andfinancial systems and bring them up to best international standards.  In early developmenteconomics, little or no attention was paid to the role of financial intermediation as anessential component of growth and development policies.  The concentration at that timewas on measures to raise the rate of domestic savings and investment and on accelerationof the pace of industrialisation through direct intervention.  In view of the realities of thattime and the historical background, this emphasis was understandable.  However, theworld has changed a great deal since then. The role of financial intermediaries inmobilising and allocating domestic savings as well as external capital has now becomecrucial. The East-Asian crisis has also demonstrated the vital importance of financialinstitutions in sustaining the momentum of growth and development.  It is no longerpossible for developing countries to delay the introduction of strong prudential andsupervisory norms, and introduce structural reforms in order to make the financial system57. Thi s is an area where central banks like, yours and ours, have a specialresponsibility.  In the SAARC forum, under the leadership of Sri Lanka, we have initiated14more competitive, more transparent and more accountable.Finalbroadening the dialogue by making the concerned fora more representative.measures to bring about better co-operation among our central banks and Ministries ofFinance.  We, in the Reserve Bank of India, look forward to working closely with the* I am grateful to Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, and Dr.A.Prasad, Executive Assistant, Reserve Bankof India for their help and close co-operation in the preparation of this lecture.15Central Bank of Sri Lanka in moving speedily towards our common economic objectives.
