INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCING : STATUS AND ISSUESThe process of economic reforms initiated in India in early nineties has focused,inter alia, on the infrastructure sector especially on attracting private investment.  Anumber of policy initiatives have been taken by the Government of India and ReserveBank of India (RBI) to attract such private investment. The present paper while listing theimportant developments also makes an attempt to focus on some of the important issuescritical to infrastructure financing. The organisation of this paper is as follows: Section 1deals with the general approach of RBI to infrastructure including link betweeninfrastructure and Government finance; Section 2 sets out the development in debtmarkets which is crucial for financing infrastructure; Section 3 contains the recentdevelopments and some current issues relating to domestic and external financing ofinfrastructure sector. Conclusions are at .The broad approach of RBI for the development of infrastructure has been“The financing requirements of infrastructure as a whole are, however, massive and poseserious problems in the context of the needs to raise more resources both by the public andprivate sectors. Currently, the private sector finds regulatory environment and legal aswell as institutional framework non- transparent and complex for its entry. The problem iscompounded by mix-up of the roles as between the owner and regulator in public domain.These factors in conjunction with the virtual domination of public sector in long termcontractual saving in household sector, and lack of securitisation of debt seem to havecontributed to inadequacies in investment in infrastructure. Injection of resources in publicsector to expeditiously complete the ongoing projects on a selective basis and a moretransparent as well as a definite policy on ownership, regulation and financing to attractprivate investor interest, both domestic and foreign, are some of the areas where initiativesare needed. At the same time, full cost recovery allowing for transparent, and explicitsubsidisation where needed, would make possible adequate flow resources to this criticalarea”.Recognising the importance of infrastructure, while analysing the Governmentfinances in the Reserve Bank of India Annual Report 1996-97, it was observed that“Public outlays on infrastructure, especially in non-tradable sectors such as power andtransport not only complement or ‘crowd in’ private investment by improving themarginal productivity of capital and thereby enhancing the prospective returns oninvestment, but also create forward and backward linkages in the economy, leading to amultiplier effect on the capital stock”.  The Report also observes that “financing a largeorder of infrastructure outlay while exercising prudent control on fiscal deficit wouldnecessitate, inter-alia concomitant efforts to bring about adjustment in currentWith regard to the State Government Finances the Report observes “Given theaccent on infrastructure development, State Governments would need to initiateappropriate policy changes so as to attract a high order of private sector participation. TheReserve Bank of India Annual Report 1997-98 further stressed the private initiative in thefinancing of key infrastructure sectors.@ Paper presented by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the Workshop on theRole of Financial Institutions in the Development of Infrastructure at Planning Commission, YojanaI am grateful to Mrs. Usha Thorat, Dr. R.K. Pattnaik and Dr. A. Prasad of RBI for their valuable assistance.Bhavan, New Delhi on November 11, 1998.expenditures, especially the subsidies”.Infrastructure and Government Financesarticulated in its Annual Report 1996-97 as follows :I. APPROACH OF RBI: A REVIEWSection IV@It is important to recognise that central to the developmen t of infrastructure is thedevelopment in debt market in India. The debt market in India comprises basically threesegments, viz., Government Securities Market, which is oldest and most dominant; PSUBonds Market, which is basically a development since late `eighties; and CorporateSecurities Market, which is growing fast after liberalisation, especially in the last twoyears. The major focus in the development of debt markets has been the GovernmentSecurities Market for three reasons. First, it constitutes the principal segment of our debtmarket. Second, as a market for sovereign paper, it has a role in setting benchmarks in thefinancial markets as a whole. Third, it is critical in bringing about an effective and reliableSince the ‘sixties and until the ‘nineties, the Government Securities marketremained dormant since the Government was borrowing at preannounced coupon ratesfrom basically a captive group of investors, such as banks. Thus, there existed a passiveinternal debt management policy. This, coupled with automatic monetisation of budgetdeficit prevented a deep and vibrant Government Securities market. Internal debtmanagement became an active instrument of policy since economic reform of the‘nineties. Since the nineties, the Government and the RBI together brought about changesin instruments and institutional framework in both Government and non-Government debtmarkets.Since April 1997, a number of structural and institutional changes in the differentsegments of financial markets have been brought about, and these include debt markets,As long as automatic monetisation existed, it was difficult to assure a frameworkfor Government securities market in terms of matching demand and supply through pricemechanism. Hence, the most significant development during 1997-98 has been theelimination of the practice of automatic monetisation of the Central Government budgetdeficit through ad hoc Treasury Bills with effect from April 1, 1997 and the introductionof a new scheme of Ways and Means Advances (WMA). During 1997-98, specialsecurities to the tune of Rs.20,000 crore were converted into marketable securities ofvarying maturities, in order to augment the stock of marketable securities for active openmarket operations. It may be pointed out that during the early part of 1997-98, the RBIhad to resort to sterilised intervention in the management of capital inflows. Also, ascheme of 14-Day Intermediate Treasury Bills was introduced in the place of 91-Day TapTreasury Bills to enable State Governments, foreign central banks and special bodies to14-Day Treasury Bills were introduced in June 1997 on a weekly auction basis.Thus, investors now have the option to invest in 14-Day, 91-Day and 364-Day TreasuryUniform price auction in respect of 91-Day Treasury Bills has been introduced asan experimental measure. Uniform price auction method is expected to eliminate theproblem of winner’s curse and encourage more aggressive bidding in the primary market.To foster market clearing rates in the primary market and bringing about moretransparency in auctions, the RBI is now pre-announcing notified amounts in auctions ofIn India, State Governments are major non-competitive bidders who have largeand volatile surplus funds positions and these render the pricing pattern and allotment ofbids uncertain for competitive bidders. As another measure towards a more effectivemarket clearing price, non-competitive bids are now kept outside the notified amount.2Treasury Bills (14-Day, 91-Day and 364-Day) and dated securities.Bills.Treasury Billsinvest their temporary cash surpluses.Advances to Central GovernmentIntroduction of Scheme of Ways and Meansespecially the Government Securities and money markets.Reform in Debt Markets since 1997-98Early Policy Developments in Debt Markettransmission channel for the use of indirect instruments of monetary control.REVIEWII. DEVELOPMENTS OF DEBT MARKET IN INDIA: REVIEW AND ISSUESThe Reserve Bank of India has been actively t rying to promote retailing ofGovernment securities. First, a system of primary dealers and satellite dealers was set upand liquidity support from the RBI has been made available to them. Secondly, the RBIannounced special liquidity support for dedicated gilt funds. However, not much interesthas been evinced in this channel so far. Thirdly, banks are now allowed to freely buy andsell Government Securities on an outright basis and retail Government securities to non-bank clients, without any restriction on the period between sale and purchase. Fourthly,with a view to enabling dematerialisation of securities of retail holders, institutions such asNational Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL), Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited(SHCIL) and National Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. (NSCCL) have been allowedThe RBI has recently enlarged the number of PDs from 6 to 13 by announcing ‘in-principle’ agreement to register 7 PDs. The addition of 7 more PDs is expected to increaseTo widen the participants in the debt market, including Government securitie s,foreign institutional investors have also been permitted to operate, though suchparticipation had to be consistent with overall ceilings on external commercialIn our market, two types of repos are currently in operation – inter bank repoincluding PDs and the RBI repo which is used for absorption/injection of liquidity. Afterthe irregularities in securities transactions in 1992, inter bank repos are permitted underregulated conditions with eligible participants and instruments being generally restrictedIn order to further expand the base in the inter bank repos market, the participationwas extended to non-bank entities that had already access to call money market as lenders.Repos have also been permitted in PSU bonds and private corporate debt securitiesprovided they are held in dematerialised form in a depository and the transactions are donein recognised stock exchanges.  This will be operationalised after Government issues aIn the most recent monetary and credit policy, the RBI removed the restriction of aminimum period of 3 days for inter bank repo transactions. This would further enablebanks and other participants in the repo market to adjust their liquidity in a more flexibleIn recent months, open market operations of the RBI, both through outright salesof Government Securities and repo operations have gained considerable momentum. Atpresent, the RBI conducts three-day and four-day repos in the market. RBI is alsoexploring the possibility of conducting one day repos. The primary objective of theseoperations is to absorb or provide liquidity from/to the market, though under certaincircumstances, repos have also been used to signal changes in interest rates.Since the introduction of the reform measures, the various segments of thefinancial market have responded favourably and become increasingly integrated. Althoughsignificant progress has been made in the debt markets also, a number of rigidities persistThe actions required for this purpose may be classified into areas relating to legal,technology, regulatory and market microstructure, retailing, standardisation, riskmanagement etc.A new legislation titled the Government Securities Act proposes to repeal areplace the Public Debt Act, 1944. The Government Securities Bill has already beennd3Repeal and Replacement of Public Debt ActLegal issuesand major issues still need to be tackled keeping in view a consistent framework.ISSUESmanner.clarification regarding applicability of stamp duties on dematerialised instruments.and now expanded gradually.Ready Forward Transactionsborrowings.Investment in Central Government Securities by FIIsactivities in terms of liquidity and depth both in the primary and secondary markets.Strengthening Dealers Systemto open SGL Accounts with the RBI.Retailing of Government Securitiesapproved by the Cabinet and is awaiting Parliament clearance. However, since the PublicDebt Act, 1944, is applicable for marketable loans raised by the RBI on behalf of both theCentral and State Governments, the proposal requires consent of all State Governments.The State Governments have to pass a Resolution for the purpose either prior to enactmentby the Centre or subsequently adopt the same by passing a Resolution. Once the new Actis enacted, the RBI will have substantive powers to design and introduce an instrument oftransfer suited to computer environment. The new Act will also give flexibility to allowGovernment Securities to be held in Depositories while at the same time specificallyexcluding Government Securities from the purview of Depositories Act, 1996.(Regulation) Act, 1956It is held that rescinding the 1969 Notification restricting forward trading insecurities is now necessary for the development of the securities market. Simultaneously,there is a proposal to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act (SCRA) to add anenabling provision to provide jurisdiction to the RBI also in the regulation of the debtmarkets. With this, the respective regulatory roles of SEBI and RBI in the debt market willbe formalised. The proposed changes in the SCRA will pave way for a more active reposDevelopment of financial markets is being inhibited by multiple prescriptions ofstamp duty which is creating friction in active secondary market trading by increasing thetransaction cost and administrative hassles. This is a matter of crucial importance andexemption of debt instruments from stamp duty or alternatively rationalisation of theprocedures by imposing a flat fee would go a long way in increasing secondary marketactivity and liquidity in debt instruments. The suggestion that the Indian Stamp Act beamended to enact a specific provision exempting transactions of all securities inThe RBI has embarked upon the technological upgradation of debt market. Thisincludes screen-based trade reporting system with the use of VSAT communicationnetwork complemented by a centralised Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) accountingsystem. It will be integrated with the regional current account system. Theoperationalisation will broaden the participation in the auction system, help enlarging theinvestor’s base and increase the competitiveness in the auction system. The centralisedSGL accounting system will improve the speed of settlement of secondary marketThe operationalisation of VSAT by end of December 1998 will provide on- linelinkages between offices of RBI, Central Government (Ministry of Finance), monitoringof Government finance (receipts and expenditures) and also among other participants(banks/primary dealers/satellite dealers/financial institutions). This will open new areas inY2K Compliance by Primary Dealers and Satellite Dealers (Sy stem Software andHardware) with the target date December 1998 as also being monitored.The RBI is actively coordinating with the Primary Dealers Association indeveloping an Electronic Dealing System to facilitate dealing in call, notice and termmoney, Treasury Bills, Government Securities and repos. This is expected to beoperationalised by March 1999.There is an increasing recourse by corporates to private placement of their debtpaper. This popularity of private placement may be attributed to the low issuance cost,ease of structuring instruments, saving on time lag in issuance. Notwithstanding thesebenefits, healthy development of the private placement market calls for moretransparency, better disclosure and protection of investors’ interest.An Informal Group on Primary Market under the Chairmanship of Dr. Shankar4Regulation of Private PlacementElectronic Dealing Systemtechnological development of payment systems.transactions.Technological upgradation in Debt MarketTechnologyDepository in dematerialised form from stamp duty also needs to be seriously considered.Stamp Duty Reformmarket and introduction of new market features like, when-issued trading.Amendments to Securities ContractsAcharya has recommended that the facility of private placement should be restricted to notmore than 99 qualified institutional investors and should be tradable on OTCEI. TheGroup also recommended that financial institutions/banks/mutual funds which participatein private placement should mandatorily give information on a regular basis to SEBI andthe RBI.Standard practices in the market need to be evolved with regard to the manner ofquotes, conclusion of deals, etc. Code of best practices has to be evolved for repotransactions. It is proposed to ensure that the Primary Dealers Association and FIMMDAIquickly set up a time frame for standardising the documentation and market practices andif need be the RBI will come forward and indicate a time frame. Most importantly, thecode of conduct will have to be compatible with the contemplated dealing screen and theIntroduction of rupee derivatives will go a long way in providing instruments forinvestors to hedge their exposures. The Reserve Bank has decided ‘in principle’ to createan environment that would facilitate introduction of interest rate swaps. The RBI proposesto examine in consultation with market participants, relevant aspects such as standarddocumentation, benchmark rate, prudential prescriptions, etc., and then allow the productin the market.With the amendment to SCRA, 1956 and the establishment of a strong clearinghouse, the introduction of T-Bills Futures can be contemplated. The RBI is alreadyencouraging trading in Government securities through National Securities Depository Ltd.and National Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. By allowing them to open SGLAccounts with the RBI. A committee is also looking at STRIPS in the GovernmentRBI recognises the importance of benchmark rate but is of the view that anybenchmark rate needs to be developed by the market itself.  In the interest of marketdevelopment it is prudent that market participants themselves work out unitedly and comeout with a reference rate. Recently, the NSE has evolved a benchmark rate linked to callRecog nising the need and importance of new instrument in the debt marketReserve Bank of India had constituted an internal working group to examine the Pros and of implementing STRIPS. The Committee is expected to submit its Report within aIt has been the RBI’s endeavour to ensure that banks increasingly mark theirinvestments to the mark. Accordingly, the ratio of investments in permanent category hasbeen brought down to 30 per cent for March 1999. In the next three years, the intention isto mark the entire portfolio to market. New private sector banks are already required tomark to market their entire investments from end-March 1997.Currently, all the market borrowings programme of all States is conducted by RBIat a common fixed coupon and tenor in two or three combined tranches. While someStates feel that they could get a better deal from the market if they go to the market ontheir own, others are skeptical about their capacity to market without a common tranche.As a long term objective, each State should in RBI’s view, have freedom to complete theapproved programme on its own market standing. As a sequel to consensus in a meetingof RBI with the State Government Finance Secretaries it has been decided in consultationwith Government of India, to initially implement a flexible approach to State Governmentmarket borrowings. According to this approach, the State Governments have the option toborrow from the market on their own standing, to the extent of 5 per cent to 35 per cent oftheir approved borrowing programme. During the current fiscal two State Governmentshave opted for this; hopefully, during fiscal 1999-2000, the scheme will be implemented5Flexible approach to market borrowings of the State GovernmentEncouragement to Trade Through Mark-to Marketmonth’s time.ConsNew Instrument Developmentmoney which has been quite popular with some debt issuers.Development of a Benchmark RateSecurities market.Risk Management and Development of Rupee Derivatives Markettechnological upgradation.Standardisation of PracticesAn issue that has significant implication in the context of infrastructure financingis the guarantees given by the State Governments. Governments grant guarantees topromote certain economic enterprises for reducing the credit risk for investors especiallyin those activities or arrears where the nature of investment is characterised by longgestation period. While guarantees do not form part of debt these have in the eventualityof default, the potential of exacerbating even an apparently sound fiscal system. In view ofthis, Reserve Bank of India has raised its concern in its Annual Report 1997-98. RBI as aprudent central bank has been emphasising on prudential limits and transparency in regardto formal guarantees as well as letters of comfort that have the effect of guarantees. ACommittee has been constituted by the Reserve Bank of India with a few of the StateFinance Secretaries as members to examine various aspects of guarantees and theAs a sequel to the recommendation of the Expert Group on Commercialisation ofInfrastructure, IDFC has been set up to promote infrastructure investment with the CentralGovernment and Reserve Bank as chief contributors of share capital.  IDFC beganoperation in December 1997 and was fully capitalised in March 1998.  The main task ofIDFC is to connect projects and institutions to financial markets in a manner that has notbeen possible before and, by so doing, develop and nurture the creation of a long-termdebt market. IDFC would not just be another term lending institution or merely a creditenhancer but its mandate is also to perceive and meet the gaps in policies, procedures, andThe funding structure of IDFC was deliberately designed to ensure privateownership and professional management, though largely funded by public sector. TheGovernment of India and RBI have provided subordinated debt of Rs.650 crore and initialcapital of Rs.350 crore.In order to promote and strengthen the infrastructure financing, Reserve Bank hasliberalised the term loans by banks for this purpose. Earlier, there were prudential ceilingson the overall exposure that banking system could take on a single infrastructure project.These have been removed recently. Each bank is now free to sanction term loans to allprojects within the overall ceiling of the prudential exposure norms prescribed by theReserve Bank, viz., 25 per cent of the capital funds in the case of an individual borrowerand 50 per cent in the case of borrower group. The Group Exposure norm of 50 per cent isalso allowed to be exceeded up to 10 per cent provided the additional exposure is for thepurpose of financing infrastructure projects. Further, banks are given freedom to decideIt is necessary for RBI to be assured that, the banks ensure that given their shortterm liability structure, their exposure to long term asset is kept within prudential limit. Asthe debt market develops depth and liquidity, the asset liability mismatch that banks faceon account of financing infrastructure can be managed through development of derivativesproducts. Further, the limitation of exposure norms can be handled through developmentof credit derivatives. Such credit enhancement products also help in adoption ofconsortium approach and ensure that special skills required for infrastructure financingRecognising that infrastructure development is a national priority, Governor,Reserve Bank of India has been having since December 1997, periodic interaction withfinancing institutions, and select banks with a view to accelerating the pace ofimplementation of infrastructure projects in key sectors by adopting a problem solvingapproach.  The objective of these discussions has been to set-up a mechanism to reviewsector specific issues on an on-going basis so that viable projects which are at an advancedstage could be brought to financial closure early. The broad topics which were covered in6Informal Meeting on Infrastructure Financingwhich may be limited, would be used efficiently.the period of term loans keeping in view the maturity profile of their liabilities.Bank lending for infrastructuresystem that enable economical and efficient infrastructure financing.Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation (IDFC)Institutional DevelopmentsIII. FINANCING OF INFRASTRUCTURECommittee is expected to submit its Report in a month’s time.State Government Guaranteesby more State Governments.seven of these meetings held so far are as follows : Hedging mechanisms for foreignexchange loans; Quantum of domestic financing for infrastructure projects (past andfuture); Mechanisms that will help to catalyse financing; and Domestic financing forinfrastructure.In the context of the domestic financing of infrastructure project, it is important torecognise the quantum of domestic debt for financing these projects and the mechanismsthat would help to catalyse infrastructure financing. According to available informationthe amount sanctioned for infrastructure projects during 1997-98 amounted to Rs.22,255crore. However, the amount disbursed has been Rs.6,505 crore. As per the estimateworked out by IDFC, the total funds required for infrastructure projects for the next fouryears would be Rs.1,63,900 crore of which domestic debt requirement would be Rs.56,734crore. Of the total domestic fund requirement indicated above IDFC expects thatIt is Reserve Bank’s endeavour to facilitate flow of resources of the magnitudesindicated by IDFC. Reserve Bank of India has to reckon the fact that banks are theprincipal repositories of household savings and consequently recognise the liquidity andinterest rate risk faced by them in using short term liabilities for long term financing.Ultimately the development of a deep and liquid debt market with diversification ofinvestor base will help in evolving products that can help banks manage such risk andunbundle the credit risk from the liquidity and interest rate risk. All efforts are being madeby Government of India and the RBI to facilitate the development of debt markets. RBIwishes to encourage banks and institutions to securitise the receivables, repackage andoffer to investors at various stages of the infrastructure project. The immediate hurdle,One of the specific proposals made for hedging liquidity risk and interest rate riskis a take out facility and market making in project debentures, say after a pre-determinedperiod of five years to give comfort to commercial banks which are willing to deploy theirfunds in infrastructure. While RBI encourages the take out facility which could bereplicated in several projects, RBI will have to monitor the extent of such facilities inrelation to the balance sheets of the parties. In any case, the provision of a “liquidity backstop” by RBI for supporting market making at the end of the pre-determined period hasimplications for monetary management.The current policy of Government on External Commercial Borrowings is to allowsubstantial flexibility in case of power and other infrastructure projects. It has been held,however, that the use of external financing for infrastructure is being inhibited by theinability to hedge long term exchange risk under current regulation of RBI. While RBI hasbeen taking several measures to deepen the forward market in foreign exchange, there islimited forward supply beyond one year. Long term currency swaps have been usedthough in a limited way and the market participants have also been encouraged by RBI torun a swap book subject to prudential limits. In cases where there is a natural hedge suchas export oriented units or where there are foreign exchange receivables the exchange riskissue does not inhibit external financing. Indian commercial banks with overseas brancheshave also been entering into long term reciprocal arrangements with institutions likeHDFC and HUDCO which have availed of external assistance by using the foreigncurrency funds at their overseas branches and providing rupee finance in India. True,banks are encouraged to run swap books as long as the prudential norms are compliedwith and a few of them have intermediated such swaps. Financial institutions areencouraged to do such swaps as long as the counter parties are their clients.Two specific proposals have been made to get around inadequate hedgingLong term exchange swaps : This envisages raising of long term funds and overseasplacement of these funds at Indian banks’ overseas branches and avail rupee finance thereIn this case the borrower has to bear the cost of the difference between the rate atwhich the funds are raised and that earned on the funds deployed with the overseasbranch. It is expected that the interest on the rupee funds would cover such differential and7against from the bank in India.opportunities for long term exchange risk. These are analysed :External financing of infrastructurehowever, appears to be the current applicability of stamp duty.commercial banks support would be around Rs.16,000 crore over the next four years.Domestic Financing of Infrastructurestill be sufficiently competitive.  The structure is possible only to the extent the overseasbranch is able to absorb such foreign currency funds. While such swaps have been put inplace even earlier, the broader prudential issues relating to bloating of balance sheets,capital adequacy and exposure norms have to be sorted out before advocating large scalerecourse to this method.Over borrowing to meet redemption : The proposal is that the project will raise anamount higher than required and the excess borrowing will be held as a deposit overseasfor the duration of loan which is expected to be 30 years. The reinvestment of the interestwould result in redemption value becoming equal to the principal of the loan. Theexchange risk on the principal is thus automatically hedged. The interest rate risk andexchange risk on the interest payments would need to be borne/managed by the project.Further, the proposal assumes the overseas bank would be willing to accept thedeposit/liability for a period as long as 30 years; secondly, if the borrower is not able toraise funds for longer period than 10 years and is not able to roll over at the end of 10years at reasonable credit spreads, RBI should provide foreign exchange to enableIt is necessary to recognise that in this proposal, there is an element of addition tothe total external debt of India beyond what is repatriated to India. Once the externalborrowing is approved by the Government of India for 10/30 years period, given India’spolicy and procedures as well as track record, there is no question of non availability offoreign exchange at the time of redemption. The real issue is, perhaps, raising rupeeresources for the remaining period of 20 years. When there is inability to rollover externalloan after ten years, if rupee resources are raised to meet such a contingency, foreignexchange can certainly be acquired from the market.In conclusion we recognise that investment in infrastructure is critical. Financingrequirements are large and of long term nature. While seeking arrangements forenhancement of financing flows, measures should be consistent with the state of financialmarket and prudential requirement.As explained, we in RBI have been making best efforts in this regard, and we are8I solicit your co-operation and advice.open to your suggestions.IV. CONCLUSIONcontinuation of the deposit up to 30 years.
