Challenges Before The Indian Banking IndustrythI am honoured to speak at the 55 Annual General Meeting of the Indian Banks'Association. The Indian Banks' Association started as a voluntary service Organisation in1946 has played a very important and pivotal role for more than 50 years in the bankingindustry and has made commendable efforts as a facilitator in ensuring an efficient andsound banking system which is committed to excellence in operations and customerservice. The Association strives to meet the diverse requirements of its memberscomprising public sector, private sector and foreign banks. With the growing complexityin finance, IBA's role has expanded from merely assisting member banks in theiractivities to functioning as a Self Regulatory Organisation, functioning as an effectiveliaisoning agency between the banking Industry, the regulators & the Government andpreparing the members for the changing times.The second phase of financial sector reforms has provided the necessary architecture forstrengthening the Indian banking system and the banks have a vital role to play as therepository of liquidity, as an important channel for flow of funds from the surplus sectorsto the deficit sectors and as the backbone of the payment and settlement systems.However, in the era of globalisation, financial sector conglomorisation and ‘bundling’ inthe provision of financial services, there is a need for further strengthening of theregulatory and supervisory regime to ensure stability of the financial system.The Reserve Bank of India has recognised this need and the fact that it cannot remaininsulated from the international developments while crafting these regulatory andsupervisory standards. I will take this opportunity to speak on the recent developmentsand challenges before the banking sector and the strategies and initiatives undertaken tomeet them.Competition and ConsolidationThe deregulation in interest rates, grant of functional autonomy to banks in the area ofcredit, entry of foreign banks and emergence of new private banks has made the bankingenvironment more competitive. While the total share in bank credit continues to bedominated by public sector banks, the share of foreign banks is showing an increasingtrend. As announced in the Union Budget for 2002-2003, it has been decided to give anoption to foreign banks to either operate as branches of their parent banks or to set upsubsidiaries. As per the recent RBI guidelines, the overall ceiling for foreign directinvestment in private sector banks has also been enhanced. In the changed scenario, it hasnow become extremely important for Indian banks to remain competitive for surviving.Universally there is a move towards consolidation and convergence. It has been ourcontention that the Government and supervisory authorities should only provide aconducive environment for consolidation and convergence through appropriate fiscal andmonetary policies supported by a sound regulatory and supervisory framework. Hence,bank consolidation/ merger process should be primarily market driven and such proposalsshould come voluntarily from the banks themselves depending on the organizationalsynergy and the market share.Management of NPAsManagement of NPAs continue to be the foremost challenge of the Indian bankingsystem. In the recent past there has been a conscious and persistent effort through theprescription of strict objective norms for the identification and classification of NPAs.This was also supplemented by the sustained efforts both by the Government and the RBIfor setting up the requisite infrastructure as also systems/ procedures for effecting2recoveries/ reduction of NPAs. The result has been encouraging. However, realising therigidities in the legal system, Govt. of India/ RBI have taken several special steps toensure that legal inadequacies do not thwart the resolve to reduce the NPAs of banks. Inaddition, banks have been advised to strengthen their credit administration machinery andput in place effective credit risk management systems to reduce the fresh incidence ofNPAs.Tightening of Prudential StandardsThe prudential standards need to be enhanced to fall in line with the international bestpractices. In this direction, Reserve Bank of India has introduced the 90 days delinquencynorm for identification of NPAs with effect from the year ending March 2004 andreduced the timeframe for classification of a sub-standard asset as a doubtful asset from18 months to 12 months with effect from the year ending March 2005. In some countries,doubtful assets, irrespective of their status i.e. secured or unsecured, are required to beclassified as loss assets and fully provided for.  However, in India, doubtful assets backedby collateral, are provided for only upto 50% of the outstanding balances, irrespective ofthe number of years in which the accounts remain in this category.  Given the delay inrecovery of dues through the legal process, the current provisioning norms followed inIndia do not entirely cover the latent losses inherent in such advances. The existingprovisioning requirements would have to be enhanced in line with the international bestpractices.The Proposed Basel Capital AccordThe Basel Committee recognises that the New Accord is more extensive and complexthan the 1988 Accord.  The New Accord is more risk sensitive and it contains a range ofnew options for measuring both credit and operational risks. The New Accord is likely tobe finalised next year and would be implemented in member jurisdictions in 2006.The adoption of the New Basel Capital Adequacy Framework, relating to assigningcapital on a consolidated basis, use of external credit assessments as a means forassigning preferential risk weights, sophisticated techniques for estimating economiccapital, etc., may need suitable modifications to adequately reflect the institutionalrealities and macro-economic factors specific to emerging market economies includingIndia.  Recognising these implications, RBI has been impressing on the Basel Committeethat some of these proposals may require modification / flexibility to fully reflect theconcerns of the emerging market economies. Notwithstanding the above, it is imperativethat the banks in India study the proposed Capital adequacy framework, identify theirtransition path and initiate steps to be fully prepared for adoption of the new standardswhen introduced.Risk Management SystemsIn view of the diverse financial and non financial risks confronted by banks in the wakeof the financial sector deregulation, the risk management practices of banks have to beupgraded by adopting sophisticated techniques like VaR, Duration and Simulation andadopting internal model-based approaches as also credit risk modelling techniques, atleast by top banks. Banks need to evolve an integrated risk management systemdepending on their size, complexity and the risk appetite.  As a step towards enhancingand fine-tuning the existing risk management practices in banks RBI has recently issuedthe draft guidance notes on credit and market risks.Risk Based Supervision3Financial sector supervision is expected to become increasingly risk oriented andconcerned more with validation of systems. Bank managements will have to developinternal capital assessment processes in accordance with their risk profile and controlenvironment. These internal processes would then be subjected to review and supervisoryintervention if necessary. The emphasis will be on evaluating the quality of riskmanagement and the adequacy of risk containment. The transaction based internal /external audit would have to give way to risk based audit system. As banks arecomputerising more areas of their operations, they would be required to introduceinformation system audit also.Corporate GovernanceAn adequate institutional and legal framework is in place in India for effectivelyimplementing a code of sound corporate governance in banks.  The statutes have built-inlegal provisions that prohibit or strongly limit activities and relationships that diminishthe quality of corporate governance in banks. As a major step towards strengtheningcorporate governance in banks, they have been advised to place before their Board ofDirectors the Report of the Consultative Group of Directors of banks and FIs (Dr.Ganguly Group) set up to review the supervisory role of Boards of banks. Therecommendations include the responsibility of the Board of Directors, role andresponsibility of independent and non-executive directors, fit and proper norms fornomination of directors in private sector banks, etc. The banks were advised to adopt andimplement the recommendations on the basis of the decision taken by their Board.Transparency and disclosure standards are also important constituents of a soundcorporate governance mechanism. Transparency and accounting standards in India havebeen enhanced to align with international best practices. However, there are many gaps inthe disclosures in India vis-à-vis the international standards, particularly in the areas ofrisk management strategies and practices, risk parameters, risk concentrations,performance measures, components of capital structure, etc.  Hence, the disclosurestandards need to be further broad-based in consonance with improvements in thecapability of market players to analyse the information objectively.Technology IssuesThe delivery of products and services need extensive use of information technologynecessitating high magnitude of investment. However, with a view to enhance the qualityof customer service as also to enhance the quality of control, one of the prime thrust areasfor the future would be completion of branch computerisation and networking of banks.This would also necessitate putting in place of appropriate legal and security systems.Sum upThe above challenges confronting the banking sector make a demand on the IndianBanks' Association to play a pivotal role in the collective interest of the banking industry.The Association should continue to align the efforts of the regulatory authorities and thebanking industry to meet these challenges. The Association can also play an active role inidentifying the gaps in India vis-à-vis the international best practices in prudentialstandards and chart out necessary strategies to take the Indian banking system to higherlevels. But most of all, I would like to make an appeal to the banking fraternity from thisforum that they should give their utmost attention to improving the customer service andameliorating the public grievances. The common man, as a bank customer, should get therespect and convenience he deserves and customer complaints, if any, should be attended4to seriously and sympathetically. My heart goes out to those small means customers whoare turned away rudely from the bank branches and sometimes even application forms arenot given to them. This apathy of bank officials hurts me. This has to be changed. Thischange has to flow from the top of the bank management. If the senior management hasthe interest of common customers in heart, other officials will have to fall in line. Afterall, in a service industry, customer has to be given his due. Basically it calls for attitudinalchange. We shall be failing in our duties if we ignore this change. Let us all make all outefforts to bring about the much required attitudinal change and I am confident that IBAcan contribute significantly in this direction.Address by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India on August 31, 2002 at theAnnual General Meeting of the Indian Banks’ Association at Mumbai
