C M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Corporate Governance: Towards Best Practices*SHYAMALA GOPINATH  Corporate governance is increasingly demanding our transformation and hence create maturity mismatchesattention and has moved centrestage. The Enron and between their assets and liabilities and rely on theWorldCom scandals in the U.S have amply demonstrated confidence of their creditors. There is also thethe necessity of having a system of corporate governance contagion impact and the issue of maintaining theeven in the developed world. In a liberalising and integrity of the payments system in which banks playderegulating country like India, corporate governance is a significant role. Corporate governance thereforeall the more important. In this context, it is indeed affects the interests of a larger cross-section ofheartening to note that Bankers’ conference is devoting stakeholders also has implications for financial stabilitya full session on “corporate governance”. In this address and is one of the key factors that determines the healthlet me touch upon the basic cornerstones of corporate of the system and its ability to survive economicgovernance in Indian banking sector. shocks.Corporate governance practices differ widely acrossthe world. In a highly dispersed shareholding systemTHE B ASIC ISSUEnormally it is the board of directors who are grantedthe responsibility of monitoring executives (e.g., U.S).Modern day corporations are known for theOn the other hand, allowing for concentrated and crossseparation of ownership and control. After all, theshareholding, countries like Germany or Japan adoptedmanagers are merely paid employees and the agency‘internal’ corporate governance systems. Corporatetheory taught us that the independent managers cangovernance for an emerging market economy (EME) hasoperate in a way that could be detrimental to the interestsan added dimension. After all, since the late 1980s /of the shareholder. It is, thus necessary, to have aearly 1990s, the financial sector of a number of EMEsmechanism by which the shareholders’ interest arehas seen a wave of liberalisation and deregulation.protected by the managers. It is here that corporateGreater deregulation in markets and in banks operationsgovernance can play a crucial role. What is corporaterequires better governance as more responsibility restsgovernance then? I can do no better than to quote fromwith the Board and the management.Professors Shleifer and Vishney, who defined corporateIt is because banks are a critical component of thegovernance as dealing with “the ways that suppliers ofeconomy that it is universally a regulated industry andfinance to corporations assure themselves of getting a1banks have access to safety nets. It would, however, bereturn on their investment”.erroneous to conclude that regulatory oversight is aCorporate governance is however conceptuallysubstitute to corporate governance. There existsdifferent for banks. The business model of financialcomplementarity between regulation and corporateintermediaries especially of banks envisages dealing ingovernance in banking. Perhaps it is in this spirit thatthe financial resources of others and most of theirthe Bank for International Settlement (BIS) in discussingliabilities constitute debt which are in the form ofenhancing corporate governance for banking organisationdeposits. Since depositors are the main suppliers ofobserved that, “banking supervision cannot function asfinance to a bank, their interest is paramount andwell if sound corporate governance is not in place andtherefore directors and officers of a bank should beconsequently, banking supervisors have a strong interestcharged with a heightened duty to ensure the safetyin ensuring that there is effective corporate governanceand soundness of these enterprises. Banks are highlyin every banking organisation”.leveraged organisations, they undertake maturityAddress by Smt Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bankers’ Conference on November 10,*2004  at New Delhi.1Shleifer, A and R. Vishney (1997): “A Survey of Corporate Governance”, Journal of Finance, Vol.52.1105C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004GLOBAL BEST PRACTICES (a) the role of supervisors, and (b) the paramount interestof depositors.A number of supranational organisations have drawnApart from such supranational organisations orcodes/principles of corporate governance. The most wellregional organisation like EU, all the G-7 countries asknown is perhaps the OECD principles of corporatewell as other developed economies have codified somegovernance of 1999. It is instructive to summarise thekind of ‘best practices’ on corporate governance, or somefive basic pillars of OECD code, viz.,specific aspects of it. While a comprehensive survey of(i) Protecting the rights of shareholders;the country-specific principles of corporate governance(ii) Ensuring equitable treatment of all shareholders is beyond the scope of the present address, one isincluding having an effective grievance redressal tempted to cite the recently enacted Sarbenes-Oxley Actof 2002 in US, aiming to protect investors by improvingsystem;the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures.(iii)Recognising the rights of stakeholders asestablished by law; It is against this background of global best practiceslet me now turn to the Indian experience on corporate(iv) Ensuring the timely and accurate disclosuregovernance.regarding the corporation including the financialsituation, performance, ownership andgovernance of the company; andCORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND INDIAN BANKS(v) Ensuring the strategic guidance of the company,effective monitoring arrangement by the boardThe initial formal moves towards corporateand the board’s responsibility to the companygovernance in India can be traced in 1997 with theand the shareholder.voluntary code framed by the Confederation of IndianWhile the OECD principles went a long way inIndustry (CII). A number of companies over the nextemphasising the basic tenets of corporate governance,three years (nearly 30 large listed companies accountingit is the 1999 BIS paper that went specifically to thefor over 25 per cent of India’s market capitalisation)2issue of enhancing corporate governance for bankingvoluntarily adopted the CII code. The next majororganisation. From banking industry perspective, BIScornerstone in the Indian case has been the SEBIproposed the following seven principles:Committee chaired by Shri Kumar Mangalam Birla(1999), as the first formal and comprehensive attempti) Establishing strategic objectives;to evolve a Code of Corporate Governance, in theii) Setting and enforcing clear lines of responsibilitycontext of prevailing conditions of governance in Indianand accountability;companies and the state of capital markets. Theiii) Ensuring that the board members are qualifiedCommittee recommended that the fundamental objectivefor their position and are not subject to undueof corporate governance is the “enhancement ofinfluence from the management or outsideshareholder value, keeping in view the interests of otherconcerns;stakeholder”. The Committee made recommendations ofiv) Ensuring that there is appropriate oversight byfar-reaching implications for several issues, such as, thesenior management;independence of board, accounting standards andv) Effectively utilising the work conducted byfinancial reporting, share-holders’ rights andinternal and external auditors;responsibilities, and formation of audit and remunerationvi) Ensuring that compensation approaches are committee.consistent with the bank’s ethical values; andThe initial move towards corporate governance invii) Conducting corporate governance in abanks can be traced in the Advisory Group on Corporatetransparent manner.Governance for the RBI Standing Committee onAgain, from a banking sector perspective, the BISInternational Financial Standards and Codes, chaired byprinciples noted categorically two specific things, viz., Dr. R.H. Patil, which submitted its Report in 2001. The2Omkar Goswami (2001): “The Tide Rises: Corporate Governance in India”, OECD Development Centre Discussion Paper.1106C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004special emphasis on enhanced transparency in theAdvisory Group has noted that the predominant formconstitution and structure of the board and seniorof corporate governance in India is much closer to themanagement and in public disclosures.East Asian ‘insider’ model where the promotersdominate governance in every possible way. Among theTaking this move towards corporate governancevarious recommendations, strengthening of thefurther, the Reserve Bank constituted a ConsultativeCompanies Act and the role of Independent DirectorsGroup of Directors of Banks and Financial Institutionsdeserve special mention. The Group looked into public(Chairman: Dr. A.S. Ganguly) to review the supervisorysectors banks and noted that the first important step torole of Boards of banks and FIs. The Gangulyimprove governance mechanism in these units is toConsultative Group looked into the functioning of thetransfer the actual governance functions from theBoards vis-à-vis compliance, transparency, disclosures,concerned administrative ministries to the boards andaudit committees and suggested measures for makingalso strengthen them by streamlining the appointmentthe role of the Board of Directors more effective. Theprocess of directors. Furthermore, as a part ofGroup submitted its recommendations in April 2002. Thestrengthening the functioning of their boards, banksmajor recommendations of the Group are the following:should appoint a risk management committee of thei) Government while nominating directors on theboard in addition to the three other board committeesBoards of PSBs should be guided by certainviz., audit, remuneration and appointment committees.broad “fit and proper” norms for the Directors,The Advisory Group on Banking Supervision for thebased on the lines of those suggested by BIS.Standing Committee on International Financial Standardsii) The appointment / nomination of independent /and Codes, while looking into several areas in whichnon-executive directors to the Board of banksinternationally accepted best practices are already in(both public sector and private sector) should beplace, probed into corporate governance as well. Thefrom a pool of professional and talented peoplenoteworthy minimum benchmarks noted by the Groupto be prepared and maintained by RBI.relate to the following:iii) It would be desirable to take an undertaking from(i) strategies and techniques basic to soundevery director to the effect that they have gonecorporate governance;through the guidelines defining the role and(ii) organisational structure to ensure oversight byresponsibilities of directors, and understood whatboard of directors and individuals not involvedis expected of them.in day-to-day running of business;iv) In order to ensure strategic focus it would be(iii) ensuring that the direct line of supervision ofdesirable to separate the office of Chairman anddifferent business areas are different;Managing Director in respect of large-sized PSBs.(iv) ensuring independent risk management and auditv) The information furnished to the Board shouldfunctions;be wholesome, complete and adequate to takemeaningful decisions. The Board’s focus should(v) ensuring an environment supportive of soundbe devoted more on strategy issues, risk profile,corporate governance; andinternal control systems, overall performance, etc.(vi) role of supervisors.vi) It would be desirable if the exposures of a bankInterestingly, with reference to public sector banks,to stockbrokers and market-makers as a group,the Group noted that the nature of a bank’s ownershipas also exposures to other sensitive sectors, viz.,is not a critical factor in establishing sound corporatereal estate etc. are reported to the Board regularly.governance practices and concluded that, “the qualityvii) The disclosures of progress made towardsof corporate governance should be the same in all typesestablishing progressive risk managementof banking organisations irrespective of the nature ofsystem, the risk management policy, strategy,their ownership”. The Group, however, felt that thereexposures to related entities, the assetare some areas where practices in the Indian bankingclassification of such lending / investments etc.sector fell short of international best practices, viz., a)should be in conformity with corporateconstitutions of boards, b) their accountability, and c) theirgovernance standards, etc.involvement in risk management. The Group gave1107C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004viii)Finally, the banks could be asked to come up Financial distress episodes in a number of countrieswith a strategy and plan for implementation of were caused in part by excessive exposure concentration,the governance standards recommended and lending to connected parties, poor credit policy andsubmit progress of implementation. inadequate management of risk mainly foreign exchangerisk. To a large extent, such basic risk managementThe Ganguly Committee recommendations have beenfailures reflects a failure of corporate governance.benchmarked with international best practices asBesides laying down prudential guidelines, RBI has beenenunciated in the Basel Paper as well as of otheremphasising the need for better understanding andCommittees and advisory bodies to the extent applicableoversight at the Board level of key banking risks. Boardsto the Indian environment. RBI has also implementedof the banks will have to take solvency and other riskmost of the recommendations. In general thesesystematically into account while making decisions. Theregulations have created an enabling framework forBasel II proposals too underscore the interaction betweenimproving corporate governance in financial institutions.sound risk management and corporate governance. ForSubsequently, the circular issued on June 25, 2004 onexample, the IRB approach to credit risk sets out‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors of banks enumeratedrequirements for sound risk assessment processes, robusta number of principles; the following among themcontrols and transparency. In turn, the board and seniordeserve special mention, viz.,management are expected to understand and guide ai) undertaking a process of due diligence on the partbank’s overall risk management and performance.of the banks in private sector to determine theSupervisors are required to ensure that all banks institutesuitability of the person for appointment /good governance practices irrespective of the capitalcontinuing to hold appointment as a director onapproach adopted.the Board, based upon qualification, expertise, track  Second, issue relates to Board strategies to ensurerecord, integrity and other ‘fit and proper’ criteria;strong internal control systems including internal andii) the process of due diligence should beexternal audit functions and other checks and balances.undertaken by the banks in private sector at theIndependent audit committees can help in translatingtime of appointment / renewal of appointment;audit reports into meaningful action, both corrective andpreventive.iii) the boards of the banks in private sector shouldconstitute Nomination Committees to scrutiniseThird, further steps to be taken to improvethe declarations;transparency through more disclosures of informationrelated to corporate governance. It is worthwhileiv) banks should obtain annually, as on March 31,a simple declaration that the information already examining the efforts of some companies to pivot theirannual reports on corporate governance issues whileprovided has not undergone change and wheremaking appropriate disclosures on each.there is any change, requisite details arefurnished by the directors forthwith.  Fourth, increasingly concerns are raised about theconflict of interest in financial sector. Four areas of the  These principles, I believe would go a long way tofinancial service industry have a high potential forensure corporate governance in banks in India.conflicts of interest: underwriting and research ininvestment banking, auditing and consulting inSOME EMERGING ISSUESaccounting firms, credit assessment and consulting inrating agencies and universal banking. A combinationI have, in the present address, tried to give a flavourof market discipline supplemented by mandatoryof the various attempts towards ensuring and improvingdisclosure of conflicts and supervisory oversight arecorporate governance in India and noted that the pathgenerally considered necessary to contain thehas been one of progressive disclosures and increasingexploitation of conflicts of interest. These measures areconvergence to international standards. Nevertheless, theintended to have positive impact on investor confidence,task is far from over, and, therefore in conclusion, letefficacy of the regulatory framework and, above all, theme raise some of the emerging issues for furthercredibility of those associated with the financial services.consideration and deliberation at this august gathering.Accordingly, in consultation with Chairman, SEBI and1108C M Y KC M Y KDecember Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Chairman, IRDA, in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary Sixth, there is perhaps a need for consultative processand Credit Policy for 2003-04, it has been proposed to to harmonise the approaches suggested by the Gangulyconstitute a Working Group on avoidance of conflicts Committee of RBI and the Narayana Murthy Committeeof interest. The Working Group will identify the sources of SEBI. In the recently announced Mid-Term Review ofand nature of potential conflicts of interest, the Annual Policy for 2004-05, it was proposed to harmoniseinternational practices to mitigate this problem, the these approaches suggested by the Ganguly Committeeexisting mechanisms in India in this regard and make and the SEBI Committee in regard to banks through arecommendations for avoidance of such conflicts of consultative process. It will be useful to know the areasinterest. for further harmonisation.Fifth, there is a need for a strong culture of Lastly, corporate governance does not end withcompliance at the top of the organisation and it will be commercial banks. It is imperative to extend the abovenecessary to consider how management can respond principles of good corporate governance practices toappropriately to ethical or reputational concerns that cooperatives, PDs, NBFCs and other financialcome to their knowledge. institutions.1109C M Y K
