“Implementation of Basel II: An Indian Perspective”Kishori J. UdeshiDeputy GovernorReserve Bank of IndiaYesterday we had very absorbing discussions on macro issues, regulatory perspectives and risk managementchallenges relating to Basel II.  We are now not debating whether to go forward with Basel II but how to implementBasel II. In fact, understanding Basel II concepts is one step away from agreeing to it in principle. ImplementingBasel II is another long step away from understanding it. Let me briefly detail some implementation issues withspecific reference to India.Features of Indian Financial SystemA feature, somewhat unique to the Indian financial system is the diversity of its composition. We have thedominance of Government ownership coupled with significant private shareholding in the public sector banks whichin turn continue to have a dominant share in the total banking system. These public sector banks are listed on thestock exchange and their performance is reflected in their P/E ratios. The private sector banks especially the newones are world class. We also have cooperative banks, whose numbers are large and pose a challenge because ofthe multiplicity of regulatory and supervisory authorities. There are also Regional Rural Banks with links to theirparent commercial banks. Foreign bank branches operate profitably in India and by and large the regulatorystandards for all these banks are uniform. The process of providing financial services is changing rapidly fromtraditional banking to a one stop shop of varied financial services and the old institutional demarcations are gettingincreasingly blurred.Approach to Prudential Norms: A ReviewThe Reserve Bank’s approach to the institution of prudential norms has been one of gradual convergence withinternational standards and best practices with suitable country specific adaptations. Our aim has been to reachglobal best standards in a deliberately phased manner through a consultative process evolved within the country.This has also been the guiding principle in the approach to the New Basel Accord e.g. while the minimum capitaladequacy requirement under the Basel standard is 8% in India, we have stipulated and achieved a minimum capitalof 9%. On the other hand, banks in India are still in the process of implementing capital charge for market riskprescribed in the Basel document although since 1998 we have in place several surrogates such as an InvestmentFluctuation Reserve of 5% of the investment portfolio, both in the AFS and HFT categories plus a 2.5% risk weighton the entire investment portfolio – whereas Basel norms take into account only the trading portfolio.RBI’s involvement in Basel IIRBI’s association with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision dates back to 1997 as India was among the 16non-member countries that were consulted in the drafting of the Basel Core Principles. Reserve Bank of Indiabecame a member of the Core Principles Liaison Group in 1998 and subsequently became a member of the CorePrinciples Working Group on Capital. Within the CPWG, RBI has been actively participating in the deliberations onthe Accord and had the privilege to lead a group of 6 major non G -10 supervisors which presented a proposal on asimplified approach for Basel II to the Committee.The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is yet to issue the final Basel II document. The Reserve Bank’srdcomments on the 3 consultative document on the New Capital Accord on the basis of the quantitative impactstudies (QIS 3) undertaken in co-ordination with select banks has brought out the need for more simplicity andgreater flexibility on account of the different levels of preparedness of the banking system in India.Policy ApproachIn general, keeping in view the RBI’s goal to have consistency and harmony with international standards and ourapproach to adopt the pace as may be appropriate in the context of our country specific needs, the RBI had in April2003 itself accepted in principle to adopt the new capital accord Basel II. The RBI has announced, in its AnnualPolicy statement in May 2004 that banks in India should examine in depth the options available under Basel II anddraw a road-map by end December 2004 for migration to Basel II and review the progress made thereof atquarterly intervals. The Reserve Bank will be closely monitoring the progress made by banks in this direction.Hence, at a minimum all banks in India, to begin with, will adopt Standardized Approach for credit risk and BasicIndicator Approach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed, both in banks and at supervisorylevels, some banks may be allowed to migrate to IRB Approach.Regulatory InitiativesThe regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India include:o Ensuring that the banks have suitable risk management framework oriented towards their requirementsdictated by the size and complexity of business, risk philosophy, market perceptions and the expectedlevel of capital. The framework adopted by banks would need to be adaptable to changes in businesssize, market dynamics and introduction of innovative products by banks in future.o Introduction of Risk Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks on a pilot basis.o Encouraging banks to formalize their Capital Adequacy Assessment Programme (CAAP) in alignmentwith business plan and performance budgeting system.  This, together with adoption of Risk BasedSupervision would aid in factoring the Pillar II requirements under Basel II.o Enhancing the area of disclosures (Pillar III), so as to have greater   transparency of the financialposition and risk profile of banks.o Improving the level of corporate governance standards in banks.o Building capacity for ensuring the regulator’s ability for identifying and permitting eligible banks to adoptIRB / Advanced Measurement approaches.2Challenges EnvisagedAgainst the above background and the complexities involved as also the areas of “constructive ambiguity” inconcepts and their application we envisage the following regulatory and supervisory challenges ahead:• India has three established rating agencies in which leading international credit rating agencies arestakeholders and also extend technical support. However, the level of rating penetration is not verysignificant as, so far, ratings are restricted to issues and not issuers. While Basel II gives some scope toextend the rating of issues to issuers, this would only be an approximation and it would be necessary forthe system to move to ratings of issuers. Encouraging ratings of issuers would be a challenge.• Basel II provides scope for the supervisor to prescribe higher than the minimum capital levels for banks for,among others, interest rate risk in the banking book and concentration of risks / risk exposures. As alreadystated, we in India have initiated supervisory capacity building to identify slackness and to assess / quantifythe extent of additional capital which may be required to be maintained by such banks. The magnitude ofthis task to be completed by December 2006, when we in India have as many as 100 banks, is daunting.• Cross border issues have been dealt with by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recently. But, inIndia, foreign banks are statutorily required to maintain local capital and the following issues wouldtherefore, require to be resolved by us :o  Whether the internal models approved by their head offices and home country supervisor adoptedby the Indian branches of foreign banks need to be validated again by the Reserve Bank orwhether the validation by the home country supervisor would be considered adequate?o Whether the data history maintained and used by the bank should be distinct for the Indianbranches compared to the global data maintained and used by the head office?o Whether capital for operational risk should be maintained separately for the Indian branches inIndia or whether it may be maintained abroad at head office?o Whether these banks can be mandated to maintain capital as per SA / BIA approaches in Indiairrespective of the approaches adopted by the head office?• Basel II could actually imply that the minimum requirements could become pro-cyclical. No doubt prudentrisk management policies and Pillars II and III would help in overall stability. We feel that it would bepreferable to have consistent prudential norms in good and bad times rather than calibrate prudentialnorms to counter pro-cyclicality.• The existence of large and complex financial conglomerates could potentially pose a systemic risk and itwould be necessary to put in place supervisory policies to address this.• In the event of some banks adopting IRB Approach, while other banks adopt Standardised Approach, thefollowing profiles may emerge:o Banks adopting IRB Approach will be much more risk sensitive than the banks on StandardisedApproach, since even a small change in degree of risk might translate into a large impact onadditional capital requirement for the IRB banks. Hence IRB banks could avoid assuming high risk3exposures. Since banks adopting Standardised Approach are not equally risk sensitive and sincethe relative capital requirement would be less for the same exposure, the banks on StandardisedApproach could be inclined to assume exposures to high risk clients, which were not financed byIRB banks. As a result, high risk assets could flow towards banks on Standardised Approach whichneed to maintain lower capital on these assets than the banks on IRB Approach.o Similarly, low risk assets would tend to get concentrated with IRB banks which need to maintainlower capital on these assets than the Standardised Approach banks.o Hence, system as a whole may maintain lower capital than warranted.o Due to concentration of higher risks, Standardised Approach banks can become vulnerable attimes of economic downturns.These issues would need to be addressed satisfactorily.ConclusionIn conclusion, I would say that keeping in view the cost of compliance for both banks and supervisors, theregulatory challenge would be to migrate to Basel II in a non-disruptive manner.  We would like to continue theprocess of interaction with other countries to learn from their experiences through various international fora.  I maymention that India is one of the early countries which subjected itself voluntarily to the FSAP of the IMF and oursystem was assessed to be in high compliance with the relevant principles. With the gradual and purposefulimplementation of the banking sector reforms over the past decade, the Indian banking system has shownsignificant improvement on various parameters, has become robust and displayed ample resilience to shocks in theeconomy.  There is therefore, ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system to migrate smoothly toBasel II.******4
