*Capital Y.V.Reddy1. I am extremely happy to be in Centre for Economic and Social Studies with you alltoday. I am particularly honoured that my respected guru for about 35 years, almost thewhole of my adult life, Mr.Vithal, is presiding over this meeting. My profound apologies forthe inconvenience caused on account of the unavoidable postponement of this talk, whichwas originally scheduled for last month. I am thankful to Professor Venkatramiah garu forgiving me this opportunity to share with you some thoughts on a subject which has been andcontinues to be a source of both concern and misunderstanding. Some recent journalistic andeven academic coverage on the subject of capital flight has added to the confusion prevailingin our country. On earlier occasions here, I had discussed the issue of balance of paymentsand also our negotiations with World Trade Organisation. Today, it gives me great pleasureto deliver an address on this subject.2. I will begin with a brief account of popular perceptions. We could then try andanswer some questions such as : What is capital flight? Why does it occur? How to measureit? Is there anything new about this phenomenon? This should help us differentiate betweenmyths and realities. In conclusion, I intend posing some issues for further deliberation.Popular Perception3. The popular perception at least in our country, is that capital flight refers to theamounts of foreign currency assets that have been kept in foreign countries by Indian citizensor corporate bodies without legal sanction for doing so. It is held that, such amounts increaseyear after year because of the continuous capital flight. It is also postulated that, exportersunder-invoice their export receipts, and the difference is keep abroad. Importers are alsobelieved to over-invoice their imports, and draw excess foreign exchange which is keptabroad. Some people have no doubt that residents buy foreign currency in what is calledhawala market (illegal market for exchanging rupees and foreign currencies), and keep itabroad. In effect, it means that some non-residents who are to remit foreign currency to Indiafor rupee payments in India are really selling their currency abroad, and the purchasers ofsuch foreign currency are making arrangements for rupee payments, by circumventing thelegal requirement. There is a perception that, one of the sources of such capital flight isamounts accepted as bribes by some public functionaries, who receive and keep suchamounts outside the country, and on occasions, bring some amounts back, when they needthem. Many believe that substantial foreign currency used to finance illegal imports through4. It is conjectured that such capital flight runs into billions of US Dollars. Forexample, the editorial in Express Investment Week (Vol.7, No.6, Feb.3-9, 1997) alleges thatin 1994 and 1995, at least US $ 11.3 billion left India. Newspapers have also been reportingestimates of capital flight from India to the USA, based on two articles by Zdanowicz, Welchand Pak (Indian Finance, September 1995 and December 1996 issues). The articles estimatethat capital flight from India to the US was in the range of US $ 5,893-412 million in 1994and in the range of US $ 5,584-611 million in 1995. Surprisingly, there are many in ourcountry What is Capital Flightwho accept such estimates as reliable.smuggling, particularly gold, also represents capital flight.Flight : Myths and Realities5. There is no universally accepted definition of capital flight. Even in academicliterature, scholars tend to define capital flight, keeping in view the context. Let me give you“Abnormal’ flows propelled from a country by any one or more of a complex list of fears andsuspicions”.“Outflows motivated by the desire of residents to obtain financial assets and earnings onThis definition, on the other hand, refers to keeping the assets out of the country to earnreturns and to escape domestic tax and other laws.“The outflow of capital from a country to a destination considered to be safe by the decisionmaking agents when the principal motivation is not to have a higher return in a legal way butThis definition It should be clear that these definitions do not provide a conceptual framework to appreciatethe phenomenon in a comprehensive way and to aid policy responses.6. I would, therefore, propose for your consideration, a conceptual framework. Capitalflight represents capital outflow with three components, namely, abnormal legal outflows,extra-legal or illegal outflows, and outflows emanating from criminal activities. Capital flightcan be viewed in three ways, namely, gross capital flight, reverse capital flight, and netcapital flight. Perhaps some elaboration of these would be in order.7. The abnormal capital flows arisin g out of normal business considerations includingprofit motive, are a matter of serious concern now in the context of large, mobile, private,global flows. Such abnormal capital flows through legal channels can be one form of capitalflight. From a policy point of view, an unexpected drastic reduction in normal capital inflowshas a somewhat similar impact as large unexpected capital outflows. However, in reality, theyoccur simultaneously. Incidentally, some academics hold that only illegal flows should betreated as capital flight. But, from a policy angle, capital flows through level channels havesimilar implications for managing the economy, though monitoring and policy responsewould be more complex in respect of extra-legal flows. Hence, for a comprehensivetreatment, both legal and not so legal flows need to be looked at.The extra-legal or illegal flows consist of the flows to create assets that are beyond thecontrol of domestic authorities with a view to avoiding tax or other laws. While the legalflows are reported and operated through normal banking channels, the extra-legal or illegalones are unreported and even if operated through banking channels, may not be formallytraceable to the real owner of assets.The outflows arising from crimina l activities are those which move around forfinancing narcotics, arms trade, terrorism, bribery, money laundering, etc.emphasises escaping domestic laws rather than earnings.to keep the money beyond the long arm of the law of the country”.those assets which remain outside the control of domestic authorities”.This definition looks at abnormality.some sample definitions.8. As regards dimensions, there can be capital inflows just as there are outflows.Hence, gross capital flight represents the outflows as defined above while reverse capitalflight represents the inflows under the three components described. The net capital flightwould thus be the difference between gross and reverse capital flight. There are occasionswhen the reverse capital flows component exceeds the outflows. This happens when thedomestic laws and policy environment change, and incentives for placing the assets abroadIt should also be noted that the components are not watertight and an illegal outflow couldcome back as an inflow through a legal channel.Why Does Capital Flight Occur?9. Normal movement of capital occurs through legal channels as economic agentsdiversify their portfolios, in search of highest return consistent with their risk preferences.Abnormal capital flows occur, mainly on account of political and economic uncertainty, andinappropriate incentive structure, often resulting from a misalignment of tax and other laws.It is also possible that, outflows occur for reasons other than economic or political factors inthe country concerned, as for example in response to global developments or criseselsewhere, though this is not a significant component of total flows over a period. Outflowsthrough illegal channels occur in search of what they perceive to be a safer place to keep theirassets. The main causes of such movements are high taxes relative to world levels, fears ofdevaluation, financial repression often characterised by negative or low interest rates, andtaxes on financial intermediation. Fears of arbitrary confiscation or harrassment at home10. Let us recall some illustrations. In 1991-92, as a result of political uncertainty inour country and economic uncertainty due to Gulf crisis, there was a sudden and steep drop innon-resident deposits. Also, when income and corporate tax rates were very high, exportersfound it attractive to keep their earnings abroad. They could use it for unauthorised purposes.In fact, such funds might have been used to finance under-invoiced imports, thus escapinghigh import duties.How Do We Measure Capital Flight?11. There are several methodologies in vogue to measure capital flight and as wouldbe explained, none of them is very useful measure. I will refer to some of them here.First, hot money method which just adds up two items in the balance of payments dataThe second is the mismatch between balance of payments (BOP) and externaldebt/liabilities method. These measures use BOP and or external liabilities data and wouldthus reflect official data only, viz. BOP external debt data from OECD (which is based onboth debtor and creditor reporting) and stock of liabilities as reported in the banking systemfrom Bank for International Settlement (BIS). This method basically compares the sourcesand uses of finance and the excess or deficit is interpreted as net capital flight, either netoutflow or inflow, the latter indicating reverse capital flight.Short-Term Capital. (BOP), namely, errors and Omissions, and Private could also be proximate causes.illegally diminish.Third, faked trade invoicing method, wherein, usually, misinvoicing of tradedocuments is analysed to capture capital flight through under-invoicing of exports and over-invoicing of imports. A variant of the misinvoicing method of analysis is abnormal pricingmethod. Since over-invoicing and under-invoicing of trade have been a subject of intensedebate in our country, we will go into it in some detail. The faked trade invoicing method canbe used to supplement other methods, Abnormal Pricing and Weak Bargaining12. I had made a reference earlier in this address to the estimates of capita flight from India tothe USA. The particular reference was made to abnormal pricing method tried out by threeprofessors at the University of Florida to estimate capital flight from India to the US. Thebasis premise of the study is that Indian exporters and importer do not buy and sell productsin the US market at a price equal to the average US/world price of exports and imports. Theauthors interpret the deviations from the average price as the capital flight. Two methods areThe first method compares the prices of Indian imports from the United States to theaverage import prices of similar products imported from the United States by all countries inthe world. The authors also compare India’s export prices of similar products exported to theUS/world from all the countries in the world. To calculate such average prices, they havedeveloped a global price index for items traded between India and the US and comparedthese with prices at which Indian exporters/importers trade with the US. Some assumptionson product differentiation are made and the estimates are adjusted for product heterogeneity.The sum of the deviations for all products gives the total capital flight from India to the US.In the second method, the authors compare the transaction prices of commoditiesimported/exported from India with the average price at which India imported/exported to theUS with respect to the commodities under study. The deviations are interpreted as capital13. While it is possible that capital flight can still be a component of these numbers,an analysis by Schneider, concludes that many other factors can be responsible for thedeviations found by the authors.Firstly, the price difference in many cases can be due to the differences in the cost ofproduction in India and the US. In such cases, the unit price of exporters will reflect the lowercost of production and the foreign trader sells it at higher prices in the US. The exporter needSecondly, the higher prices paid by Indian importers may not reflect over-invoicing but mayactually represent lower bargaining power.Thirdly, capital flight estimated by the authors seems to be improbable. For instance, thecapital flight from India to the US during 1994 was estimated by the authors to be in therange of US $ 411-5,893 million whereas, the volume of trade with US was US $ 9,326million. The upper range calculated by the authors is more than half the volume of trade withthe US, and thus very unlikely.not necessarily get the benefit of such higher prices.flight.adopted by them.i.e, hot money and mismatch methods.14. Schneider argues that a more probable interpretation of the results for India basedon abnormal pricing model can be that the deviation in unit prices of Indian imports andexports with that of average of US/World prices reflects India’s poor bargaining position ininternational markets along with other rigidities. In fact, another study commissioned by thePlanning Commission in 1991 and conducted by Bhatnagar arrives at a similar conclusion inrespect of our exports. An important conclusion of the study was that exporters realised unitvalues for exports which were lower than the international unit value of exports. Majorreasons for this, as reported by the respondents in this study, were lack of overseas presence,packing handicaps, lack of price intelligence, poor image of Indian products, incompleteproduct range, production process not being modern, etc.Incidentally, neither of the studies point out the problem of inability of our exporters to stickto delivery schedules due to poor and uncertain infrastructural services as well as proceduralbottlenecks. This could be an important element for the loss of bargaining power.What is New?15. There is reason to believe that in the recent past, there has been substantial reversecapital flight. Partial evidence is available from an analysis of the trade data just explained.This is plausible because both direct and indirect taxes (customs duties) have come down andalso because the exchange rate is more realistic now. As a result, perhaps, the exporters andimporters may find it less attractive than in the past to keep their money abroad, or cycle it toavoid taxes.16. It is also likely that, with the adoption of current account convertibility andliberalised trade, the financing needs of illegal imports have come down. That is evident fromsome reduction in the difference between legal and hawala (illegal) exchange rates. The linkbetween the hawala market and illegal imports through smuggling of gold was very clearlybrought out in a discussion paper in the RBI (Gold  as an Instrument of ExternalAdjustment) in 1992 by Atul , A.Vasudevan , ,  Narayanand  Roy, under the aegis of the Development Research Group. Let me quote the“Large smuggling of gold is operationally feasible only if the foreign exchange can beobtained outside the level foreign exchange market. Hawala market provides this channel.This hawala premium can therefore be reasonable expected to reflect the demand for foreignexchange for smuggling gold, it being the major commodity for illegal imports. Transactionof foreign exchange in the hawala market can be expected to depend on the availability offoreign exchange provided by non-resident Indians outside the legal supply of foreignexchange as in the case of FCNR deposits. remittances, etc. To the extent hawala premiumsattract these foreign currencies, their inflow into the country through legal channels willdecline. It is generally recognised that over-invoicing of imports and under-invoicing ofexports have given rise to large capital flight. At least a part of this leakage provides a sourceof supply of foreign exchange in the hawala market. Therefore, the magnitude of annualThough gold import has been liberalised, there is stil l demand for illegal foreignexchange to finance import of gold both through smuggling and non-resident channels.However, the demand from smugglers of consumer goods seems to be down as a result ofreduction in duties and liberalisation of such imports. Overall, the incentives for, as well ascapital flight is likely to influence the supply of fund for smuggling gold.”relevant extracts here.MahuaMythili K.Kanagasabapathy SarmaMobilisationmagnitudes of capital flight through illegal channels appear to have come down drastically,As mentioned, the introduction of current account convertibility could have reduc edthe financing needs of illegal imports. But, the current account convertibility provides scopefor capital movement, in the guise of current transactions as long as the incentive structuresencourage such capital flows. In fact, this was clearly anticipated by the High LevelCommittee on Balance of Payments (Chairman Dr.C.Rangarajan) in April 1993. The Reportstates “In the medium-term, care has to be taken to ensure that there is no capital flightthrough liberalised windows of transactions under invisibles.” What is significant is that, inthe guise of current transactions, both capital inflows and outflows can occur – nor merely aone-way flow.17. As regards legal flows, there is evidence to show reverse capital flight. Althoughthere was a drop in non-resident deposits to the tune of US $ 1.5 billion in 1991, it was soonfollowed by subscriptions to India Development Bonds. More important, when the Bondsmatured during this year, about US dollar one billion was transferred to the residents. Nodoubt, there are some who argue that a part of NRI deposits are, in any case, in the nature ofreverse capital flight. There are some who hold that a part of the amounts raised by ourcorporates may also be a channel for reverse capital flow.18. It is hard t o obtain evidence of the flows arising from criminal activities. Perhaps,Reality19. First, it is clear that, there is at present, no evidence of larger capital flight out ofthe country through legal or illegal channels after the reform process has been initiated ascompared to the pre-reform period. On the contrary, there is a possibility of net reverseSecondly, there is no reliable basis for suspecting large capi tal outflow now, throughtrade transactions.Thirdly, while it is true that our country, like many other developing countries, mighthave faced capital flight in the past, a good part of such capital has been simultaneously usedfor financing illegal import of gold valued at billions of US dollars each year. In fact, evennow, most of gold imports may be financed through such capital flight. Hence, it would beinappropriate to estimate the stock of capital held abroad illegally as the sum of gross capitalFourthly, there is reason to believe that capital flight in our country now is very mucha two-way process or a two-way flow. A one-way flow is a real resource transfer. A two-wayflow, whenever it is in the nature of recycling of money, essentially means that there is anerosion of domestic tax base. For example, an exporter may over-invoice exports and use thatforeign exchange to under-invoice imports in order to save on customs duty on imports. Suchan exporter is simply avoiding tax but there is no net capital outflow.Fifthly, the problem of capital flight was viewed, in the past, in the context of scarcityof foreign exchange and fear of devaluation. Now, our foreign currency reserves areflight that took place in the pat.capital flight.it is reasonable to presume that no new developments are noticeable.though they still persist to some extent.comfortable, and our currency has exhibited significant stability in relation to all majorcurrencies in the world in a market-led exchange rate regime. Some observers feel that, inregard to foreign currency resources, we have moved from struggling with scarcity toIssues20. It appears reasonable to assume that, of late, there is a reduction in extra-legal orillegal gross capital flight. There are indications of reverse capital flight in the recent which may continue for sometime. The recently approved Budget is widely believed toencourage reverse capital flight, more so when voluntary disclosure scheme takes off. Thesedevelopments have the effect of enhancing normal capital inflows. Hence, the issue ofmanaging large capital inflows assumes significance. This would call for an appropriateexchange rate, intervention and 21. In spite of substantial liberalisation and a drastic reduction in illegal transactionsin the foreign exchange market, the hawala market for foreign exchange still exists and thereis some, through vastly reduced, premium for foreign exchange in this market. Thisestablishes continued existence of gross capita flight through illegal or extra-legal channels.If a reasonable assumption is made that there is little or no incentive in the current policystance for residents to keep the capital outside the country, we have to find reasons for thisFirstly, there is an inevitable demand for domestic consumption of gold. This demandis, at present, met mostly through imports by some non-residents, who are believed tospecialise in this activity, and by smugglers. There is a belief that import by non-residents isfinanced by non-residents themselves out of foreign exchange that would not be otherwisecoming into our country. Considering the large value of such imports, it is safe to assume thatmost of these imports are financed through the hawala market, just as almost a similarmagnitude of gold smuggling is financed. In fact according to the World Gold CouncilReport, 1996, India was the largest importer of gold in 1996. Data indicates that total importof gold during 1996 was 379 tonnes valued at about $ 4.7 billion, of which about 266 valued at $ 3.3 billion was through official channels. It is possible to argue, perhapsconvincingly, that as long as the unstoppable domestic demand for gold is not permittedlegally and liberally, the hawala market for foreign exchange and consequent distortions willpersist.Secondly, there are some consumer goods whose import is subject to quantitativerestrictions and perhaps some of them are illegally imported through smuggling using thehawala market. Currently, these magnitudes appear small, but some though not all of them,do create scope for hawala.Thirdly, transaction costs, particularly delays in actual transfer of non-residentremittances of small amounts through official banking channels could provide scope forFourthly, there may still be procedural bottlenecks which make it cumbersome forresident Indians to obtain foreign exchange through legal channels for meeting their genuineneeds. This also gives scope for some demand, certainly not very significant, for foreigncurrency in the illegal market.hawala, though this need not necessarily add to the premium over legal rate.tonnesstill active hawala market.sterlisation policies.pastmanaging plenty.Any approach to eliminating capital flight through illegal channels will thus have to22. As regards capital flight to finance criminal activities, two issues may needattention. First, whether the enforcement agencies are in a position to give adequate attentionto serious crimes, since under the current FERA, very large number of routine transactionsare accorded the status of crimes. The second relates to whether the existing legal frameworkis adequate to tackle serious crimes in areas such as money laundering. The Finance Ministerhad already announced that FERA will be replaced with the Foreign Exchange Management23. There are a few other issues of a general nature which warrant attention and I willrefer to some of them now. Like some developing countries, if we were to extend somefacilities such as guarantees to foreign investors and if the domestic corporates do not get asimilar or compensatory treatment, there would be asymmetry. In such a situation, whileforeign capital comes in, domestic capital may go out. In fact, domestic investors may eventry to take domestic capital out and bring it back in the garb of foreign investment. In theformer case, there is an outflow of domestic capital while in the latter case there is both an24. We are in the process of financial integration with the rest of the world. In such anintegrated market, there would be both inflows and outflows of capital. Ideally, we shouldensure that they occur through legal channels. Further, we should have efficient proceduresfor recording these flows. Unfortunately, recording procedures are not in a position to keeppace with the rapid developments in financial instruments. We have to address this issue, andwe in the Reserve Bank of India, intend undertaking a special exercise for this purpose.Recently, a Sub-Group was formed in the RBI to report on foreign exchange transactions byAuthorised Dealers (Ads). It recommended that data could be collected on a simplified basison electronic media every fortnight from the Authorised Dealers’ branches which areidentified as ‘critical’ from the point of view of compilation of balance of payments data.Over a period of time, the data could be provided through online connectivity, once the entirefinancial sector is covered by V-Sat communication network.25. In today’s world, capital is extrem ely mobile and it moves wherever it perceivesprofit and security. It is extremely difficult to hold on to capital, both domestic and foreign, inthe face of perceived economic instability or inappropriate policy framework. With capitalcontrols, such mobility may be restricted, but now, as never before, there is increased scopefor circumventing such controls and mobility occurring through illegal channels. Withoutcapital controls, such mobility may be made easier, but the advantage is that capital flows canbe monitored better and policy response could be proactive. There are advantages of somecapital control, but effectiveness and benefits are being rapidly overtaken by the costs of suchcontrols. But, the downside risks of totally dismantling capital controls could be high, if thewill for and faith in sound macroeconomic management is lacking. Hence, as mentioned byour Governor Dr.Rangarjan, in his address at Carnegie Mellon University and I quote“Reduction in fiscal deficit, moderation in inflation and a flexible financial system which canadapt to the changing situation are some of the essential preconditions for capital accountThank you.convertibility.”outflow and a corresponding inflow of capital.Act and that there would be a new Act to tackle money laundering.tackle all these issues. Address by Dr. Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RESERVE BANK OF INDIA, at Center for Economic andSocial Studies, Hyderabad, on June 21, 1997.*
