Indian banking – The challenges ahead1. I deem it an honour to have been invited to deliver this year’s GNatarajan memorial lecture. I did not have the good fortune of meeting lateShri G.Natrajan but I have heard a lot about him from my friend Shri V.A.George. As a father of a mentally challenged child I had an insight into theactivities of Smt. Poonam Natrajan, founder chairperson of Vidya Sagar,formerly known as Spastic Society of India, Chennai. I am grateful to herfor inviting me to address this august gathering. Recently I had anopportunity to read late Natrajan’s book – Rupee watch, the story of theIndian Forex Market Retold (1993 -99) which gives us an idea of the deepinsight he had on the India Forex Markets during those turbulent days. Topay my homage to this great visionary, I thought nothing could have beenmore appropriate subject for todays address than – “Indian banking – TheChallenges Ahead”.2. In recent years, there has been a considerable widening anddeepening of the Indian financial system, of which banking is a significantcomponent.  With greater liberalisation, the financial system has come toplay a much larger role in the allocation of resources than in the past andits role in future can be expected to be much larger than at present. Thegrowing role of the financial sector in the allocation of resources hassignificant potential advantages for the efficiency with which our economyfunctions. Consequently, the adverse consequences of malfunction of thefinancial system are likely to be more severe than they used to be in thepast. Hence, all our efforts today are focused at ensuring greater financialstability. Given the significance of the Indian banking system, one cannotafford to underplay the importance of a strong and resilient bankingsystem.3. The pre-reform period witnessed the following major regulatoryconstraints on the banking sector which not only distorted the efficiency ofthe interest rate mechanism but also adversely affected the viability andprofitability of banks:- large pre-emptions – both in terms of the statutory holding ofGovernment securities (statutory liquidity ratio, or SLR) and cashreserve ratio (CRR); and- complex structure of administered interest rates;One of the major objectives of banking sector reforms in India hasbeen to enhance efficiency and productivity, which were achieved through:- reductions in the pre-emptions;- de-regulation of interest rates;- enhancement of competition through establishment of new banks inthe private sector, more liberal entry of foreign banks, enhancing therole of public shareholders in nationalised banks by gradual reductionof Government shareholding in these banks and allowing foreigndirect investment in the private sector banks up to 74 per cent, subjectto conformity with the guidelines issued from time to time.The cumulative effect of these measures is that banks have beenaccorded greater discretion in sourcing and utilisation of resources albeitin an increasingly competitive environment.Present position and the challenges aheadThe enhanced role of the banking sector in the Indian economy, theincreasing levels of deregulation and the increasing levels of competitionhave placed numerous demands on banks. Operating in this demandingenvironment has exposed banks to various challenges.i) Customer service: It is no longer adequate for banks to provideonly traditional banking services. Apart from providing theconventional banking services, banks have begun offering abouquet of financial services to their clients, including cross sellingof financial products. The ultimate aim is to offer a one-stop-shopfor meeting varied customers' financial needs. Some banks havebegun employing customer relationship management systems tonot only retain the existing customers but also to attract newcustomers. The establishment of new private sector banks andforeign banks has rapidly changed the competitive landscape in theIndian consumer banking industry and placed greater demands onbanks to gear themselves up to meet the increasing needs ofcustomers. For the discerning current day bank customers, it is notonly relevant to offer a wide menu of services but also providethese in an increasingly efficient manner in terms of cost, time andconvenience.While banks are focusing on the methodologies of meetingthe increasing demands placed on them, there are legitimateconcerns in regard to the banking practices that tend to excluderather than attract vast sections of population, in particularpensioners, self-employed and those employed in unorganisedsector. While commercial considerations are no doubt important,banks have been bestowed with several privileges, especially ofseeking public deposits on a highly leveraged basis, andconsequently they should be obliged to provide banking services toall segments of the population, on equitable basis. Further,experience has shown that consumers’ interests are at times notaccorded full protection and their grievances are not properlyattended to. Feedback received reveals recent trends of levyingunreasonably high service/user charges and enhancement of usercharges without proper and prior intimation. It is in this context thatthe Governor, Reserve Bank of India had mentioned in the AnnualPolicy Statement 2005-06 that RBI will take initiatives to encourage- greater degree of financial inclusion in the country;- setting up of a mechanism for ensuring fair treatment ofconsumers; and- effective redressal of customer grievances.It would, therefore, be reasonable to expect banks to focuson the above aspects while designing their products for customers.ii) Branch banking: Traditionally banks have been looking toexpansion of their branch network to increase their business.Against this background it is interesting to observe that the newprivate sector banks as well as the foreign banks have been able toachieve business expansion through other means.  It has beenrealized that it might not be necessary to establish a wider brickand mortar network to reach a wider population. Banks are,therefore, examining the potential benefits that may accrue bytapping the agency arrangement route and the outsourcing route.While proceeding in this direction banks ought not to lose sight ofthe new risks that they might be assuming and hence put in placeappropriate strategies and systems for managing these new risks.iii) Competition: With the ever increasing pace and extent ofglobalisation of the Indian economy and the systematic opening upof the Indian banking system to global competition, banks need toequip themselves to operate in the increasingly competitiveenvironment. This will make it imperative for banks to enhance theirsystems and procedures to international standards and alsosimultaneously fortify their financial positions.iv) Technology : A few banks which have impressive branch networkshave not been able to meet their customers’ expectations due toinefficiencies arising out of inadequate investment in technologyand consequently faced an erosion of their market shares.  Thebeneficiaries are those banks which have invested in technology.Another distinct advantage of use of technology is the ability toeffectively use quantitative techniques and models which canenhance the quality of their risk management systems. Recognisingthe benefits of modernising their technology infrastructure banksare taking the right initiatives.  The challenge in this regard will befor banks to ensure that they derive maximum advantage out oftheir investments in technology and to avoid wasteful expenditurewhich might arise on account ofa. uncoordinated and piecemeal adoption of technology;b. adoption of inappropriate/ inconsistent technology andc. adoption of obsolete technology.A case in point is the implementation of core banking solutionsby some banks without assessing its scalability or adaptability tomeet Basel II requirements.v) Basel II implementation: As you are aware, Basel II is the revisedframework for capital adequacy for banks. Implementation of BaselII is seen as one of the significant challenges facing the bankingsector in many jurisdictions. With the introduction of capital chargefor market risks with effect from the year ended March 31, 2005banks in India are compliant with all elements of Basel I. I will nowoutline the approach to Basel II implementation in India.Commercial banks in India will start implementing Basel II witheffect from March 31, 2007. They will initially adopt theStandardised Approach for credit risk and the Basic IndicatorApproach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed,both by the banks and also by the supervisors, some banks may beallowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) Approach.Implementation of Basel II will require more capital for banks inIndia due to the fact that operational risk is not captured underBasel I, and the capital charge for market risk was not prescribeduntil recently. Though last year has not been a very good year forbanks, they are exploring all avenues for meeting the capitalrequirements under Basel II. The cushion available in the system,which has a CRAR of over 12 per cent now, is, however,comforting.With a view to ensuring migration to Basel II in a non-disruptive manner, a consultative and participative approach hasbeen adopted for both designing and implementing Basel II in India.A Steering Committee comprising senior officials from 14 banks(public, private and foreign) has been constituted whereinrepresentation from the Indian Banks’ Association and the RBI hasalso been ensured. The Steering Committee had formed sub-groups to address specific issues. On the basis ofrecommendations of the Steering Committee, draft guidelines to thebanks on implementation of the New Capital Adequacy Frameworkhave been issued. Though Basel II implementation is considered asa challenge generally, the above approach has lightened theburden on banks in India.Notwithstanding the above, capacity building, both in banksand the regulatory bodies is a serious challenge, especially withregard to adoption of the advanced approaches. We have initiatedsupervisory capacity-building measures to identify the gaps and toassess as well as quantify the extent of additional capital whichmay be required to be maintained by such banks. The magnitude ofthis task appears daunting since we have as many as 90 scheduledcommercial banks in India.vi) Improving Risk Management Systems: With the increasing degreeof deregulation and exposure of banks to various types of risks,efficient risk management systems have become essential. As youare aware, as a step towards further enhancing and fine-tuning riskmanagement systems in banks, Reserve Bank has issuedguidelines on asset-liability management and risk managementsystems in banks in 1999 and Guidance Notes on Credit RiskManagement and Market Risk Management in October 2002 andthe Guidance Note on Operational risk management in 2005.Though Basel II focuses significantly on risks its implementationshould not be seen as an end in itself. It should be seen as amedium whereby the risk management systems in banks areconstantly upgraded to address the changing environment.At the initial stages of development of the risk managementsystems, banks were managing each risk in isolation. The currentbusiness environment demands a more integrated approach to riskmanagement. It is no longer sufficient to manage each riskindependently or in functional silos. Enterprises worldwide are,therefore, now putting in place an integrated framework for riskmanagement which is proactive, systematic and spans across theentire organisation.  Banks in India are also moving from theindividual silo system to an enterprise wide risk managementsystem. This is placing greater demands on the risk managementskills in banks and has brought to the forefront the need forcapacity building. While the first milestone would be risk integrationacross the entity, banks are also aware of the desirability of riskaggregation across the group both in the specific risk areas as alsoacross the risks. Banks would be required to allocate significantresources towards this objective over the next few years.In the Reserve Bank, we have adopted the risk basedapproach to supervision since 2003 and have brought about 23banks under the fold of risk based supervision (RBS) on a pilotbasis. On the basis of the feedback received from the pilot project,the RBS framework has now been reviewed. The risk basedapproach to supervision is also serving as a catalyst to banks’migration to the integrated risk management systems. In view of therelevance of improved risk management systems under thechanging circumstances and the larger emphasis placed on riskmanagement systems in banks under Basel II, it is essential thatthe RBS stabilizes at an early date and serves as an importantfeedback not only to bank managements but also to RBI. However,taking into account the diversity in the Indian banking system,stabilizing the RBS as an effective supervisory mechanism will be achallenge to the RBI.vii) Implementation of new accounting standards: Derivative activity inbanks has been increasing at a brisk pace. While the riskmanagement framework for derivative trading, which is a relativelynew area for Indian banks (particularly in the more structuredproducts), is an essential pre-requisite, the absence of clearaccounting guidelines in this area is matter of significant concern. Itis widely accepted that as the volume of transactions increases,which is happening in the Indian banking system, the need toupgrade the accounting framework needs no emphasis.  The WorldBank’s ROSC on Accounting and Auditing in India has commentedon the absence of an accounting standard which deals withrecognition, measurement and disclosures pertaining to financialinstruments. The Accounting Standards Board of the Institute ofChartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is considering issue ofAccounting Standards on the above aspects pertaining to financialInstruments. These will be the Indian parallel to InternationalAccounting Standards 32 and 39. The proposed AccountingStandards will be of considerable significance for financial entitiesand could therefore have implications for the financial sector. Theformal introduction of these Accounting Standards by the ICAI islikely to take some time in view of the processes involved. In themeanwhile, the Reserve Bank is considering the need for banksand financial entities adopting the broad underlying principles ofIAS 39. Since this is likely to give rise to some regulatory /prudential issues all relevant aspects are being comprehensivelyexamined. The proposals in this regard would, as is normal, bediscussed with the market participants before introduction. Adoptionand implementation of these principles are likely to pose a greatchallenge to both the banks and the Reserve Bank.viii) Transparency and Disclosures : In pursuance of the FinancialSector Reforms introduced since 1991 and in order to bring aboutmeaningful disclosure of the true financial position of banks toenable the users of financial statements to study and have ameaningful comparison of their positions, a series of measureswere initiated. The disclosure requirements broadly covered thefollowing aspects: Capital adequacy Asset quality Maturity distribution of select items of assets and liabilities Profitability Country risk exposure Risk exposures in derivatives Segment reporting Related Party disclosuresWith a view to moving closer towards international bestpractices including International Accounting Standards (IAS) andthe disclosure requirements under Pillar 3 of Basel II, ReserveBank has proposed enhanced disclosures which lay a greateremphasis on disclosure of certain qualitative aspects.Transparency and disclosure standards are also recognised asimportant constituents of a sound corporate governancemechanism. Banks are required to formulate a formal disclosurepolicy approved by the Board of directors that addresses the bank’sapproach for determining what disclosures it will make and theinternal controls over the disclosure process. In addition, banksshould implement a process for assessing the appropriateness oftheir disclosures, including validation and frequency.ix) Supervision of financial conglomerates: In view of increased focuson empowering supervisors to undertake consolidated supervisionof bank groups and since the Core Principles for Effective BankingSupervision issued by the Basel Committee on BankingSupervision have underscored consolidated supervision as anindependent principle, the Reserve Bank had introduced, as aninitial step, consolidated accounting and other quantitative methodsto facilitate consolidated supervision. The components ofconsolidated supervision include, consolidated financial statementsintended for public disclosure, consolidated prudential reportsintended for supervisory assessment of risks and application ofcertain prudential regulations on group basis. In due course,consolidated supervision as introduced above would evolve tocover banks in mixed conglomerates, where the parent may benon-financial entities or parents may be financial entities comingunder the jurisdiction of other regulators.The financial landscape is increasingly witnessing entry ofsome of the bigger banks into other financial segments likemerchant banking, insurance etc., which has made them financialconglomerates. Emergence of several new players with diversifiedpresence across major segments and possibility of some of thenon-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring largeenough proportions to have systemic impact make it imperative forsupervision to be spread across various segments of the financialsector. In this direction, an inter-regulatory Working Group wasconstituted with members from RBI, SEBI and IRDA. Theframework proposed by the Group will be complementary to theexisting regulatory structure wherein the individual entities areregulated by the respective regulators and the identified financialconglomerates would be subjected to focussed regulatory oversightthrough a mechanism of inter-regulatory exchange of information.As a first step in this direction, an inter-agency Working Group onFinancial Conglomerates (FC) comprising the above threesupervisory bodies identified 23 FCs and a pilot process forobtaining information from these conglomerates has been initiated.The complexities involved in the supervision of financialconglomerates are a challenge not only to the Reserve Bank ofIndia but also to the other regulatory agencies, which need to havea close and continued coordination on an on-going basis.x) 'Know Your Customer' (KYC) Guidelines – Anti Money LaunderingStandards : Banks were advised in 2002 to follow certain customeridentification procedure for opening of accounts and monitoringtransactions of a suspicious nature for the purpose of reporting it toappropriate authority. These ‘Know Your Customer’ guidelines wererevisited in the context of the recommendations made by theFinancial Action Task Force on Anti Money Laundering standardsand on Combating Financing of Terrorism. These standards havebecome the international benchmark for framing Anti MoneyLaundering and combating financing of terrorism policies by theregulatory authorities. Compliance with these standards both by thebanks/financial institutions and the country has become necessaryfor international financial relationships. Detailed guidelines basedon the Recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force andthe paper issued on Customer Due Diligence for banks by theBasel Committee on Banking Supervision, with indicativesuggestions wherever considered necessary, were issued to banksin November 2004. Banks were required to ensure that a properpolicy framework on ‘Know Your Customer’ and Anti-MoneyLaundering measures is formulated and put in place with theapproval of the Board within three months and be fully compliantwith these guidelines before December 31, 2005. Compliance withthe above is a significant challenge to the entire banking industry tofortify itself against misuse by anti-social persons/ entities and thusproject a picture of solidarity and financial integrity of the Indianbanking system to the international community.xi) Corporate Governnace: Banks are “special” as they not only acceptand deploy large amount of uncollateralized public funds infiduciary capacity, but they also leverage such funds through creditcreation.  Banks are also important for smooth functioning of thepayment system.  In view of the above, legal prescriptions forownership and governance of banks laid down in BankingRegulation Act, 1949 have been supplemented by regulatoryprescriptions issued by RBI from time to time. In this context, onemust remember that profit motive should not be the sole criterionfor business decisions. Flow of bank finance for productivepurposes must always take priority over the granting of credit forspeculative investment no matter how profitable the latter may be. Ifbank finance flows increasingly to finance speculative activities, itwill be to the detriment of real productive investment for research,development and the production of real goods/ services. One mightconclude that such uncontrolled flow would ultimately affecteconomic growth. Hence, funding of speculative activities must besubject to prudential limits, even though it might yield attractivereturns. This will be a significant challenge to banks where thepriorities and incentives might not be well balanced by theoperation of sound principles of corporate governance. If theinternal imbalances are not re-balanced immediately, the correctionmay evolve through external forces and may be painful and costlyto all stakeholders. The focus, therefore, should be on enhancingand fortifying operation of the principles of sound corporategovernance.ConclusionFriends, it is crucial for the banking industry to meet theincreasingly complex savings and financing needs of the economy byoffering a wider and flexible range of financial products tailored for alltypes of customers. With the increasing levels of globalisation of theIndian banking industry, evolution of universal banks and bundling offinancial services, competition in the banking industry will intensify further.The banking industry has the potential and the ability to rise to theoccasion as demonstrated by the rapid pace of automation which hasalready had a profound impact on raising the standard of bankingservices. The financial strength of individual banks, which are majorparticipants in the financial system, is the first line of defence againstfinancial risks. Strong capital positions and balance sheets place banks ina better position to deal with and absorb the economic shocks. Banksneed to supplement this with sophisticated and robust risk managementpractices and the resolve to face competition without diluting the operatingstandards.Thank YouAcknowledgements:Y V Reddy: Banking sector reforms in India - an overview, Karachi, 18 May2005.
