Indian Banking and Finance: Managing  New ChallengesIntroductionIn my inaugural address last year, I had indicated a vision for Indian banking inthe new millennium – that of a vibrant, internationally active banking system, drawingupon its innate strengths and comparative advantages to make India a major bankingcentre of the world. I had pointed out then that, while it may take up to 10 or even 15years to achieve this vision, the time to begin was now. Recent developments have onlyserved to bring forward the urgency attached to embarking upon this quest. Even as wedo so, it is necessary to recognise that, in view of recent global developments and theeconomic slowdown, the progress towards this goal would call for even greater effort anddetermination. In this context, the theme chosen for this year’s Conference i.e., “IndianBanking: Paradigm Shift” is most timely as it provides an opportunity to deliberate on thenew challenges ahead, and the action that we must take to manage them. I am happy to berd a part of these deliberations and to deliver the inaugural address to the 23 Conferenceof Bank Economists here today.As you are aware, global economic prospects turned sharply adverse sinceSeptember 2001 following the terrorist attacks on the US. The possibilities of a recoveryin the global economy have become highly uncertain, belying the initial expectations of aV-shaped recovery as well as the subsequent hopes of a U-shaped recovery. As of now,the consensus of forecasts settles around 2.4 per cent for world GDP growth for 2001.World trade volume growth could slow down to around 1.3 per cent and net capitaloutflows from developing countries may now be larger than anticipated earlier. Althoughthe sharp spurt in international oil prices has abated, their future behaviour remainsunclear. Macroeconomic weaknesses have also been associated with an erosion ofbusiness confidence. Insurance, airlines, tourism and hotel industries have been hit hardand the exposure of financial institutions to these industries can be a potential source ofvulnerability.Despite the relatively inward-looking nature of the Indian economy, it cannotremain insulated from these international developments. The direct effects of theseexternal developments on our banking system are expected to be limited. Indirect effects,especially through exports and subdued industrial activity could, however, impact uponthe asset quality of our banking system and other segments of the financial system. Theneed to constantly monitor international developments and take appropriate and often,preemptive action add an entirely new dimension to the progress of our banking systemtowards its longer-term vision.We have made considerable progress in implementing banking and financialsector reforms. There is also some improvement in the financial performance of thebanking system in terms of various indicators of operating efficiency. Nevertheless, thereare several areas regarding the efficiency of our banking system – rather than its stability– that raise concerns, especially during a period of generalised uncertainty. The level ofnon-performing assets (NPAs) continues be high by international standards, preemptingfunds for provisioning and eating into the performance and profitability of financialintermediaries. The response to the debt recovery and asset restructuring initiativesundertaken as part of financial sector reforms has also been slow.In the period ahead, our financial system will also have to prepare for a tighteningof the prudential norms as the new Basel Accord becomes effective and a fuller responseto the current financial environment emerges. Our financial institutions continue to besusceptible to financial market turbulence, especially in the equity market. Upgradingtechnical skills, technology, research and human capital, developing effective ‘front-office’ strategies and fortifying internal rules of governance and responsibility assumes arenewed priority in the fast changing scenario.The face of banking, as we have known it, is also changing rapidly. India isapproaching an era of financial conglomorisation and ‘bundling’ in the provision offinancial services. Besides infusing heightened competition, there are implications for theregulatory and supervisory regime. Banks and financial institutions have to prepare forchanges in the regulatory framework towards a more focussed, comprehensive andefficient environment that eschews regulatory forbearance. Legal reforms accordinglywill have to ascend the hierarchy of priorities in the reform process.Against this background, in this talk, I propose to focus on the main challengesfacing Indian banking, such as, the role of financial intermediation in different phases ofthe business cycle, the emerging compulsions of the new prudential norms, andbenchmarking the Indian financial system against international standards and bestpractices. I will also say a few words about the changing context of regulation andsupervision of the financial system in India, the need for introducing new technology inthe banking and financial system, and the importance of strengthening skills andintellectual capital formation in the banking industry.Recent Macroeconomic Developments and the Banking SystemFor a greater part of the twentieth century, the role of the financial system wasperceived as mobilising the massive resource requirements for growth. Since the 1970sand 1980s, development economics underwent a paradigm shift. The financial system isno longer viewed as a passive mobiliser of funds. Efficiency in financial intermediationi.e., the ability of financial institutions to intermediate between savers and investors, toset economic prices for capital and to allocate resources among competing demands isnow emphasised. Developments in endogenous growth theory since the late 1980sindicate that efficiency in financial intermediation is a source of technical progress to beexploited for generating increasing returns and sustaining high growth. These changeshave provided the rationale for many developing countries to undertake wide-rangingreforms of their financial systems so as to prepare them for their true resource allocationfunction. As important financial intermediaries, banks have a special role to play in thisnew dispensation.The sharp downturn in global macroeconomic prospects and the continuingsluggishness in domestic industrial activity have necessitated a revision in the forecast forIndia’s real GDP growth in 2001-02 from 6.0-6.5 per cent expected at the time of theApril 2001 Monetary and Credit Policy Statement to 5.0-6.0 per cent in the mid-termreview of the policy. The downward revision is primarily predicated on the outlook forthe industrial sector which grew by barely 2.2 per cent in April-October 2001 as against5.9 per cent in the corresponding period of last year, mainly on account of the slowdownin manufacturing and mining and quarrying. Capital goods production declined by asmuch as 6.6 per cent and several sectors recorded a slow down in growth rate or anabsolute decline. On the other hand, agriculture sector, supported by reasonablemonsoon, recorded a rebound in growth. The kharif output is expected to cross a newpeak of 105.6 million tonnes and prospects for the rabi crop are also good. On theexternal front, merchandise exports increased marginally by 0.5 per cent in the first eightmonths of 2001-02. While oil imports fell by 13.4 per cent, the non-oil imports showedan increase of 8.4 per cent. Despite a moderate widening of the trade deficit, continuingbuoyancy in net invisible receipts has kept the current account deficit very low.According to available data, net capital flows are also likely to be of a higher order thanin the preceding year. Foreign exchange reserves rose to US $ 48.0 billion as onDecember 28, 2001 recording an accretion of the order of the US $ 5.8 billion over theend-March 2001 level.In the context of the recent deceleration in the economy the intermediation roleassumes even greater relevance. Banks and financial institutions should endeavour toplay a ‘supply-leading’ rather than ‘demand-following’ role in initiating the upturn byenergising the financial intermediation process. By virtue of a bird’s eye view of theeconomy and their superior credit assessment of the investment proposals and theefficiency of capital, banks should endeavour to economise on ‘search’ costs inidentifying and nurturing growth impulses in the commodity and service producingsectors of the economy.In the recent period, monetary policy in India has also moved into a counter-cyclical stance signalled by cuts in key interest rates and cash reserve requirements. Atthe same time, market operations have ensured adequate liquidity to support the revivalof aggregate demand with a clear preference for softening of interest rates within theoverall institutional constraints on the interest rate regime. Inflation has been steadilyfalling and this has had a positive impact on inflation expectations, along with theunderlying resilience of the macroeconomic fundamentals of the Indian economy. The 50basis point reduction in the Bank Rate and the 200 basis point reduction in the CRR,announced recently, are expected to significantly enhance the lendable resources of thebanking system.The current situation of comfortable liquidity provides an opportunity for banks totransform idle liquidity into investible resources for growth. The easy interest rateenvironment would make it possible for banks to ‘price in’ projects which would haveearlier remained unfunded due to inherently lower returns to capital or due to lack ofaccess to prime lending rates. This will, however, require reassessment of portfolios andinternal liquidity constraints, even adjustments in risk profiles and risk management. Thedeceleration in the industrial growth scenario, of course, opens up the moral hazard ofadverse selection and the possibilities of large-scale contamination of portfolios. In asituation of generalised slowdown, unviable projects can look potentially bankable giventhe scarcity of investment avenues. Nevertheless, the possibilities for financial intermediation in the current situationare too varied and challenging to ignore. There is no systematic evidence that financialsector reforms by themselves and without supportive policies in other areas, cancontribute to a revival of the economy; yet this is a time when the responsibility on thefinancial system to contribute to the process of economic revival is greater than before.Periods of downturn in economic activity also provide opportunities for banks toundertake consolidation and strengthening. There is a strong complementarity betweenfinancial stability and macroeconomic stability. The interests of both are served by astable and resilient financial system.In recent years, various measures have been taken to improve the functioning ofdifferent segments of the financial markets and thereby, to improve the operationaleffectiveness of monetary policy. The Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF), which wasintroduced in June 2000 has emerged as an effective and flexible instrument formanaging liquidity on a day-to-day basis. In the second stage of the LAF, whichcommenced from May 2001, variable rate repo auctions replaced the collateralisedlending facility and Level I support to primary dealers. Standing facilities wererationalised and a back-stop facility was introduced at variable market-related rates.Concurrently, LAF operating procedures were recast to improve operational flexibilityand complementary measures were undertaken to improve the functioning of money andgovernment securities market segments and to facilitate their orderly integration.In order to enable the call money market to evolve into a pure inter-bank market,lending by non-banks was reduced to 85 per cent of their average daily call lending in2000-01 from May 2001. The minimum maturity for wholesale term deposits of Rs.15lakh and above has been reduced to 7 days from the earlier minimum maturity of 15 days.The maintenance of daily minimum cash reserve requirements has been lowered to 50 percent from 65 per cent for the first seven days of the reporting fortnight. Interest paid oneligible balances under CRR has been raised to the level of the Bank Rate fromNovember 3, 2001. The market has responded positively with an appreciable rise inturnover and a decline in volatility.Several measures have also been taken to improve the functioning of thegovernment securities market. 14-day and 182-day Treasury Bills were withdrawn andthe notified amounts of 91-day Treasury Bills has been simultaneously increased. ANegotiated Dealing System (NDS) is being introduced to facilitate electronic bidding andto disseminate information on trades on a real-time basis. For this purpose, the ReserveBank has begun the automation of its public debt offices. An important step is the settingup of the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) to act as counterparty in all tradesinvolving government securities, Treasury Bills, repos and foreign exchange. The entiresystem will operate in a networked environment and INdian FInancial NETwork(INFINET) will provide the backbone for communication.Prudential NormsA strong and resilient financial system and the orderly evolution of financialmarkets are key prerequisites for financial stability and economic progress. In keepingwith the vision of an internationally competitive and sound banking system, deepeningand broadening of prudential norms to the best internationally recognised standards havebeen the core of our approach to financial sector reforms. This has been supportedconcurrently by heightened market discipline, pro-active and comprehensive supervisionof the financial system and the orderly development of financial market segments. Thecalibration of the convergence with international standards is conditioned by the specificrealities of our situation; however, the New Capital Accord of the Basel Committee onBanking Supervision which was released in January 2001 adds urgency to the process ofconvergence. It is against the backdrop of these exigencies that prudential norms arebeing constantly monitored and refined. In the recent period, banks are being encouragedto build risk-weighted components of their subsidiaries into their own balance sheets andto assign additional capital. Risk weights are being constantly refined to take intorecognition additional sources of risk. The concept of ‘past due’ in the identification ofNPAs has been dispensed with. Banks and financial institutions are being urged toprepare to move to the international practice of the ‘90 day norm’ in the classification ofassets as non-performing by 2003-04.The new Basel Accord, as contained in the second Consultative Paper on CapitalAdequacy of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision released in January 2001 is inresponse to the perceived rigidities in the 1988 Accord’s capital requirements, the scopefor capital arbitrage and the increased sophistication in the measurement andmanagement of risk. The new Accord rests on three mutually reinforcing pillars i.e.,minimum capital requirements, processes of supervisory review and market discipline.Under the first pillar, the current definition of capital and the minimum requirement of 8per cent of capital to risk weighted assets is retained. Capital requirements would beextended on a consolidated basis to holding companies of banking groups.The primary emphasis of the new Accord is on improving the measurement ofrisk. The process of measurement of market risk is maintained. Three alternatives forcalculating credit risk capital requirements are proposed to be made available to banks,depending on the complexity of their business and the quality of their risk managementoperations. The ‘standardised approach’ which can be employed by less complex banksremains conceptually the same as in the 1988 norms; however, it expands the scale of riskweights and uses external credit ratings to categorise credits. Banks with more advancedrisk management capabilities can employ an internal ratings based (IRB) approach –‘foundation’ and ‘advanced’ variants are proposed on a progression scale – in whichbanks may categorise exposures into multiple credit ratings of their approved internalrating systems. The internally estimated probability of default, the maturity of exposureand the credit type i.e., corporate or retail, will determine risk weights. There is a newexplicit capital charge proposed on operational risk.The processes of supervisory review contained in the second pillar emphasise theneed for banks to develop sound internal procedures to assess the adequacy of capitalbased on a thorough evaluation of its risk profile and control environment, and to setcommensurate targets for capital. The internal processes would be subject to supervisoryevaluation, review and intervention, when appropriate. The third pillar aims at bolsteringmarket discipline through enhanced disclosure by banks. Disclosure requirements are setout in several areas under the new Accord, including the way in which banks calculatetheir capital adequacy and their risk assessment methods. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision has received more than 250comments on the January 2001 proposals. The Committee is expected to release a fullyspecified proposal, based on these comments, in early 2002 and to finalise the Accordduring 2002. An implementation date of 2005 is envisaged. The Reserve Bank forwardedits comments to the Basel committee in May 2001. It has supported flexibility, discretionto national supervisors and a phased approach in implementing the Accord. The Accordcould initially apply to internationally active – banks with over 15 per cent of theirbusiness in cross-border transactions, as proposed by the Reserve Bank – and significantbanks  whose domestic market share exceeds 1 per cent – with a simplified standardisedapproach to be evolved for other banks. Material limits on cross-holdings of capital andeschewing of direct responsibility on external credit rating agencies in the assessment ofbank assets have also been proposed by the Reserve Bank. It has also expressed itspreference for external credit rating agencies that publicly disclose risk scores, ratingprocesses and methodologies.The new accord, when implemented, is likely to have significant implications forthe banking system as a whole. Besides requiring increased capital, it attaches urgency tothe development of efficient and comprehensive internal systems for assessment andmanagement of risks, setting up and adhering to adequate internal exposure limits andimproving internal control generally. The guidelines for risk management and assetliability management provided by the Reserve Bank serve as a useful foundation forbuilding more sophisticated control systems. The feedback received from few banksindicates the need for substantial upgradation of existing management informationsystems, risk management practices and technical skills. Capital allocation is alsoexpected to be more risk sensitive and, therefore, banks and financial institutions willhave to plan in advance so that there are no disruptions in the capital structure. Furthersophistication in risk management and control mechanisms will have to evolve asexperience with preferential risk-weighting and sensitivity to external ratings isaccumulated.A key requirement when the new Accord, after further modification, becomesoperational is that of high quality human resources to cope with and adapt to the newenvironment. Enhancing technical skills and abilities to handle new technologies and newrisks, exploiting information flows to price them in, and developing foresight inanticipating changing risk-return relationships will become essential.Market DisciplineProcesses of transparency and market disclosure of critical information describingthe risk profile, capital structure and capital adequacy are assuming increasingimportance in the emerging environment. Besides making banks more accountable andresponsive to better-informed investors, these processes enable banks to strike the rightbalance between risks and rewards and to improve the access to markets. Improvementsin market discipline also call for greater coordination between banks and regulators.India has been a participant in the international initiatives to ensure improvedprocesses of market discipline that are being worked out in several fora, such as, themultilateral organisations, the BIS, the Financial Stability Forum, and the Core PrinciplesLiaison Group. Concurrent efforts are underway to refine and upgrade financialinformation monitoring and flow, data dissemination and data warehousing. Banks arecurrently required to disclose in their balance sheets information on maturity profiles ofassets and liabilities, lending to sensitive sectors, movements in NPAs, besides providinginformation on capital, provisions, shareholdings of the government, value of investmentsin India and abroad, and other operating and profitability indicators. Financial institutionsare also required to meet these disclosure norms. Banks also have to disclose their totalinvestments made in equity shares, units of mutual funds, bonds and debentures, andaggregate advances against shares in their notes to balance sheets.From this year onwards, notes to banks’ balance sheets will disclose themovement of provisions against NPAs as well as those held towards depreciation oninvestments. Guidelines relating to non-SLR investments through the private placementroute mandate the disclosure of information on issuer composition and non-performinginvestments in a similar manner. Efforts have been made to identify and monitor earlywarning indicators of financial crises. The overall approach is to combine the use ofmicro-prudential indicators with macro-economic indicators in order to develop a set ofaggregate macro-prudential indicators. This brings about a mix between bottom-up andtop-down assessment. As the methodology gets refined and the indicators are stress-tested for predictive power, financial stability surveillance will be significantly improved.This process will involve greater transparency and objectivity in the disclosure practicesof banks.Efforts have also been made to set up a Credit Information Bureau to collect andshare information on borrowers and improve the credit appraisal of banks and financialinstitutions within the ambit of the existing legislation. The Bureau has been incorporatedby the State Bank of India in collaboration with Housing Development FinanceCorporation (HDFC) and foreign technology partners. Collection and sharing of someitems of information have already been initiated. Efforts are also going into the collectionand sharing of information on private placement of debt under the Bureau so that there isgreater transparency in such trades. The possibility of collecting and disseminatinginformation on suit-filed accounts by the Bureau (in place of the Reserve Bank) is beingexplored by a Working Group constituted for this purpose with representation fromacross the financial system. The Group will also examine the prospects of on-line supplyof information and the processing of queries. A draft legislation covering various aspectsof information sharing, including issues relating to rights, responsibilities, and privacyhas been prepared, which would considerably strengthen the functioning of the Bureauwhen it is enacted.Benchmarking the Indian Banking System byInternational StandardsThe impetus given to the strengthening of domestic financial systems and theinternational financial architecture by the Asian crisis has gathered momentum in recentyears. An important development in this regard has been the move to set up universallyacceptable standards and codes for benchmarking domestic financial systems. Moreover,multilateral assessments of country performance are increasingly focusing on observanceof standards. The IMF’s Article IV consultations, its Financial Sector StabilityAssessment and the Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes of the IMF and theWorld Bank are indicative of the fact that a country’s adherence to benchmark standardsand codes is being considered integral to the preservation of international monetary andfinancial stability. While the process has begun with the predominant involvement ofgovernments and regulators, the search for standards and codes is progressivelyencompassing the private sector with consideration of issues relating to market discipline,corporate governance, insolvency procedures and credit rights.It is important to recognise that new standards and codes are not being regarded asfinal goals but as instruments or enabling conditions for enhancing efficiency in financialintermediation while ensuring financial stability. There are three levels at which action isnecessary, viz., legal, policy and procedures, and market practices by participants. Inseveral areas, fundamental changes in the legal and institutional infrastructure are pre-requisites. Since these changes can impinge upon the socio-cultural as well as politico-economic ethos, appropriate adoption and some prioritisation in implementation areunavoidable.We have made some noteworthy progress in generating a constructive debate onthe applicability of international standards and codes to the Indian financial system.Participative consultation has been supported by internal self-assessments as well asexternal assessment. In several areas, the issues are of a technical nature. Accordingly,the Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes, set up in December 1999,constituted ten Advisory Groups comprising eminent experts, generally non-official, tobring objectivity and experience into studying the applicability of relevant internationalcodes and standards to each area of competence.The Advisory Groups have submitted their reports. They have set out a roadmapfor implementation of appropriate standard and codes in the light of existing levels ofcompliance, the cross-country experience, and the existing legal and institutionalinfrastructure. The Advisory Group on Banking Supervision has assessed the Indianbanking system vis-à-vis the principles of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.It has found the level of compliance to be generally of a high order. The Advisory Groupon Bankruptcy Laws has, inter alia, recommended a comprehensive bankruptcy codeincorporating various aspects including cross-border insolvency and the repeal of theSick Industrial Companies Act. The Advisory Group on Corporate Governance has maderecommendations relating to rules and responsibilities of boards and has advisedamendments to the Companies Act.The Advisory Group on Data Dissemination has found that India’s datadissemination compares favourably with many other countries and has proposed thecompilation of forward-looking indicators. The Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparencyis of the view that current fiscal practices meet the IMF’s Code of Good Practices onFiscal Transparency. It has recommended amplifying the scope of fiscal responsibilitylegislation in order to include the essential elements of a budget law. The AdvisoryGroup on Insurance regulation has recommended flexible minimum capital requirementsdepending on the class of business. With regard to actuarial and solvency issues, theGroup has found the Indian standards to be at par with international norms. The AdvisoryGroup on International Accounting and Auditing Standards has set out an agenda for thefuture for convergence in auditing and accounting practices. It has recommended a singlestandard setting authority and the need for convergence of corporate and tax laws.The Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies hasrecommended inflation as the single mandated objective for the central bank andnecessary autonomy to fulfill the mandate. It has also made recommendations on theoperating procedures of monetary policy. The Advisory Group on Payments andSettlement has recommended legal reforms to empower the Reserve Bank to supervisethe payment and settlement system, application of the Lamfalussy standards to deferrednet settlement (DNS) and introduction of Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS). It has alsorecommended the setting up of the Clearing Corporation and a separate guarantee fundfor foreign exchange clearing. The Advisory Group on Securities Market Regulation hascompared India against the International Organisation of Securities Commissions(IOSCO) principles and emphasised the need to strengthen inter-regulator cooperation.Thus, in India, we have made considerable progress in the identification ofinternational standards and codes in relevant areas, expert assessment regarding theirapplicability, including comparator country evaluation and building up possible course ofaction for the future. The next step is to sensitise all concerned – policy makers,regulators and market participants – to the issues involved and to seek the widest possibledebate on issues as well as expert assessments with a view to generating a broadconsensus on implementation of a universally recognised set of codes and standards.Universal BankingSince the early 1990s, banking systems worldwide have been going through arapid transformation. Mergers, amalgamations and acquisitions have been undertaken ona large scale in order to gain size and to focus more sharply on competitive strengths.This consolidation has produced financial conglomerates that are expected to maximiseeconomies of scale and scope by ‘bundling’ the production of financial services. Thegeneral trend has been towards downstream universal banking where banks haveundertaken traditionally non-banking activities such as investment banking, insurance,mortgage financing, securitisation, and particularly, insurance. Upstream linkages, wherenon-banks undertake banking business, are also on the increase. The global experiencecan be segregated into broadly three models. There is the Swedish or Hong Kong typemodel in which the banking corporate engages in in-house activities associated withbanking. In Germany and the UK, certain types of activities are required to be carried outby separate subsidiaries. In the US type model, there is a holding company structure andseparately capitalised subsidiaries.In India, the first impulses for a more diversified financial intermediation werewitnessed in the 1980s and 1990s when banks were allowed to undertake leasing,investment banking, mutual funds, factoring, hire-purchase activities through separatesubsidiaries. By the mid-1990s, all restrictions on project financing were removed andbanks were allowed to undertake several activities in-house. In the recent period, thefocus is on Development Financial Institutions (DFIs), which have been allowed to set upbanking subsidiaries and to enter the insurance business along with banks. DFIs were alsoallowed to undertake working capital financing and to raise short-term funds withinlimits. It was the Narasimham Committee II Report (1998) which suggested that the DFIsshould convert themselves into banks or non-bank financial companies, and thisconversion was endorsed by the Khan Working Group (1998). The Reserve Bank’sDiscussion Paper (1999) and the feedback thereon indicated the desirability of universalbanking from the point of view of efficiency of resource use, but it also emphasised theneed to take into account factors such as the status of reforms, the state of preparednessof the institutions, and a viable transition path while moving in the desired direction.Accordingly, the mid-term review of monetary and credit policy,October 1999 and the annual policy statements of April 2000 and April 2001enunciated the broad approach to universal banking and the Reserve Bank’scircular of April 2001 set out the operational and regulatory aspects of conversion ofDFIs into universal banks. The need to proceed with planning and foresight is necessaryfor several reasons. The move towards universal banking would not provide a panacea forthe endemic weaknesses of a DFI or its liquidity and solvency problems and/oroperational difficulties arising from undercapitalisation, non-performing assets, and assetliability mismatches, etc. The overriding consideration should be the objectives andstrategic interests of the financial institution concerned in the context of meeting thevaried needs of customers, subject to normal prudential norms applicable to banks. Fromthe point of view of the regulatory framework, the movement towards universal bankingshould entrench stability of the financial system, preserve the safety of public deposits,improve efficiency in financial intermediation, ensure healthy competition, and imparttransparent and equitable regulation.Issues in Supervision and RegulationProgressive strengthening, deepening and refinement of the regulatory andsupervisory system for the financial sector have been important elements of financialsector reforms. In the long run, it is the supervision and regulation function that is criticalin safeguarding financial stability. There is also some evidence that proactive andeffective supervision contributes to the efficiency of financial intermediation. Financialsector supervision is expected to become increasingly risk-based and concerned withvalidating systems rather than setting them. This will entail  procedures for sound internalevaluation of risk for banks. As mentioned earlier, bank managements will have todevelop internal capital assessment processes in accordance with their risk profile andcontrol environment. These internal processes would then be subjected to review andsupervisory intervention if necessary. The emphasis will be on evaluating the quality ofrisk management and the adequacy of risk containment. In such an environment,credibility assigned by markets to risk disclosures will hold only if they are validated bysupervisors. Thus effective and appropriate supervision is critical for the effectiveness ofcapital requirements and market discipline.In certain areas, as for instance, in the urban cooperative banking segment, theregulatory requirements leave considerable scope for regulatory arbitrage and evencircumvention. The problem is rendered more complex by the existence of regulatoryoverlap between the Central Government, the State Governments and the Reserve Bank.Regulatory overlap has impeded the speed of regulatory response to emerging problems.The need for removing multiple regulatory jurisdiction over the cooperative bankingsector has been reiterated on several occasions. In this regard, the Reserve Bank hasproposed the setting up of an apex supervisory body for urban cooperative banks underthe control of a high-level supervisory board consisting of representatives of the Centralgovernments, the State governments, the Reserve Bank and experts. The apex body isexpected to ensure compliance with prudential requirements and also supervise on-siteinspections and off-site surveillance.Recent developments in certain segments of the financial sector have also broughtto the fore issues relating to corporate governance in banks. As part of on-going reforms,boards have been given greater autonomy to prescribe internal control guidelines, riskmanagement and procedures for market discipline and accountability. It is extremelyimportant that greater vigilance over adherence to these norms goes hand-in-hand withgreater autonomy. Recent evidence of transgression of prudential guidelines by a fewbanks has raised the issue of the audit and supervisory functions of boards. As we movetowards a more deregulated financial regime, these functions have to be transferred fromeither the Government or the Reserve Bank to bank boards. This imposes a greaterresponsibility and accountability on the bank management. It is in this context that aconsultative group of directors of select banks and other experts has been set up torecommend measures to strengthen the internal supervisory role of boards. The objectiveis to obtain a feedback on how boards function vis-à-vis compliance with prudentialnorms, transparency and disclosure, functioning of the audit committee, etc., and todevise effective mechanisms for ensuring management discipline.Several other initiatives in improving the supervisory function have beenundertaken, including a prudential supervisory reporting system for financial institutions,improvements in procedures for financial inspection, sensitising the general public forbetter regulation of the activities of NBFCs and enactment of appropriate legislation toprotect depositor interests in some States. Major legal reforms have been initiated in areassuch as security laws, the Negotiable Instruments Act, bank frauds and the regulatoryframework of banking. The Reserve Bank has also accepted the principle of transfer ofownership to the Government in respect of some financial institutions in view of theconflict of interest that may arise in the conduct of its supervisory function. It is expectedthat these initiatives will pave the way for an efficient, and risk-based supervisoryenvironment in India.Technology in BankingNobel Laureate Robert Solow had once remarked that computers are seeneverywhere excepting in productivity statistics. More recent developments have shownhow far this state of affairs has changed. Innovation in technology and worldwiderevolution in information and communication technology (ICT) have emerged asdynamic sources of productivity growth. The relationship between IT and banking isfundamentally symbiotic. In the banking sector, IT can reduce costs, increase volumes,and facilitate customised products; similarly, IT requires banking and financial servicesto facilitate its growth. As far as the banking system is concerned, the payment system isperhaps the most important mechanism through which such interactive dynamics getsmanifested.Recognising the importance of payments and settlement systems in the economy,we have embarked on technology based solutions for the improvement of the paymentand settlement system infrastructure, coupled with the introduction of new paymentproducts such as the computerised settlement of clearing transactions, use of MagneticInk Character Recognition (MICR) technology for cheque clearing which currentlyaccounts for 65 per cent of the value of cheques processed in the country, thecomputerisation of Government Accounts and Currency Chest transactions,operationalisation of Delivery versus Payment (DvP) for Government securitiestransactions. Two-way inter-city cheque collection and imaging have beenoperationalised at the four metros. The coverage of Electronic Clearing Service (Debitand Credit) has been significantly expanded to encourage non-paper based fundsmovement and develop the provision of a centralised facility for effecting payments. Thescheme for Electronic Funds Transfer operated by the Reserve Bank has beensignificantly augmented and is now available across thirteen major cities. The scheme,which was originally intended for small value transactions, is processing high value (upto Rs.2 crore) from October 1, 2001. The Centralised Funds Management System(CFMS), which would enable banks to obtain consolidated account-wise and centre-wisepositions of their balances with all 17 offices of the Deposits Accounts Departments ofthe Reserve Bank has begun to be implemented in a phased manner from November2001.A holistic approach has been adopted towards designing and development of amodern, robust, efficient, secure and integrated payment and settlement system takinginto account certain aspects relating to potential risks, legal framework and the impact onthe operational framework of monetary policy. The approach to the modernisation of thepayment and settlement system in India has been  three-pronged: (a) consolidation, (b)development, and  (c) integration. The consolidation of the existing payment systemsrevolves around strengthening Computerised Cheque clearing, expanding the reach ofElectronic Clearing Services and Electronic Funds Transfer by providing for systemswith the latest levels of technology. The critical elements in the developmental strategyare the opening of new clearing houses, interconnection of clearing houses through theINFINET; optimising the deployment of resources by banks through Real Time GrossSettlement System, Centralised Funds Management System (CFMS); Negotiated DealingSystem (NDS) and the Structured Financial Messaging Solution (SFMS). Whileintegration of the various payment products with the systems of individual banks is thethrust area, it requires a high degree of standardisation within a bank and seamlessinterfaces across banks.The setting up of the apex-level National Payments Council in May 1999 and theoperationalisation of the INFINET by the Institute for Development and Research inBanking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad have been some important developments inthe direction of providing a communication network for the exclusive use of banks andfinancial institutions. Membership in the INFINET has been opened up to all banks inaddition to those in the public sector. At the base of all inter-bank message transfers usingthe INFINET is the Structured Financial Messaging System (SFMS). It would serve as asecure communication carrier with templates for intra- and inter-bank messages in fixedmessage formats that will facilitate ‘straight through processing’. All inter-banktransactions would be stored and switched at the central hub at Hyderabad while intra-bank messages will be switched and stored by the bank gateway. Security features of theSFMS would match international standards.In order to maximise the benefits of such efforts, banks have to take pro-activemeasures to :? further strengthen their infrastructure in respect of standardisation, high levels ofsecurity and communication and networking;? achieve inter-branch connectivity early;? popularise the usage of the scheme of electronic funds transfer (EFT); and? institute arrangements for an RTGS environment online with a view to integratinginto a secure and consolidated payment system.Information technology has immense untapped potential in banking.Strengthening of information technology in banks could improve the effectiveness ofasset-liability management in banks. Building up of a related data-base on a real timebasis would enhance the forecasting of liquidity greatly even at the branch level. Thiscould contribute to enhancing the risk management capabilities of banks.Human Resource Development in BankingA recurring theme in the annual BECON Conference has been the need to focuson developing human resources to cope with the rapidly changing scenario. The corefunction of HRD in the banking industry is to facilitate performance improvement,measured not only in terms of financial indicators of operational efficiency but also interms of the quality of financial services provided. Factors such as skills, attitudes andknowledge of personnel play a critical role in determining the competitiveness of thefinancial sector. The quality of human resources indicates the ability of banks to delivervalue to customers. Capital and technology are replicable, but not human capital whichneeds to be viewed as a valuable resource for the achievement of competitive advantage.The primary emphasis needs to be on integrating human resource management (HRM)strategies with the business strategy. HRM strategies include managing change, creatingcommitment, achieving flexibility and improving teamwork. These processes underlie thecomplementary processes that represent the overt aspects of HRM, such as recruitment,placement, performance management, reward management, and employee relations. Aforward looking approach would involve moving towards self-assessment of competencyand developmental needs as a part of a continuous learning cycle.The Indian banking industry has been an important driving force behind thenation’s economic development. The emerging environment poses both opportunities andthreats, in particular, to the public sector banks. How well these are met will mainlydepend on the extent to which the banks leverage their primary assets i.e., humanresources in the context of the changing economic and business environment. It isobvious that the public sector banks’ hierarchical structure, which gives preference toseniority over performance, is not the best environment for attracting the best talent fromamong the young in a competitive environment. A radical transformation of the existingpersonnel structure in public sector banks is unlikely to be practical, at least in theforeseeable future. However, certain improvements can be made in the recruitmentpractices as well as in on-the-job training and redeployment of those who are alreadyemployed. There are several institutions in the country which cater exclusively to theneeds of human resource development in the banking industry. It is worthwhile toconsider broad-basing the courses conducted in these institutions among other higher-level educational institutions so that specialisation in the area of banking and financialservices becomes an option in higher education curriculums. In the area of informationtechnology, Indian professionals are world leaders and building synergies between the ITand banking industries will sharpen the competitive edge of our banks.The changing environment, the forces of globalisation and liberalisation and theadvances in information and communication technology have major HR implications forthe Reserve Bank as well. Financial products are becoming increasingly complex anddiverse, while the markets in which they trade get progressively deregulated. The need toadopt global best practices in financial sector regulation and supervision, and adapt themto the domestic environment, places a premium on the skills and expertise of the Bank’shuman resources. Again, the functioning and policies of public institutions, such as theReserve Bank, are increasingly subject to public discussion and debate. This calls forgreater transparency, more effective communication, and a high degree ofprofessionalism in the Bank’s staff. This warrants continuous upgradation of humanresource management strategies with a view to enhancing the level of knowledge,sharpening skills and also to instill the necessary attitudes and work culture. The ReserveBank is now devoting considerable attention to these areas at the entry level as well as atdifferent levels of career development of its staff.The Role of EconomistsIn my inaugural address to BECON, 2000 I had discussed the crucial role of bankeconomists in transforming the banking system in India. Economists have to be more‘mainstreamed’ within the operational structure of commercial banks. Apart from thetraditional functioning of macro-scanning, the inter-linkages between treasuries, dealingrooms and trading rooms of banks need to be viewed not only with the day-to-day needsof operational necessity, but also with analytical content and policy foresight.Today, operational aspects of the functioning of banks are attracting intensiveresearch by professional economists. In particular, measuring and modeling differentkinds of risks faced by banks, the behaviour of risk-return relationships associated withdifferent portfolio mixes and the impact of fluctuations in financial markets on thefinancial performance of banks are areas which lend themselves to analytical andempirical appraisal by economists and econometricians. They, in turn, are discovering thedegrees of freedom and room for analytical maneuver in high frequency informationgenerated by the day-to-day functioning of banks. It is vital that we develop anenvironment where these synergies are nurtured so as to serve the longer-term strategicinterests of banks. Even in real time trading and portfolio decisions, the fundamentalanalysis of economists provides an independent assessment of market behaviour,reinforcing technical analysis. A serious limitation of the applicability of standard economic analysis tobanking relates to the inadequacies of the data-base. Absence of long time series datastorage in the banking industry often poses serious problems to the quest for the formalanalytical relationships between variables. Even if such data exist, the presence ofstructural breaks may blur meaningful analysis based on traditional formulation.Economists need to think innovatively to overcome this problem. Use of panelregression, non-parametric methods and multivariate analyses could go a long way inunderstanding and validating behaviourial relationships in banking.Another important challenge for the economics profession is to develop propermodels for measurement of various risks in Indian conditions. This is a necessity in viewof the move towards risk-based supervision. Quantification of operational risks andcalibration of Value at Risk (VaR) models pose major computational challenge tobankers and policy makers alike, particularly in India. A major difficulty lies inidentifying the right statistical model that determines the underlying distribution suited tothe particular category of operational loss, and building the necessary database forderiving operationally meaningful conclusions.In my inaugural address last year, I had also emphasised the need for bankeconomists to come out of their narrow specialisation and address operational issuesrelating to banking and finance. In order to make a meaningful contribution to banking,economists must have the experience of working in operational areas of banks. For thispurpose, economists need to ‘soil their hands’ in dealing rooms, treasuries and investmentunits, credit authorisation and loan recovery, strategic management groups andmanagement information systems of the banks to understand the ground realities. Thereare also ‘economies’ to be gained from field-level credit appraisal, asset recovery, debtrestructuring, market and consumer behaviour in which banks are involved. Thus, theprofession needs to amalgamate the objectivity and theoretical soundness of economicswith the functional dimensions of banking and finance. It is this combination of specialisttraining with operational experience, which is going to make the economics professionrelevant to the changing face of banking in India.ConclusionHow close are we to the vision of a sound and well-functioning banking systemthat I outlined a year ago? It is fair to say that despite a turbulent year and manychallenges, we have made some progress towards this goal. There has been progressiveintensification of financial sector reforms, and the financial sector as a whole is moresensitised than before to the need for internal strength and effective management as wellas to the overall concerns for financial stability. At the same time, in view of greaterdisclosure and tougher prudential norms, the weaknesses in our financial system are moreapparent than before.There is greater awareness now of the need to prepare the banking system for thetechnical and capital requirements of the emerging prudential regime and a greater focuson core strengths and niche strategies. We have also made some progress in assessing ourfinancial system against international best practices and in benchmarking the futuredirections of progress. Several contemplated changes in the surrounding legal andinstitutional environment have been proposed for legislation.Nevertheless, several sources of vulnerability persist. The NPA levels remain toolarge by international standards and concerns relating to management and supervisionwithin the ambit of corporate governance are being tested during the period of downturnof economic activity. There is also a sense that we have a lot to acquire and adapt interms of the technical expertise necessary to measure and manage risks better. Thestructure of the financial system is changing and supervisory and regulatory regimes areexperiencing the strains of accommodating these changes. Certain weak links in thedecentralised banking and non-bank financial sectors have also come to notice. In afundamental sense, regulators and supervisors are under the greatest pressures of changeand bear the larger responsibility for the future. For both the regulators and the regulated,eternal vigilance is the price of growth with financial stability.We should strive to move towards realising our vision of an efficient and soundbanking system of international standards with redoubled vigour. Our greatest asset inthis endeavour is the fund of technical and scientific human capital formation available inthe country. The themes which are being covered in this Conference under structural,operational and governance issues should help in defining the road map for the future.Once again, I commend the choice of the theme for BECON 2001, and wish you successin your deliberations.Thank you.
