Financial Inclusion for Sustainable Development : Role of IT and IntermediariesMy topic today is financial inclusion for sustainable development and how IT and communitybased organisations including NGOs can be leveraged for expanding banking outreach so as tomeet the needs of the underserved population.Financial inclusion has become a buzzword internationally – even in developed financial marketsthere are concerns about those excluded from the banking system especially migrant workers.The barriers to access to formal banking system have been identified as relating to culture,education (especially financial literacy), gender, income and assets, proof of identity, remotenessof residence, and so on. Efforts are being made by the authorities- especially banking regulators-to improve access to affordable financial services through financial education, leveragingtechnology, and generating awareness.I would like to illustrate by quoting some recent developments. The FDIC Board of Directors in USapproved on November 2, 2006 the establishment of an FDIC Advisory Committee on EconomicInclusion, a committee to provide the FDIC with advice and recommendations on importantinitiatives focused on expanding access to banking services for underserved populations. Thismay include reviewing basic retail financial services such as cheque cashing, money orders,remittances, stored value cards, short-term loans, savings accounts, and other services thatpromote asset accumulation by individuals and financial stability. Financial inclusion is thus beingseen as part of ensuring financial stability.In a recent speech at the Opportunity Finance Network's Annual Conference at Washington DCon November 1, 2006, Chairman of the Fed Reserve Board Ben. S. Bernanke referred to the roleof community based financial institutions in minimizing neighbourhood  and informationexternalities and other types of market failure that tend to prevent competitive conditions frommaximizing social welfare. He spoke about the role of community development financialinstitutions in solving collective action problem and countering information externalities bydeveloping financial products and services that better fit local needs and provide coordinateddevelopment activities and community specific information. In dealing with scale and usingtechnology, banks tend to adopt highly standardized and automated processes. But financialinclusion requires substantial efforts in understanding the needs of the customer, counseling,financial literacy, screening & monitoring. In his speech the Chairman focused on role of the localorganizations in acting as information brokers and facilitators.There is also a news item that applications made by  Wal-Mart to cash cheques at its 44 storeshas been approved by the Division of Banking in Massachusetts mainly on grounds of providingfacility to the unbanked. In some jurisdictions, non bank entities are being allowed to providepayment and account maintaining facility without bank account - through e-money-  to meet theneeds of the unbanked.In developing countries, the added dimension, and the main difference is that the focus offinancial inclusion is on promoting sustainable development and generating employment for avast majority of the population especially in the rural areas.In yesterday’s address in BANCON, Deputy Governor Dr. Rakesh Mohan has elaborately laid outthe position for India and the data analysed by him speaks for itself. Rather than repeating thefigures, let’s just take a look at a few facts. In March 2005, commercial banks had 338 millionsavings and current accounts as against 290 million in 2000. Rural accounts went up from 172million to 200 million – representing an increase of 28 million, while urban accounts increased by20 million from 118 million to 138 million. The rate of growth annually was around 3 % just a littleover the population growth- State wise data would show certain areas where there is hardly anyincrease. The number of loan accounts increased from 54 million in 2000 to 77 million in March2005 (7.3 % CAGR). However the higher growth rate was on account of urban areas. In ruralareas, the number of loan accounts went up from 40 million to 47 million (3.3%) whereas theurban areas showed a stronger growth  from 14 million to 30 million loan account or growth rateof 16.5%. The growth in the number of small borrower accounts in rural areas was even lower at2.5 % whereas the growth in the number for urban areas was 13.8 % between 2000 and 2005.There has been hardly any increase in outreach or scale in the last five years except for somegrowth in branches and loan accounts in urban areas. Number of bank offices in rural areasremained more or less the same - 47253 in 2000 to 47586 in 2005-  while they rose from 19808to 22383 in urban areas.  Current and savings accounts per branch in rural areas rose from 3650to 4202 and from 5965 to 6155 in urban areas. The number of loan accounts per branch rosefrom 844 in 2000 to 1003 in 2005 while in urban areas the number increased from 731 to 1335.These data bring out the spurt in urban retail lending in recent time –but this has not beenmatched by similar growth in savings accounts in both rural and urban areas or growth in loanaccounts in rural areas.On the other hand, there are 93 million mobile users today –the CAGR since 1999 is 85 %.  Thenumber of mobile phones currently is more than the number of borrowers from the bankingsystem. There is a clear need  to increase the outreach and scale up operations at existingoutlets.Use of technologyThe use of IT is inevitable to improve the usage of existing branch infrastructure. Increasingoutreach and up scaling number of accounts at each branch will require bankers to move out oftheir branches and source clients and then look at low cost delivery alternatives once the accountrelationship is established. Opening a no frills account with a small overdraft or GCC is only thefirst step in building the relationship which would require sustained efforts to ensure that thebanking relationship with the customer is fashioned to meet his needs. IT can reduce cost andtime in processing of applications, maintaining and reconciliation of accounts and enable banks touse their staff at branches for making that critical minimum effort in sustaining relationshipespecially with new accountholders. In rural areas customers cannot be expected to come tobranches in view of opportunity cost and time and hence banks will have to reach out through avariety of devices such as weekly banking, mobile banking, satellite offices, rural ATMs and useof Post offices. In urban and even in rural areas where mobile phones have penetrated, bankscould use mobile technology for facilitating banking transactions. Mobile phones can be used totransfer funds real time from and to bank accounts and could make remittances and payments atvery low cost. Once the data base and track record is established, a multitude of financialservices can be offered including savings, remittance, transaction banking such as receipt ofsalaries, pensions and payments for utilities, loan including home loans, insurance and MFproducts. Here the branches can render more business and variety of products to existingclientele as also source new customers within the area of operation.  Financial inclusion offers ahuge potential for business in terms of resources and assets and banks therefore need to takeaggressive steps to use technology, business processes and personnel to be able to exploit thispotential in innovative and creative ways.In a branch banking model, local community based organizations or respected persons could beused to deal with the information asymmetry problem by leveraging the knowledge aboutcustomers available with such entities /persons to reduce credit risk and transaction cost. Even ifpost offices and post men are not used for actual delivery of services,  they can be used for theinvaluable information and data they possess for direct marketing. There are a number of suchorganizations and delivery channels- including retired bankers and school teachers- who can beused for such credit enhancements in the form of reliable information.In fact use of technology is critical in building up a reliable credit information system, build up database on customers for a variety of purposes, thereby reducing the transaction cost involved inchecking encumbrances and collaterals and also facilitating better pricing of risk.A South African IT initiative worth emulating is the ‘MZANSI’ account. This account, a National nofrills Bank Account (NBA) product that caters to the needs of the un-banked population of SouthAfrica was established to use existing distribution networks of banks, government and otherbodies. It was envisaged that NBA will attract 4 million potential customers over period of 5 years.In its first year of operation itself, it garnered nearly two million accounts. Salient features of the MZANSI Account are:• The product is card based and launched at a very affordable price• It is first of two 'first order savings / transmission products' aimed at extending penetrationof banks into first order markets.• Access to the NBA product is provided through a combination of existing service pointoutlets & physical branch outlets including own and shared ATMs, Post offices, andmerchant POS devices.There is a money transfer service associated with the MZANSI account which makes it possibleto transfer money between un-banked / banked customers from any participating bank or SouthAfrica Post Office. All banks in South Africa are participants in this unique venture. As it is a verytechnology intensive product, the transaction costs are very low and thus, what were thought tobe as 'too costly to serve areas and people' have became attractive propositions.State Governments such as in Andhra Pradesh  are actively looking at making pension paymentsas also disbursals under REGP  through use of smart cards linked to bank accounts. The samecard could be used for social security programs as also banking transactions and can act as aunique identifier card. All relevant details relating to the person can be stored on the card withbio-metric identification.  Experiments are under way for low costs ATMs with biometricidentification for withdrawal of cash that could enable a low cost and therefore a more sustainableway of financial penetration and outreach while ensuring safeguards against foul play.RBI is setting up an Advisory Group on IT solutions for financial inclusion and it is hoped thatcollaborative effort between banks governments and post offices will be facilitated by thedeliberations of this Group. Use of intermediariesA recent paper by the CGAP refers to the potential for increasing outreach through branchlessbanking where two models have been detailed, viz., the bank-agent model and the e-bankingmodel where without a bank account a variety of financial transactions can take place through e-money. The paper outlines “agency risks” and “e-money” risks and issues for regulators.In India, branchless banking has to be able to ensure effective penetration into underservedareas –an example of this is the SHG-Bank  linkage program. Up-scaling this program forfinancing productive activities and synergizing local entities for providing ancillary and collectiveservices required for improving bankability  of activities has to be the focus. While up scaling theSHG –bank linkage program, care must be taken to ensure integrity of accounting and protectionof member’s interest. In addition up scaling requires knowledge enhancement and capacitybuilding.  For example Village knowledge centers set up by a public sector bank at some of itsrural branches has enabled more productive lending and increased good business at suchbranches.The use of intermediaries such as post offices and others raises the issue of agent related risks.Most of the agent related risks detailed in the CGAP paper have also been spelt out in the reportof the Khan Committee and the RBI guidelines on use of business correspondents and facilitatorsand the final outsourcing guidelines released yesterday.  Use of intermediaries is helpful wherethe intermediary actually enables reduction of risk, such as use of SHGs where the groupdiscipline and social capital act as credit enhancements. The use of MFIs  which engage incapacity building of the group members and also in providing “credit plus” services enable banksto minimize credit risk by improving viability while expanding outreach to large number of poorcustomers. There are concerns arising out of allowing agents to accept cash repayments anddeposits and that is why online biometric devices linked to bank accounts real time are preferableto offline models. Other risks that need to be addressed are operational risk, reputation risk, legalrisks, liquidity risk, consumer protection, including resolution of consumer grievances as alsothose relating to AML.Finally what are some of the lessons for leveraging existing branch network, IT andintermediaries for financial inclusion?Firstly, there should be clear focus on relatively unbanked and underserved areas rather thancompeting aggressively in already well served areas. There is a clear need to vastly increasethe numbers served by existing branches for savings loan and remittances. It is hoped thenew KYC norms for small value accounts will go a long way in ensuring this..Secondly, financial inclusion should be led by understanding the needs of the customerrather than achieving targets. In rural areas banks should reach out rather than expectplaying a numbers game. A well planned strategy should focus on customising products fortransactions, remittances, savings, loans and insurance. Improving financial literacy andcredit counseling in fact should precede delivery of financial products. In fact a localizedapproach would require banks to rethink their policy on having uniform products for the entirecountry. Communication should be in local language and in tune with local culture to removebarriers.Third, technology can be leveraged to increase delivery channels at lower cost, have betterinternal control systems and MIS, enhance the efficiency safety and integrity of the paymentsand remittances system and develop a reliable credit information system. A well functioningpayments system itself improves economic activity and its efficiency.Fourth, for rural areas, financial services will need to be supplemented by organising supportfor ancillary activities and knowledge dissemination. Farmers training centers, villageknowledge centers, RUDSETIs set up by a few banks will need multiplication for ensuringsustainable development.Fifth, the SHG program has become quite widespread. As at March 2006, 2.2 million SHGswere linked and Rs 11400 crore credit provided to them. There is need for up scaling to coverproductive loans while ensuring that the process of group formation and capacity building isgiven sufficient time to allow social capital and democratic processes to take root.Transparency in accounting and book keeping and financial education of members should bepart of due diligence undertaken by banks.Sixth, the real value of NGOs and MFIs lie in their role as providing “credit plus” services andnot just functioning as an intermediary for onlending. Banks with their resources and scalehave greater cost advantages but linking with community based organisations and localpersons /entities would help them get over the information gap and access barriers.Seventh, while using agents, customer’s rights need to be safeguarded to ensure there is nomis-selling or deficiency in services. .Eighth, RRBs and well functioning cooperatives can be supported by banks to increaseoutreach. Sponsor banks have a specific responsibility in this regard and need to takeownership for their sponsored RRBs. Unlike other parts of the financial system, the RRBswith nearly 14500 branches are concentrated in the regions that are relatively backward andpopulous but where the incremental prospect for business and banking penetration is high.HR, technology and processes and leadership issues need to be addressed if RRBs are tofulfill what is expected from them.Last but not the least, the role of the State Governments in facilitating financial inclusion iscritical. Land settlement rights, computerization of land records, and providing economic andsocial infrastructure with pro-active agricultural extension machinery will greatly help in usingfinancial inclusion for sustainable development. Also leveraging the use of IT by collaborativeefforts between banks and State Governments can prove to be a win win situation.Thank You
