Mr. Chairman, Professor Rao garu; Professor I am happy to be here again in the midst of friends belonging to the academic community oftwin cities. In particular, I am honoured that Professor Hanumantha Rao is presiding overtoday’s session. A lecture-date with CESS implies that I prepare carefully on a topic ofcontemporary interest to the research community in the broad area of economics. During mylast visit a couple of years ago, I spoke on the subject of capital flight when affectionatePeddaguru Shri.Vithal presided over the meeting. Today, I intend speaking on Inflation inIndia. Being a central banker, the preoccupation on my part with price-stability is onlynatural. The current state of inflation is an added reason why the theme of inflation has beenWhenever the annual inflation rate has gone up sharply, say into double-digit, there has beenhuge hue and cry, often leading to demands that the Reserve Bank of India should take actionnecessary to bring price levels down. On the other hand, when inflation drops below five percent, there is rarely in view an open support for RBI’s policies. At present, the rate ofinflation is at a very low level, and perhaps it is time to see that price-stability is alsomaintained on a sustained basis.Inflation is one of those economic phenomena that affects every citizen, almost everyday;yet, perceptions in India are often at variance with reality. For example, people often ask as tohow during periods of falling inflation, prices still go up. A moment’s reflection makes itclear that when inflation is down, it is only the rate of increase in prices that is down. On theother hand, when inflation rate edges up, not all are satisfied. For, while nominal incomes goup, the real worth of incomes is eroded with price-increase. These instances show howpopular perceptions are at variance with the essence of the phenomenon.Currently, a great deal of popular attention is being paid to issues relating to inflation and itsmeasurement in India, than ever before, reflecting some new realities. First, with thedismantling of most administered interest-rates, the link between inflation and interest rate is,relative to the past, more closely tracked by savers, investors and financial intermediaries.True, in the past also, there were links, more in the case of deposit rates than lending rates,but in the recent past, there is greater sensitivity to the link. Second, with the progressiveopening up of the economy, the integral link between inter-country interest rate differentials,inflation rate differentials and the forward exchange premia are closely observed whenviewing exchange rate movements. Third, in a liberalised trading regime and marketdetermined exchange rate regime, and also if the country has to allow the economy to beglobalised” or more open, inflation-tracking is critical in terms of maintainingcompetitiveness of domestic industry. Fourth, the market participants carefully track inflationdata to anticipate and assess monetary policy changes, in view of the recent trends in theAt the outset, it would be useful to clarify the headline measure of inflation in India. This willbe followed by a review of inflation in India from the 1950s to the present times. Themeasurement issues, with special reference to the recently observed widening of divergencebetween the two frequently used measures of inflation in India would be elaborated. Then thediscussion would turn to the concept of core inflation and its relevance to India. Somemanner of articulation of such policy changes.“chosen for introspection today.Venkataramiah and friends, Hanumantha India : Status and Issues* Inflation in exploratory analysis is attempted on the apparent puzzle of the current low inflation beingaccompanied by relatively high growth in money supply. The dilemmas in monetary policy inthe context of inflation will be referred to before giving a comprehensive treatment to therelevance of inflation targeting in our country. The concluding part will present an agenda forresearch and debate on inflation in India.On the MeasureThe variation in the price level in India can be measured in terms of the Wholesale PriceIndex (WPI), or the Implicit National Income Deflator (NID) or the Consumer Price Index(CPI).The WPI is the main measure of the rate of inflation often used in India. The WPI is availablefor all commodities’ and for major groups, sub-groups and individual commodities. The basicadvantage of this measure of inflation is its availability at high frequency, i.e. on weekly basiswith a gap of about two weeks, thereby enabling continuous monitoring of the price situationfor policy purposes. This index does not cover non-commodity producing sectors viz.The national income deflator, on the other hand, is a comprehensive measure but statisticallyderived from national accounts data released by the Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) asa ratio of GDP at current prices to GDP at constant prices. Since it encompasses the entirespectrum of economic activities including services, the scope and coverage of nationalincome deflator is wider than any other measure. At present, the GDP deflator is availableonly annually with a long lag of over one year and hence has very limited use for the conductThe important measure at the point of consumption is the consumer price index for industrialworkers (CPI-IW) which is meant to reflect the cost of living conditions and is computed onthe basis of the changes in the level of retail prices of selected goods and services on which ahomogeneous group of consumers spend the major part of their income. Its coverage isbroader than the other indices of CPI like the CPI for agricultural labourers (AL) and the CPIfor urban non-manual employees (UNME). Besides, CPI-AL and CPI-UNME are notconsidered as robust national inflation measures because they are designed for specificgroups of population with the main purpose of measuring the impact of price rise on rural andWhile each of the measures has its advantages as well as weaknesses, the selected measure ofinflation should broadly capture the interplay of effective demand and supply forces in theeconomy at frequent intervals. This will be facilitated if the price indices have a highperiodicity of release, and it is in this sense that WPI is superior to CPI. WPI’s coverage ofcommodities is also high. While services do not come under the ambit of WPI, the coverageof non-agricultural products is better in WPI than CPI, making WPI less volatile to relativeprice changes as against the CPI. The coverage of tradable items, essentially manufacturedproducts (weight = 57.06 per cent) is higher in the case of WPI whereas the coverage of non-tradables like services pertaining to education, medical care and recreation are more in thecase of CPI-IW. The weekly periodicity of WPI with a lag of a fortnight often coincides withthe release of banking and money supply data on 14 day basis (referred to as fortnightly forconvenience) which in turn is available with a similar lag. The correlation between the annualurban poverty.of policy.services and non-tradable commodities.average variation of M3 (broad money) and WPI on a relatively long time horizon is strongerthan that between M3 and CPI-IW, a statistical relationship that has been corroborated byseveral econometric studies on the subject. In fact, some studies indicated that the long-termelasticity of WPI with respect to M3 is close to unity. A number of recent empirical worksbased on the long-run equilibrium analysis have found that both these series are to a fair extent, thus providing evidence on the WPI being more amenable to monetary policychanges. The Report of the Working Group on Money Supply (1998) also used WPI asinflation measure and found that the nominal money demand equation showed a long-runFinally, some internal studies in RBI (by Deepak Mohanty, Abha Prasad and Prakash) indicate that, though there has been some divergence in the annual movement of thetwo indices and GDP deflator over the longer term, there has not been any secular orsystematic bias. The analyses of the three measures of inflation for the period 1950-51 to1995- 96, display broadly similar trends. A long term time-series data of the three indices viz.WPI, GDP-deflator, and CPI-IW reveal that there have been leads and lags involved duringcertain phases, which tend to get evened-out over long time spans, but there has not been anysecular or systematic bias. The cross-correlation between the three indices comes close to onereaffirming the belief that any one of these could be used to study the phenomenon ofinflation in the Indian economy. No doubt, there are some interesting developments afterNevertheless the choice of WPI as a headline measure appears justifiable on grounds ofconvenience as well as analytical reasoning. First, the WPI with a weekly frequency has jut atwo weeks lag as against the monthly frequency of CPI-IW with a lag of two months.Secondly, the commodity coverage in WPI is wider than that in CPI. Thirdly, WPI iscomputed on all-India basis whereas CPI is just constructed for specific centres and thenaggregated to get the all-India index. Because of this feature WPI is more easily understoodby majority of public.Review of Inflationary Trends in IndiaIn general, among the developing countries, India’s inflation performance would beconsidered as satisfactory, as would be evident from the study already mentioned. During thefifties, in fact, the average decadal rate of inflation was very low at 1.7 per cent, with the ratevarying in a wide range from a negative value of 12.5 per cent to a positive value of 13.8 percent. The minimum inflation at a negative rate in 1952-53 was in response to the bumperagricultural production in that year while the maximum inflation rate in 1956-57 was mainlyDuring the sixties, the average decadal inflation edged up to 6.4 per cent. The inflationarypressures started mounting from 1962-63, on account of the Chinese War in 1962 andunsatisfactory supply position. The Pakistan war in 1965, and the famine conditions during1965-66 aggravated the situation further. The maximum inflation at 13.9 per cent wasrecorded for the year 1966-67, but the minimum inflation rate of (-) 1.1 per cent was in 1968-The average inflation rate during the seventies was still higher at 9.0 per cent. The maximuminflation recorded in the year 1974-75 at 25.2 per cent was mainly attributed to the failure of69 attributed primarily to the bumper agricultural production in the preceding year.attributed to demand pressures, especially investment demand, both public and private.1995-96, but this study did not capture them.Anupamprice elasticity close to unity.cointegratedkharif crops in 1972-73 as also to the hike in crude oil prices in 1973. The minimum inflationrate for the decade at (-) 1.1 per cent was recorded in the following year, i.e. 1975-76, inresponse to the substantive anti-inflationary measures taken by the government. The year1979-80, however, witnessed a strong resurgence of inflationary tendencies due mainly topoor agricultural output and the second hike in international oil prices. The decade was themost tumultuous as far as the price situation was concerned.During the eighties, the decadal average inflation moved down somewhat to 8.0 per cent.What is more significant is that variation in prices was small as compared to any of thepreceding decades. The highest inflation rate for the decade was at 18.2 per cent in 1980-81and the minimum inflation rate was at 4.4 per cent for 1985-86.The period 1990-91 to 1997-98 witnessed a resurgence of inflationary tendencies with four ofthe seven years showing price rise between 10 to 15 per cent. Following the Gulf crisis of1991, the first half of the decade was characterised by double-digit inflation – the soleexception being 1993-94 with an inflation rate of 8.4 per cent. From 1995-96 to 1997-98,there was a reversal of trend, as reform measures began to show positive impact on prices,Thus, India recorded relatively satisfactory levels of inflation since, for the entire period ofanalysis, i.e. 1950-51 to 1997-98, the average rate of inflation working out to 6.7 per cent andthe modal value of distribution of inflation rates lying between 5 to 10 per cent. The inflationrate has also been far less volatile than in most developing countries, with standard deviationat 6.6 and the rate having crossed the 15 per cent mark on only four occasions during the lasthalf a century or so. Moreover, the high pressures of inflation were felt on almost alloccasions, due to exogenous shocks like oil price hike, gulf crisis, wars, etc. and domesticsupply shocks such as adverse monsoon conditions. However, it is possible to suggest thatprogressively, over the period, impact of monsoon conditions on volatility in prices is gettingincreasingly moderated perhaps due to expansion of irrigated agriculture as also buffer stockoperations.Besides, the changes in administered prices had an impact on the timing of price increases inthe sense that variability could have been moderated under some circumstances. Finally, andperhaps, importantly, monetary policy did not appear to have been a major cause for the fewexamples of high inflation.In this context, some elements of caution are necessary here. First, though the average for theentire period is 6.7 per cent, the average for the past 30 years is much higher at 8.66 per cent.Second, during recent years, international inflation rates are drifting downwards. Third,though money supply may not have started the inflationary spiral in India, passiveThe Current StatusIt is well recognised that, viewed in the light of the experience of the recent past, the year1998-99 saw high inflation rates in most months. However, by the fiscal year-end, on a point-to-point basis, the rise in the wholesale price index showed a marked deceleration. The point-to-point inflation rate declined to 4.8 per cent in 1998-99 from 5.3 per cent in 1997-98.However, inflation rate on the basis of the average of weeks was higher at 6.9 per cent inaccommodation could have contributed to sustaining inflation at a higher rate.and the average inflation rate for the nineties up to 1997-98 was 9.0 per cent.1998-99 compared with 4.8 per cent in 1997-98. The weighted contributions of majorcommodity groups to the total price rise during 1998-99, on an average basis, indicate thatthe primary articles group contributed to the maximum with a share of 56.8 per cent whichwas substantially higher than that of 23.7 per cent in the preceding year. The share of fuelgroup declined to 6.8 per cent in 1998-99, from 29.1 per cent in 1997-98. The contribution of manufactured products declined to 39.5 per cent in 1998-99 from 47.6 percent in 1997-98. A noticeable aspect of the price situation during 1998-99 was that theweekly annualised rate of inflation as measured by WPI consistently remained higher duringThe rate of inflation measured in terms of point-to-point variation in the Consumer PriceIndex for Industrial Works (CPI-IW) registered an increase of 8.9 per cent in 1998-99, closeto the rate of 8.3 per cent in 1997-98. But, with the increase of CPI-IW remaining high formost part of the year and falling towards the end of the year, consumer inflation measured interms of average of months of CPI-IW almost doubled to13.1 per cent in 1998-99 from 6.8per cent in 1997-98. It was also higher than the average of 10.2 per cent during the period1990-91 to 1996-97. The trends in WPI and CPI-IW revealed significant divergence betweenthe two, with the difference between the wholesale price inflation and consumer price1998-99, thus, was somewhat extraordinary for several reasons.First the divergences in various measures of inflation, WPI vis-à-vis CPI and average vis-à-vis point to point, are significant.Second, the traditional villains of inflation such as war, oil price hike and failure of monsoonThird, there was a fairly rapid reversal of inflationary pressures making the episode anunusually short duration one.Fourth, for justifiable reasons, aspects covering the construction of the indices were subject toserious questioning.As regards, 1999-2000, for the week ended July 24, 1999, the annual inflation rate measuredas point–to-point variation in the WPI was 1.19 per cent. During the financial year i.e. uptoJuly 24, the rise of 1.16 per cent in WPI on a point-to-point basis, was lower than that of 4.78per cent recorded during the same period of the previous year. The weighted contribution ofmajor commodity groups show that primary articles group continue to have maximum sharein the price increase during the year so far. On an average basis also, the inflation rate duringthe current financial year so far at 1.19 per cent was lower than that of 4.85 per cent duringthe same period in 1998-99.The rate of inflation measured in terms of CPI-IW increased by only 1.4 per cent duringApril-June 1999, much lower than the increase of 5.0 per cent during the first three months of1998-99. On an average basis, the increase was of a lower order of 1.0 per cent as comparedto 6.7 per cent during 1998-99.Practical Issues in the Measurement of Inflationwere conspicuous by their absence.inflation being in a wide range of 3 to 12 percentage points during the year.the major part of the year than that of the preceding year.weightedIt is now obvious that none of the existing measures provides a truly reliable gauge ofinflation at any point of time. An index can be constructed for different baskets of goods andservices, with varying weights, to cover different sets of consumers or locations. There is thusno all purpose, all-inclusive, universally valid index. Operationally, there could be problemsthat distort an index. For example, the basket of goods and weights may be held constant fortoo long. Indeed, over a period, some of the goods may go out of production. In any case,change in quality of goods cannot be captured, although it is apparent that the quality ofmany industrial goods has been improving. Further, the government machinery that collectsthe data, even with best of efforts, would not be able to capture the offers of discounts atThe widening gap between the inflation rates based on the WPI and CPI-IW in recent periodshas raised several statistical issues, which were subjected to a sharp scrutiny by and Sharmishtha Mitra (RBI Occasional Papers of December 1998). The main points of thisstudy are worth From the coverage point of view, the dissimilarity in the baskets for CPI-IW and WPI is veryprominent. As I mentioned at the beginning, the basket for WPI includes a wide-spectrum ofraw materials, intermediate and final products, which are traded in wholesale markets butservices are excluded from its scope. On the other hand, CPI-IW covers final products andservices consumed by industrial workers in retail market. While price quotations for WPIrelate to the wholesale level, those for CPI-IW pertain to retail prices. Hence, it is notsurprising that they differ to some extent. However, consumption being the end use of alleconomic activities, price changes in wholesale markets (WPI) are expected to be reflected inprice changes in retail markets (CPI-IW). Changes in CPI-IW may also have some cost-pushimpact on WPI when changes in wages occur due to indexation of dearness allowances. Thusdespite the several differences, conceptually there would be some cause-and-effect typerelationship between the two series. At the same time, some degree of difference betweenIn this background, the main concern should really be whether the gap is wideningsignificantly or not. For better understanding the gap is normalised by the authors aftermaking suitable adjustment for the rising trends in both the series. Some preliminarystatistical investigation not only indicates widening divergence between the two series sinceMay 1995 but also seems to have raised some questions on the stability of long-termrelationship between them. The study, however, concludes that the short-term relationshipbetween CPI-IW and WPI based on common commodities does not appear to be disturbed.Therefore, the study suggests that the recent disturbance in the short-run relationship betweenthe actual CPI-IW and WPI is mostly attributable to some peculiar price behaviour ofuncommon items, weighting diagrams etc. This implies the need for a detailed survey of theAt a somewhat non-technical level, there are some striking reasons why the two indices arenot representative measures of inflation. First, the coverage, especially the exclusion ofservices-sector from WPI, given the rapid increase in the share of services in GDP. Second ,biases on account of the base year and weights are predominant. Third, because of currencyof the two indices for too long a period, ensuring quality and consistency in data havesuffered and led to poor representation of the phenomenon.behaviour of individual commodities in both the market segments.CPI-IW and WPI may be unavoidable due to difference in their base years.summarising here.G.P.Samantaretail level.Core InflationIt is against the background and in the context of inflation-targeting by some central banks,there has been some interest in developing the concept of core-inflation, in preference to aheadline measure such as the WPI or CPI. This is particularly relevant in so far theframework of monetary policy is concerned. The RBI in Box III.4 of its Annual Report for1997-98 has given a brief description of the concept, features and practices of core-inflation.The permanent component is often called the `underlying’ rate of inflation or the `core’ rateof inflation. It is not the current rate of inflation, comprising transient components, but thefuture underlying rate of inflation, which should be the concern of monetary policy.Measurement of the underlying or core rate of inflation, however, does involve some amountof judgement or discretion.The Box describes the economic rationale for considering the core rate of inflation in theframework of monetary policy which is governed by the fact that it is this rate, beingpermanent in nature, which is fully anticipated by economic agents and hence, incorporatedinto their decision making processes thereby making it output-neutral. Viewed from anotherangle, it is the existence of the permanent component, which imparts downward rigidity tothe measured rate of inflation in the event of a positive supply shock. Therefore, it would bevaluable for the economy to ensure that permanent or core rate of inflation is reduced. Theobjective of reducing the rate of inflation as the prime objective of monetary policy should beOn the application of core inflation in India, some research work has already been initiated inRBI and the latest RBI Occasional Paper, Summer of 1999, has a paper by G.P.Samanta. Thepaper recognises the practical issue of eliminating the noise or supply (transient) relatedcomponents of traditionally used price index based measures of inflation. In the Indiancontext, exclusion-based measures appear to be intuitively appealing. Four exclusion-basedmeasures - exclusion from headline measure, i.e. WPI, are examined and the measure whichappears least volatile, according to the analysis by Samanta, is the one that excludes PrimaryFood Articles, Primary Non-Food Articles and Administered commodities from the WPIbasket. Needless to say, as the author admits, this is an emerging issue and further research isrequired before arriving at any meaningful conclusions that could satisfy both the theoreticalMoney Supply and InflationIn some ways, the underlying logic behind the concept of core-inflation could be utilised toexplain the so-called current puzzle of low current rate of inflation and the relatively highgrowth in money supply. First, as already mentioned, supply shocks played a dominant rolein setting the inflation trend during the major part of 1998-99 and when the suppliesimproved in the subsequent months, a correction followed. The bumper crop recorded in rice,wheat, oilseeds, sugarcane, pulses and major fruits and vegetables in 1998-99 must have ledto early supply conditions in some of these commodities, driving down their prices from thelast year.expectations and operational parameters.viewed against this perspective.Secondly, the low primary articles inflation may also be contributing to the reduction in themanufacturing inflation by bringing down the input cost of industries which are dependent onThirdly, increased import competition due to trade liberalisation coupled with sharp declinein world manufacturing prices could be contributing to low manufacturing inflation throughFourthly, positive productivity shocks in the post liberalisation period due to competitivepressures might be contributing to improved price competition of industries in the domesticFifthly, money and inflation relationship also needs to take into account the transmission lagof monetary impulses, which can be both long and variable. Preliminary evidence in theIndian context shows that the full impact of a monetary shock on the inflation rate can take along time to Sixth, the importance of money supply in explaining the long term price movement in theIndian economy may be appreciated from the fact of the existence of a fairly stable moneydemand function. Majority of the recent studies in the Indian context including the RBI’sWorking Group on Money Supply (1998) which threw light on this subject have found thatinflation rate over a long period is reasonably explained by growth in money supply. Thesestudies indicate that in the short run the price effect of money supply may deviate from thebehaviourHowever, it is necessary to recognise that the evolving transmission mechanism consequentupon financial sector reform would imply certain changes in the nature and magnitudes of theunderlying relationship between the growth in money supply and inflation, matters on whichfurther and intense research and analysis is required.For the past three years, i.e. 1996-97 to 1998-99, the growth in broad money averaged 17.3per cent per annum and the growth in real GDP 6.3 per cent and the inflation rate 6.0 percent. The way the rural economy is getting monetised and the rural demand is increasing overtime in the recent past , it is not unrealistic to conjecture a slight shift in the sectoral demandfor money. Keeping in view the fact that there is excess capacity in the economy, a shift insectoral demand for money need not be inflationary. It can be argued that short-termdeviation in the relationship among money , output and prices ought not to be construed as abreakdown of the inherent linkages. Yet, there are a number of recent developmentswarranting intense research and analysis of the evolving relationships between growth inmoney supply and inflation.With complexities in statistical measurement of inflation, evolving relationships betweenmoney supply and prices, uncertain time lags in such relationship, conduct of monetarypolicy is a challenging task. On top of the normal growth cycles, our economy is undergoinga wide ranging and deep structural transformation, adjusting simultaneously to internationalprice pressures. In addition, 1998-99 was characterised by extraordinary adversedevelopments in the external sector and domestic uncertainties. When the headline measureof inflation indicated pressures, judgements were called for in fine tuning monetary policy.The actual stance taken and vindication thereof is public-knowledge. However, for purpose of , especially when the economy is subject to supply shocks. long-run equilibrium realise, and the lag could even exceed two years.market.cost saving technological innovation and reduced mark up in domestic industries.agricultural raw materials.record, it is worthwhile recalling extracts of Dr.Jalan’s Monetary Policy Statement of April1999 :“Developments during the past year illustrate the dilemma faced by monetary authorities in asituation of uncertain macro-economic outlook in respect of inflation and growth, alongsidehigh monetary growth. When the current rate of inflation is low, a high rate of growth inmoney supply nevertheless warrants tightening of liquidity (and increase in interest rates) inorder to dampen aggregate demand and to avoid potential problems. However, if growth ofoutput is also low, tightening of money supply during a period of relatively low inflation mayresult in a further loss of output. This in turn could result in lower revenue and the need forGovernment to borrow further. A similar dilemma arises when inflation rate acceleratesbecause of supply shocks, which are expected to be temporary. This, for example, was thesituation last year when, until October, inflation was accelerating due to lower availability ofa few primary commodities. The Reserve Bank at that time chose not to tighten monetarypolicy in the expectation that the price risk would reverse itself later in the year whenagricultural supplies improve. In retrospect, this judgement turned out to be correct.However, if it had not, and inflation had accelerated further, monetary policy would haveAttention to the possibility of inflation targeting in India has heightened recently, partly inview of such an approach being adopted by a number of central banks in many industrialcountries and partly because of the analytical rigour behind the approach, as evidenced by thesixth  memorial lecture given by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New ZealandMr.Donald Brash in June this year. Mr. Brash focussed on the relevance of New Zealand’sexperience to developing countries particularly in the context of “fiscal dominance ” ;multiple objectives of monetary policy, especially growth and exchange rate; and lack ofsophistication in inflation-forecasting, inflation-measurement and overall financial system.His main theme was that inflation targeting was in no sense a panacea but a very sensiblepolicy option.In fact, some efforts to address this issue have been in evidence in India for sometime. Dr. paper on “Inflation-targeting; Issues and Relevance for India”. (EPW Jan. 16-23,1999) has recognised that successful inflation targeting requires credibility of the enforcingagency, usually the government and the central bank. Credibility in turn requires that thetarget be chosen carefully. The article reviewed inflation targeting experience so far, the issues related to it and argued for developing an inflation model for India. The conclusionwas that operationally inflation targeting in India should wait until financial sector reformAgenda for the FutureInflation, as a subject, has been a major area of economic-research and public-debate, all overthe world, and particularly so in India, where strong democratic traditions and intellectuals’activism are well rooted. Even so, it may be appropriate to highlight some of the areas thatneed attention at this juncture.agenda is accomplished.analysedR.Kannan’sL.K.JhaInflation Targetingrequired much sharper tightening in the subsequent months of the year.”First, there is a need for working out a national consensus on the acceptable level ofinflation. What may be called inflation-consensus should be followed by an explicit inflation-mandate. The RBI Annual Report for 1993-94 argued “It is here that there is need for abroader national consensus before prescribing a mandate for a central bank”.“ History shows that successful monetary policy requires not only a high degree ofoperational freedom for the central banks but also a clear enunciation of the dominantobjective of policy…However, there has to be a general consensus on the need to keep theDr. Rangarajan, now Governor of Andhra Pradesh had made scholarly and policycontributions to the concept of an optimum level of inflation for India. In 1997,Dr.Rangarajan indicated his views as “ Keeping the price and growth objectives in view, the money supply growth should be somodulated that the inflation rate comes down initially to 6 to 7 per cent and eventually to 5 toStudies by Dr. Vasudevan, our Executive Director in RBI also establish that at the inflationrate of about 6 per cent  GDP growth has been found to be optimal in the case of India. Morerecent studies by Dr.  and  of RBI confirm this view and also indicate thatinflation rates below the estimated threshold may have some positive effect on growth.Personally, I believe that rapid changes in world situation, and rapid process of ourintegration with the rest of the world could be pushing down this threshold level - down fromsix per cent.The Economic Survey (1997-98) of Government of India gave some official indication of theacceptable level of inflation when it “ As world inflation rates are currently of the order of 0 to 3 per cent, 4 to 6 per cent inflationThe Tarapore Committee on Capital Account Convertibility recommended a mandated rate ofinflation for the three-year period 1997-98 to 1999-2000 in the average of 3 to 5 per cent. Inbrief, there is a growing consensus on acceptable level of the inflation-rate, but this needs tobe better articulated, formalised and perhaps converted in due course into a mandate fromGovernment to RBI and, in the process to all economic agents. This approach should have,Second, the immediate task of weights in regard to Wholesale Price Index is beingaddressed by  Committee. Similar effort in respect of Consumer Price Index, it isunderstood, is under contemplation by Government of India. The issues relating to base year,coverage and weights have to be resolved. A detailed survey of the behaviour of individualcommodity prices in both the wholesale price segment and retail price segment wouldperhaps help analyse changes in their behaviour in the past. The National StatisticalCommission proposed to be established as per the budget speech of Finance Minister couldHashimamong other things, a significant impact on inflationary expectations in India.rate could be regarded as an acceptable level for India at present.”stated :Dr.Joshi Kannan6 per cent. That indeed must be the goal of monetary policy.”follows :inflation rate around a certain level”.In fact, the RBI’s Annual Report for 1996-97 says:consider giving priority to this item as part of measures for a systematic revamping of theThird, analytical work on defining appropriate “Core Inflation” for India may be worthexploring. A measure of core inflation has two distinct uses for monetary policy purposes.While one role is in setting or formulating policy, the second role is in providing policyaccountability. Because of these two uses, many central banks are interested in estimatingcore inflation. But, it should be equally recognised that different methods used to estimatecore inflation give various estimates and hence it is very difficult to have a precise and uniquedefinition, which is universally acceptable. Hence, the need for further research on definingcore-inflation, appropriate for India.Fourth, in analysing inflation, we need also to look at the asset price inflation,particularly in the context of financial market liberalisation. In India, the asset prices are notcovered in both the indices of inflation indicators despite their increasing importance in termsof one of the important channels for the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.However, there are significant difficulties in constructing an appropriate index for thispurpose.Fifth, analytical work on inflation-targeting needs to be continued, though immediateoperational relevance may not be very apparent. The experience of other countries especiallydeveloping countries should be studied carefully before embarking on this.Sixth, well informed debate on the issue of inflationary expectations is necessary totake a view on the computation of real interest rates. From the view point of a proactivepolicy, it is necessary to have a pragmatic assessment on the anticipated inflation rate. Thereare many ways in which this can be gauged and perhaps we can have as many techniques asthere are economists. In my lecture on `Interest Rates in India: Status and Issues’ delivered atthe inaugural conference of Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association ofIndia (FIMMDAI) in June 1998, I had “ We need to add an important caveat here, that calculations of real rates of interest shouldtake into account the distributed lagged effect. Illustratively, the nominal interest rate in year needs to be adjusted by taking into account a five year moving average of the inflationrates in a year ` t, t-1, t-2, t-3, t-4’ with weights of say 5, 4, 3, 2, 1. In other words, the presentt-4’ “.I had given one such simple illustration of deriving the anticipated inflation rate using aweighted average inflation rate with a distributed lag. While there may legitimately be somedrawbacks to this approach, we need to improve on this. In any case, it is too simplistic toargue that the latest “year-on-year” inflation rate is the best indicator of the expected inflationSeventh, there are a variety of policy-perspectives that have a bearing on inflation, and thesetoo need to be analysed on an on-going basis. These relate to the evolving role of quantityvariables and rate variables in monetary policy, the changing lags, and the improvements intransmission-mechanisms. The transmission-mechanisms are being enhanced but seriousrigidities such as the interest-rates for Provident Funds, administered small savings etc.persist. Liberalisation of various markets, including agricultural markets cut into rent-marginin commodities. Fiscal policy would be relevant not only in terms of aggregate demandrate.inflation rate has a larger impact than the inflation rate in the year `t’ `emphasised:system.effects through direct and indirect monetisation, but also because of changing composition oftax and expenditure-structure. The fortuitous circumstance of a reduction in POL prices in therecent past indicates the importance of tracking the narrowing gap between domestic andinternational prices. Perhaps we should also have an analytical-construct to differentiatebetween the extent of externally-induced inflation, or for that matter deflation anddomestically induced inflation.Finally, the public-distribution system has its costs but also has its benefits – particularly inTo conclude, our track record on inflation has been satisfactory; and there are good chancesthat we would improve on it if we continue to keep our analytical tools rather sharp andensure the timeliness and coordination especially between fiscal-monetary operations as wellas effectiveness of policy-responses. We in RBI will continue to contribute to analysis andThank you.* Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Centre for Economic and SocialStudies, Hyderabad on August 17, 1999. Dr.Reddy is grateful to Dr.R.Kannan, Shri Deepak Mohanty and ShriMadhusudan Mohanty for their assistance.debate and we are prepared for appropriate policy advice and policy actions.terms of moderating the variability in inflation rate.
