Address by  S P Talwar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of IndiaMy dear friends,The interest in corporate governance is not a new phenomenon and basic elements such as therights and responsibilities of different participants in the life of the corporation have beendealt with in various laws of the country. The term corporate governance has been used in avariety of contexts in recent years, particularly in relation to Boards of companies listed on astock exchange. Many of these issues also have implications for other companies that are notlisted, and these include private companies and Government owned commercial enterprises.This is because governance is at the heart of the role that all boards of directors play, so anunderstanding of what it is about and the issues involved can provide useful insight fordirectors. In United States, the corporate governance issues came to the fore during theheyday of the corporate takeover activity. In contrast, in India, the debate came up mainlydue to corporate failures, serious financial and other irregularities,  dereliction of duties bymanagement etc which led to a growing public distrust of the governance process incorporate sector. The Cadbury Committee Report created a lot of interest in India. Whereasthe corporate governance debate in US had focussed on shareholder rights, the emphasis inthe UK was on structure and processes and accountability. This gave rise to the question as towhom the directors are accountable. While the Cadbury Committee focussed on theresponsibility of executive and non-executive directors for reviewing and reportingperformance to shareholders, this has now been expanded to include parties other thanshareholders such as employees, customers, suppliers and communities. However thedirectors being elected by share holders, are accountable to them but the directors are alsoresponsible for relations with stakeholders. Another more recent occurrence that hashighlighted importance of corporate governance is the financial turmoil in some emergingmarkets and developing countries. The OECD Adhoc Task Force on Corporate Governancehas laid down certain principles of corporate governance. The Principles are intended to assistgovernments both member and non-member in their efforts to evaluate and improve the legal,institutional and regulatory framework for corporate governance in their countries and to giveguidance and suggestions for stock exchanges, investors, corporations and other parties thathave a role in the process of developing good corporate governance. It does not seek toestablish a global standard but has identified some common elements that underlie goodcorporate governance. These include the right of shareholders, equitable treatment ofshareholders, role of stakeholders, standards of disclosure and transparency and the role ofthe Board.Banks and Corporate Governance:Banks play a vital role in the economy and the continued strength and stability of the bankingsystem is a matter of general public interest and concern both in regard to its linkages withthe real sector and for providing a payment and settlement system. Banks, as corporateentities possess certain unique characteristics. As financial intermediaries, they are highlyleveraged organisations and until capital standards were introduced, banks could expandbusiness without any linkage with capital. Even with the capital ratios now prescribed, thegearing compared to other entities is significant. Another characteristic is that banks cancontinue to fund their operations only so long as they enjoy the confidence of the financialmarkets. Credit institutions are linked to each other through a complex chain of inter-bankConference on Corporate Governance in Banking and Financerelationships which in the event of difficulty become mechanisms for the acceleration ofcontagion. The failure of a major institution or a group of institutions regardless of thereason, is liable to set off through contagion the failure of other institutions and open seriousrisks in both the banking and financial systems. To protect small depositors, there also existsin most countries a deposit insurance/ protection scheme. While the deposit insurance systemmechanism is an important factor in the stability of the banking system it can haveunintended effects in terms of the moral hazard involved both from the depositor’s angle andthe institution covered.Depositor protection and public policy considerations have therefore brought  banks within acomprehensive regulatory and supervisory framework. The ultimate power on which theauthority of most supervisors is based is the power to authorise or licence an entity to conducta banking business and to withdraw such authorisation/licence. In order to qualify for andretain a banking licence, entities must comply with certain regulatory requirements.Regulators follow both quantitative and qualitative approaches. Among the quantitativemethods, the main pillar of prudential regulation is capital adequacy. Other quantitativemethods basically are prudential limits on risk taking such as liquidity requirements, limits onforeign exchange exposures, risk concentration limits etc. Banking is however becomingcomplex and it has been recognised that there is need to attach importance to qualitativestandards such as internal controls and risk management, composition and role of the Boardand disclosure standards. In India therefore during  the last few years, we have initiatedseveral steps towards corporate governance. Besides RBI’s own supervisory system both off-site and on-site, external auditors play a vital role in the governance and maintenance of theoverall soundness of the bank.The increasing interest in corporate governance is also due to certain other developmentssuch as increasing participation of the public shareholders in public sector banks, the entry ofnew private banks and the need to access capital markets by all banks.  These developmentsrequire banks to establish credible and widely accepted corporate governance arrangements,if they have to attract capital particularly global capital. While the generally acceptedprinciples of corporate governance would also apply to banks, in view of their unique statusand safety nets provided to them, certain principles of corporate governance require areorientation.While shareholders of banks enjoy the same rights as other shareholders, in view of theimportance of having “fit and proper” management, transfers of shares beyond a thresholdrequire acknowledgement of RBI in addition to compliance with other laws. One of the basicrequirements is that persons who control and manage the business of a bank must be men ofintegrity, above board, trustworthy and must possess appropriate skills and experience.Similarly in the case of the new private sector banks, the promoters are required to retaintheir share of 40% for five years  in order to ensure that they have a long-term interest in thefinancial viability of the bank. To limit the control, which any one group can have over theoperations of the banks, no person can exercise voting rights in excess of 10% in privatesector banks. At the same time, widely held majority shareholding provides the neededchecks and balances in the form of an elected board and control by general body in matters ofstructural nature.(ii) Role of StakeholdersDifferent laws cover the rights of the stakeholders in banking companies – depositors,2Rights of shareholderscreditors and employees and these laws are respected and enforced. Banks also owe a duty tothe communities and their activities should be in public interest. The disclosure andtransparency measures ensure that all stakeholders have the necessary information that theyrequire.(iii) Disclosure and transparencyDisclosure and transparency are key pillars of a corporate governance framework becausethey provide all the stakeholders with the information necessary to judge whether theirinterests are being taken care of. We see transparency and disclosure as an important adjunctto the supervisory process as they facilitate market discipline of the banks. The task ofmoving towards greater disclosure in India was taken up in 1992 when the formats of thefinancial statements were revised and enlarged. Since the liberalisation measures introducedin the beginning of this decade, the extent of disclosure has been enhanced gradually with theprocess accelerating in the last couple of years. The banks have now to disclose all significantdata such as Capital, (Tier I and Tier II), capital adequacy ratio, percentage of net Non-performing Advances (NPAs) to net advances, provisions towards NPAs and  investments,critical operating ratios like interest, non-interest income and operating profit to workingfunds and  return on assets. From March 2000, banks will have to disclose among othersmaturity pattern of assets/liabilities, foreign currency assets and liabilities; movements inNPAs and associated provisions and lending exposure to sensitive sectors as may beannounced from time to time. With these the disclosure standards in India would generally beon par with international standards.In order to provide easy access to the disclosed capital, asset quality and performanceindicators, data for individual bank and the banking system as a whole are published by the(iv) Responsibilities of the BoardThe governance of banks rests with the board of directors. For this reason much of the debatehas been focussed on the structure and composition of the board, the board procedures andthe responsibility of the board. In the light of deregulation in interest rates and the greaterautonomy given to banks in almost all operational matters, the role of boards of directors ofeven the public sector banks have become more significant. The Board should ensure that thebank is run with integrity, complies with all legal requirements and regulatory standards andconducts its business in accordance with high ethical standards. Boards have been required tolay down policies in critical area such as investments, loans, asset-liability management andmanagement and recovery of NPAs.  They have to ensure that proper control systems existand are functioning and that the operations of bank are conducted with due regard toprudence including the assurance that necessary provision are made and all statutory andother directives are complied with.  The RBI has also directed the banks to set up AuditCommittees of the Board.  The Audit Committee is charged with the responsibility ofensuring the efficacy of the entire internal control and audit functions in the bank besidescompliance with the Inspection reports of RBI, internal and concurrent auditors.  To ensureboth professionalism and independence of these committees, Chartered Accountant directorson the board of banks are mandatory members and Chairman is not to be part of the AuditCommittee. The RBI through various measures has emphasised the primacy of the Board ofDirectors and its essential role as the instrument of  corporate governance in the affairs of thebank.   The laws also prohibit connected lending i.e. lending to companies in which directorsare interested. Lending to a bank’s own subsidiaries and affiliates are also subject to3prudential limits and has to be undertaken at market rates.Reserve Bank of India in its annual 'Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India'.Recently, RBI has introduced rating on the banks as part of the CAMELS supervisoryprocess. This takes into account the working and the effectiveness of the Board and itscommittees including the Audit committee, effectiveness of the management in ensuringregulatory compliance and adequacy of control exercised by the Head / Controlling officesNarasimham Committee has recommended that RBI Nominees from the boards of banksshould be withdrawn, as it is perceived to be in conflict with RBI's regulatory and supervisoryrole. In fact, RBI has been withdrawing its nominees from the boards of well managed oldprivate banks.Non-banking finance companies and DFIsAlthough these companies may not be like banks, being financial intermediaries and animportant part of the financial system they are also subject to similar prudential regulations.Certain other regulations have been prescribed by RBI which are specific to the sector.Corporate governance and the role of Banks and DFIs .Banks and development financial institutions in India particularly DFIs have an importantrole in the governance of companies where they have their nominee directors. The role ofthese nominee directors is to protect the interest of the institution and also as a member of theBoard be responsible as any other director. However in certain instances where irregularitieshave been detected, the role of nominee directors has attracted attention.  It is felt in generalthat these nominee directors have a duty to act in the larger public interest. No doubt the issueof nominee directors of term lending institutions and mutual funds has become a contentiousissue.Objectives of corporate governance in banks/financial companiesThere is lot of focus on raising the level of corporate governance in India mainly from theangle of creating shareholder value and also being more transparent in the operations. InIndia particularly if privatisation has to succeed it becomes imperative that the institutions inthe private sector which manage public  savings act with integrity and responsibility andadopt sound business practices.  We have come across certain cases in the non-bank financialsector where the directors have defrauded the depositors. This can affect the confidence ofdepositors and leads to public mistrust. If companies have to attract local and foreign capitalthey have to demonstrate better standards of governance. In this context, I would like toemphasise that in banks and other financial sector companies, financial soundness andviability of the bank should come first.  Once this is assured, the shareholder value will notonly be retained but enhanced.Issues relating to corporate governance(i) It is recognised that independence is the cornerstone of accountability and thatindependent boards are essential to a sound governance structure. In India in mostbanks the CEO and Chairman’s positions is combined. There has been much debateconcerning the wisdom and feasibility of an independent chairman. The CadburyCommittee had stated that there should be a clearly accepted division ofresponsibilities at the head of a company which will ensure a balance of power andauthority such that no one individual has unfettered powers of decision. Where theChairman is also the Chief executive it is essential that there should be a strong andindependent element on the board with a recognised senior member. The US4besides ensuring asset quality and profitability.Corporate Governance Core Principles has also addressed this issue. It states that asubstantial majority of the board should consist of directors who are independent.Where the CEO  also chairs the Board he is clearly more powerful than the Board. Ithas therefore suggested that when the chair of the board also serves as the company’sCEO the board designates – formally or informally an independent director who actsin a lead capacity to coordinate the other independent directors. In a discussion paperbrought out by Shri S.H. Khan, Chairman, NSE and former Chairman IDBI onCorporate Governance of Financial Institutions, this issue has been raised.According to him “to avoid the concentration of power in the hands of a singleindividual and, in recognition of the pivotal role  of the Chairman in securing goodcorporate governance, it is important that the roles of the Chairman  and of the ChiefExecutive Officer be separated and different individuals appointed to the positions.The Chairman should ideally be a non-executive director of the institution. ”  In too we need to examine how to ensure balance of power and authority where the rolesof CEO and Chairman are combined at the same time not confusing accountability ordisrupting daily operations. Certain board committees should also consist entirely ofindependent directors. The feasibility of  compensation pattern in banks in the form ofcash and stock may also become relevant in  future. One of the principles of sound banking regulation is that “connected lending” shouldnot be permitted i.e. lending by banks to directors or companies in which directors are.  The Banking Regulation Act does not permit such lending .  A similarprovision/regulation does not apply to financial institutions (FIs) and it is possible fordirectors on the board of FIs to continue to enjoy borrowing facilities from the FIs .This needs to be reviewed. The other issue relates to the number of non-executive directors. In public sectorbanks we have currently two whole time directors including CEO and the rest arenon-executive directors and nominee directors. Employee directors are also on theboard .  A suggestion has been made that the number of executive directors should beincreased. The Cadbury Committee has suggested that the board should include non-executive directors of sufficient calibre and number for their views to carry significantweight in the board’s decisions. The Khan discussion paper has recommended thatindependent non executive directors should constitute a majority on the board .Ordinarily, not less than two third of the total strength of the board should be nonexecutive directors .  To ensure that they bring an independent judgement to bear onissues of strategy, performance and standards of conduct, he has suggested that amajority of the non executive directors should be independent of the institution aswell as of the Government. To ensure balance in the composition of the board, it isnecessary that at least three or four directors not exceeding one third of the totalstrength be executive directors .  It will be useful to have the views on these issues Recently, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) issued a statement onmeasures to strengthen the banking system .  One of the measures relating to corporategovernance is to require all local banks to form Nominating Committees within theBoards .  The Nominating Committee will comprise five members of the Board where.  The purpose of theCommittee is to ensure that only the most competent individuals are appointed to theboard and key management position. In India a major challenge is to professionaliseBoard of Directors.5appointments will be made by the board subject to MAS approval(iv)from the participants.(iii)interested(ii)IndiaTo conclude, the new strategy of supervision recognises strong corporate governancefunction supported by competent (executive) management as the first line of defence insupervision of banks and financial institutions. The Reserve Bank of India has appointed thefollowing Working Groups in order to bring about systemic improvements in the financialsector(1) In the light of the Narasimham Committee recommendations relating to urban banks, theRBI has appointed a working group to evolve objective criteria, to determine the need andpotential for organising urban cooperative banks, review the existing entry point normsand the existing policy pertaining to branch licensing and area of operation of urbancooperative banks, to consider measures for determining the future set up ofweak/unlicensed banks and to examine the feasibility of introducing capital adequacynorms for urban cooperative banks and to suggest necessary legislative amendmends toBR Act and Cooperative Societies Act of various states for strengthening the urban(2) Reserve Bank of India has decided to undertake a study of the existing system of DepositInsurance in India and of the need for certain reforms therein as a crucial component ofthe financial sector reforms which are being implemented .  It has accordingly set up ahigh powered Advisory Group.(3) It is proposed to establish a credit information bureau for the collection of  creditinformation relating to borrowers and providing such information to the financial system1 Speech delivered at the programme on “Corporate Governance in Banking and Finance “ organised byAdministrative Staff College of India, Hyd’bad at World Trade Centre, Mumbai6with a view to facilitating better credit risk Management.banking movement.:-
