Reflections on India's Economic Development [Rush Transcript; FederalNews Service, Inc.]This is a rush transcript - hosted on RBI website with the concurrence of the Council on ForeignRelations. The transcript as well as the audio and video of the discussion are also available athttp://www.cfr.org/publication/10763/reflections_on_indias_economic_development_rush_transcript_federal_news_service_inc.htmlY.V. ReddySpeaker:Governor, Reserve Bank of IndiaFrank G. WisnerPresider:Vice Chairman, External Affairs, American International Group, Inc.May 12, 2006Council on Foreign RelationsFRANK G. WISNER: Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. It’s a pleasure towelcome all of you to the Council on Foreign Relations this morning, and achance to talk with and get to know India’s very distinguished Reserve Bankgovernor. It’s a privilege for me personally, having been a long-standing admirerof the governor, and being in business. All of you who know India will rememberthat there virtually is not step you take wisely in India without understanding andhaving a close relationship with the motor wheel of India’s finances, the ReserveBank.Governor, to you, sir, a particularly warm welcome. From those who are drought-stricken, thank you for bringing the rain. We’re very pleased. And I am delightedthat you are with us.Ladies and gentlemen, you have before you today in Governor Reddy one of thegreat figures of India’s finance, a figure of international standing, an educator,and a terrific public servant throughout your life. I believe many of you have hada chance to read the governor’s biography. There isn’t a field of India economics,government economics, that you, Governor, have not touched: the FinanceMinistry, the Commerce Ministry, and your own native state of Andhra Pradesh.I’m also delighted that you bring to this table today international experience fromyour time both with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. But if Istand back and think about you and your career, I remember that your greatcontribution has been your years in the Reserve Bank, both as deputy governorand now as governor since 2003. And it is true to say that every important aspectof the Reserve Bank’s responsibilities you have been directly responsible for,from inflation, foreign exchange management, debt management, every field hasbeen in your grip.I don’t have to tell all of you what a role the Reserve Bank plays in India’s life, bystatute, by tradition, and most of all by the extraordinary professionalism andrespect with which the cadre of the bank and its leadership has forged theinstitutions over the years; its independence, its responsibilities, therefore, in theclassic fields that we ascribe to a reserve bank, central bank, of keeping a sharpeye on the performance of the economy, on the monetary policies of India, oninflation, and on the inflation factors. But also, Governor, you play such a criticalrole in the management of the financial markets, their health, and in financialinstitutions. I know as well, given your experience, that you watch very carefullywhat is going on in the international scene.I am really pleased, therefore, that we will have a chance to talk to you thismorning and listen to you.For those who might not have seen it, Governor Reddy has prepared a verythoughtful paper, which is available at the front desk. If you didn’t pick up a copycoming in, I suggest that you do so when you leave.The governor and I will speak for a few minutes, and then we’ll turn the floor overto you for questions. I would ask you to all please respect Council rules. Thesession today is on the record. But when we come to questions, I would be—Iwould appreciate those who would like to ask a question when you do so, pleaseidentify yourself. Would you also all do the obvious and turn off cell phone orother electronic devices?Governor, again, a very warm welcome from me to an old friend, and from all ofus who are doing business in India, terrific respect for you, your career and theinstitution you’re responsible for.Governor, I thought that we would proceed, as you suggested, directly into anexchange. And I’d like to start with a rather broad question. There isn’t one of uswho’s gathered together today who isn’t struck by the fact that in the last severalyears, India has really emerged. The economy’s taken off. And we’re all struck bythe fact that not only growth rates are high, but this time we look like we’re in afor a good, long cycle of sustainable growth at high levels that is going toprofoundly transform not only the nature of the Indian economy, but will have itsworld impact.And I wonder if you could set the stage for us. Why now? What has happened tospark this move? From the position you sit in, how has India moved to emerge atthis moment in world economic history?Let me start with that and give you an easy one. (Laughter.)Y.V. REDDY: Thank you. Thank you, Ambassador Wisner. I am most grateful toyou, Sir, for your very, very kind remarks. I will do my best to explain whatever Ican, and at times, I will share my confusion with you, frankly, since I know that Iam among friends. Being among friends, one can be free and be frank, I believe.When this issue came up and somebody said, “How is it that India is growing sofast in the recent years?” So I said, “There’s a combination. There is anacceleration of growth and also acceleration of interest in India.” So we are beingnoticed more now than before.It is actually not very recent; if we see the growth pattern, the growth has been 6percent from 1980. During the whole of 1980s, GDP grew at 6 percent. But thedifference between the growth in 1980s and growth in 1990s was that in 1980s,there was only domestic liberalisation, and in a way, it was not sustainablebecause the debt was high, and there was inadequate incentive framework in theeconomy.As a result, there was the debt and oil triggered crisis in 1991. So in 1990s, whatwe did was to make sure that the 6 percent growth was maintained on asustainable basis. That is the main difference between 1980s and 1990s. In the1990s, the growth process became sustainable both because of appropriatemacro policies and also external liberalization. Having done some domesticliberalisation in 1980s, the external liberalisation in the 1990s, and having setright the macro policies, particularly on the exchange rate issues, in the 1990swe continued at 6 percent, but slightly accelerated.Another thing that has happened in the 1990s is because of gradualism, both thepublic sector and private sector within India got their act together, and they wereable to equip themselves to be globally competitive after a period. So by the timewe reached the new millennium, the domestic public sector and private sectorinstitutions, policymakers had the mental makeup and the skills to be able to goon an accelerated path of around 8 percent.So the way I look at it is, it is an acceleration through what I describe as changingbalances. It is not a dramatic move, but the balances keep changing so muchthat the changing balances reinforce the path of reform.That’s how I would describe the Indian growth process.WISNER: It makes sense, it really does.The point I conclude myself is that what we’re looking at today, given thechanges that you described, is a sustainable path, that we’re going to seerelatively high rates of growth for years to come. And therefore, in terms of thosein the market who have to calculate risk, this is a sensible one. But no one is risk-free.Could you think out loud with us for a moment, Governor, about what you thinkwill be the major issues in the years ahead? What will be the tough problems thatIndia will face that will affect her performance?REDDY: I start with the major strength. The major strength of reform in India isthat the reform is in some senses bottoms up. The decentralised private sectorunits and even the decentralised political units are into the mainstream. And youwill have noticed yesterday’s elections in West Bengal, the chief minister whohas been advocating reform has been elected with the higher majority in a statelike West Bengal.WISNER: And he’s a communist.REDDY: Yes, indeed. So that gives a signal of popular backing for the basic logicof reform. So in that sense, the reform process is deep-rooted and it is bottomsup, which gives the strength  way forward.However, the issues I would divide into global and domestic.As far as global issues are concerned, first is the oil. So far, we have been ableto handle the oil issue reasonably well because we are a growing and resilienteconomy. There is a price to be paid which we are paying. But still, the growth isrespectable, so I think that is worth noting.The sudden unwinding of global imbalance is unlikely, but if any disorderlyunwinding were to happen, while we cannot be immune from it, our own analysisof the balance sheet shows that the impact will not be as serious as in the caseof many other countries in this respect.So the third issue which is sort of - which is occasionally there - is the issue ofgrowing protectionism in the context of global imbalances. But that is a matter onwhich we cannot speculate at this point of time. We have to proceed in theassumption that we will always work together because it is in the mutual interest.Having said this from the global perspective, in terms of the domestic issue, Iwould rate development in agriculture as the most critical issue way forward fortwo reasons. One, agriculture, which is growing at 2 percent so far, though itaccounts for around 20 percent of GDP. If we want to reach the double digit inGDP growth, we have to focus on agriculture. There is a second and moreimportant reason - that is about 60 percent of the workforce is dependent onagriculture. During the recent years, agriculture has been growing at 2 per cent,the population is growing roughly at 2 per cent, which means living standardshave tightened for 60 percent of the workforce. And this has been happening foryears. So it is not going to be easy to proceed with this type of situation withoutconsiderable feeling of deprivation.So the way one has to look at it is a combination of development of non-agriculture sector, which will absorb some workforce, but certainly strengtheningof agriculture. Enhanced investments - accelerated public investment,accelerated private investment - and changes in the institutional setting foragriculture will be the biggest challenge and most difficult. So it is agriculture, thisis one reform which should be enabled by the strength we have in non-agriculture so far, and which should be developed in the interest of sustainedstability, both economic, political and even social. I will put that as number one.The second is the fiscal. The fiscal situation is not on the fast track. However, wehave to recognize two important areas which will result in what I call fiscalempowerment. The main difference is, given the nature of the society and thelarge number of poorer people who are inhabiting the country, and theimportance of education, health, public health, we have to incur expenditures onappropriate sectors in terms of quality, which is basically public health, education,governance, etc. So in order to be able to do that, fiscal empowerment, in myview, which we have used this word in the Reserve Bank publications, will needtwo things. One is elimination of subsidies which are not appropriate, andelimination of tax exemptions, which are distortionary. I think if we combine thesetwo, then we should be able to arrive at a very strong fiscal position. Thedirection so far is satisfactory. And from a central bank point of view, I will ratethis as the second most critical aspect.The third, which is well recognized by most of you, and anybody who visits Indiawill be struck by it right away, is improvements in physical infrastructure. Therethe big issue is the regulatory framework, and I believe the government isaddressing this issueSo I will say that these three would constitute the major challenges for themedium term. It may not be exhaustive, but these three appear to be the mostimportant, from my side.WISNER: No, they certainly are. I’d take you back for a second to the fiscalposition. India today, if my memory is correct, has an extremely manageableexternal debt position, but the internal pressures of fiscal expenditure areconsiderable. I don’t remember the exact figure, 80 percent of GDP, the domesticdebt. Is this really manageable? Are tax receipts rising? Is the economy goingfast enough so that the domestic debt does not weigh on the performance ofdomestic financial markets?REDDY: I think your memory is absolutely right, it is about 80 percent. Oneredeeming feature is that the GDP growth is around 8 percent and the fiscaldeficit of the states is coming down, which is one good news in terms of numbersincrementally. And as you know, fiscal is one of those positions - and I am suremost of you know - the fiscal correction is a sensitive medium term issue. Sohandling stock, in a way, is going to be a medium-term issue, partly by thegrowth that is happening, and partly by incrementally handling this problem. Butthe stock also has an impact, as you rightly think, in terms of the forwardmovement in reforms in both external sector and financial sector.The most important thing, we believe, in Indian policy situation is – I alreadymentioned the changing balances - what I would call as harmony, so there is thisbroad harmony between real sector, the fiscal, financial, external, governanceinstitutions. If one was too fast in one way, and the other parts are left behind,there is the potential for imbalance. So in that sense, while the fiscal situation hasnever been a problem of threatening stability - it does not threaten stability - but ithas constrained the growth prospects.More recently, one of the main reasons we have been able to grow faster isbecause the private sector has been able to grow. Apart from deregulation, theresources made available by gradual reduction in the preemption of resources bythe government, on the one hand, and the capital flows, on the other helped. Soon both counts, we have had some relief, and according to our calibrations, withgovernment on the Fiscal Responsibility Budget Management, fiscal situation willbe on a sustainable basis by 2009. And we, the central bank, have been assuredby the government of India that they will deliver consolidation by 2009. And manystate governments have passed similar legislations. A few are on the way. So,personally and institutionally, we are confident that we would complete theprocess of fiscal consolidation by the year 2009-2010. And before that, we do notexpect any issue arising, but we have to make sure that there is a harmoniousliberalisation among various components of the macro-economy.WISNER: Governor, that’s encouraging, a very encouraging signal.Let me take you to one other of the observations you just offered us, and that’sthe issue of infrastructure. Many people in this room will be looking at choices tomake in financing capital flows to India, and India today faces, as you correctlynoted, a daunting prospect in transportation and in power development and in theimprovements in urban infrastructure that are so very clearly on your horizon.Government is talking increasingly about public-private partnerships. How shouldwe understand the concept of public-private partnerships and where we in theprivate sector responsible for financial flows should be thinking of our role in thispartnership?REDDY: Traditionally in India, we have had strong or perhaps virtual monopoly ofour public sector and over much of the infrastructure. Now, when we move, giventhe totality of the situation, including many rights and privileges which accrue tovarious participants, dramatic shift to the private sector will be problematicthough that was attempted in some states; and it was felt that it is good tocombine the public policy assurances with the managerial and technologicalcapabilities of the private sector. That is the type of mix we have opted for. Oneof the major issues of concern very often has been the type of costs we recoverhere. So once there is a public-private partnership, it will be possible to invokemany of the public policy measures to ensure cost recovery.So therefore I think this type of overhang problems as well as the values of thepublic policy issues are managed and facilitated by public-private partnership. Soinevitably where we are moving - and again I repeat the issue of changingbalances - we are moving from a public monopoly, through public-privatepartnership, on to greater role for private sector.So it is a way of  - I would like to clarify - it is a way of gradual vacating of publicsector. The public-private partnership is not meant to reinforce public sector. ThatI would like to clarify.WISNER: Governor, we perhaps can come back to the details of that in amoment, but inherent in your remarks so far this morning has been a veryoptimistic—and correctly so—view of the pace and direction of economic reform,of government’s decisions to encourage market forces to play their role,government to move back, to allow the private sector in India and its foreignpartners to be front and center.Raise the curtain for us. Look down the road over the next couple of years.India’s also an intensely political land, where change must come about on aconsensus basis. What would you predict will be the most important reforms thatwe could anticipate in India over the next several years? Where will the changesbe?REDDY: First, in terms of macro-aggregates, we are already touching domesticsavings close to 30 percent and it is been gradually increasing. Both in terms ofgrowth and investment, we distinguish ourselves in macro-efficiency ascompared to many other Asian countries. So that process is likely to bestrengthened. And the second thing is, in that sense, if we are looking at thegrowth prospect for India, yes, 8 percent seems to be very possible, andacceleration should not be ruled out.As far as the stability is concerned, I will again dwelve into political, overalleconomic and financial stability.In terms of political, the political system’s stability, as you will note, this differencebetween political stability and political system stability. Any Party A or B may ormay not be in power now or before, but together, every political party in India hasbeen a part of central government or has been a part of state government. So thepolitical system stability is the second dynamic factor.The third dynamic factor and that with particular relevance for foreign investors isincreasing enthusiasm of the provincial governments to attract foreigninvestments. There is a competition among the provincial governments to attractprivate investment  so that they will be able to ensure physical infrastructure andgood governance.And therefore I will say the biggest, the most important reform that is likely tohappen in the next few years will be at the state level, and that if you are lookingfor a tipping point for India’s economy, my personal view is, tipping point willhappen in the northern states  of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar and as you will noticefrom the recent elections in East also.So once these states move which have lot of people and have a very strongdemographic dividend in the next three decades and there is an awarenessamong the state governments there is a tipping point. So if one is looking for thetipping point as far as India is concerned that will occur in states of Bihar andUttar Pradesh. The growth of north Indian states start going up is key, becausethe reform and the public-private partnership and understanding is pretty well-rooted in the south, is well-rooted in the west, and there is a beginning in east.So I would say that in terms of the sectors, immediate priority is infrastructureand in the next two to three years, the financial sector and the real economy - thefinancial sector will follow real sector now. First priority will have to beinfrastructure, which includes physical infrastructure, and followed by the realsector, I would say, would perhaps be the sequencing.WISNER: Respecting the fact that you are India’s chief regulator of the financialsector, can you, within that constraint, describe how you see changes will occurin the financial sector, in the banking sector, in other aspects of the financialsector? What should we anticipate?REDDY: I would say in terms of priorities, insurance sector will have to  grow(laughter), because of the simple reason that given the extent of economicactivity, demographic situation and the huge workforce getting in, we haveactually no insurance worth the name until recently. So it is one area where thereis maximum convergence between the global interest, global expertise and thedomestic requirements. I would place insurance as number one.Second will be pensions. The pension is virtually restricted to government, theorganized sector, which covers barely about 6 to 7 percent of the workforce. Andthen the way we look at it now is, there is increasing self-employment that ishappening in India. The growth of services sector also is an indication of thenumber of self-employed people, and we do not have much of an institutionalmechanism of insurance for that.The third is that there is a convergence between the way the funds shall beraised from insurance and pension, because there’s some sort of long-termcontractual savings. They will fit in beautifully with the current requirements forfinancing infrastructure developments. So I would say that these two will have tobe, and they are, on the priority item.As far as the banking sector is concerned, I now say we are quite lucky in thesense that we have a number of foreign banks, and they are doing anoutstanding job in terms of contributing to our financial sector development. Well,the foreign bank branches account for 7 percent of the banking assets in India,but they account for 60 percent of the off-balance-sheet exposures. Theyaccount for over 40 percent of the foreign exchange markets, both for thecustomers and inter-bank, whereas they account for only 7 percent  in terms ofall assets. Even government securities market which is very important for us, andthis is the beginning of development of a corporate debt market  in secondarymarket, foreign banks’ share is about 25 percent. And there we are talking about250 branches out of 80,000 domestic bank branches.So the way it is happening is that among the foreign banks, one branch can doall that a domestic bank can do and is providing a necessary competition tosectors where we have developed, and where the foreign banks have expertise.And one good thing that has happened is in the process, the public sector banks,in terms of efficiency, also have increased. So we are inter-active and we havegiven the road map also, and I think, well, within the medium-term, ideally, expecta lot more competition, a lot more diversification of banks’ presence in thefinancial sector.WISNER: Terrific.Governor, I could pursue you with dozens of questions and exhaust all the time,but I really feel it’s right if we share the conversation with audience at large. And Iinvite all of you to join in and give me your questions, and I, in turn, will steerthem to the governor.Do I have a first volunteer? Grand. In the very back of the room.QUESTIONER: (Name and affiliation inaudible.) Good to see you again,governor. Just to press you a little further on a point you touched on with respectto the role of foreign banking institutions and the current level of the assets thatthey own. There is an increasing desire to be able to expand beyond the 7percent. I would be interested in your thoughts on certain of the restrictions onsome of the well-known positions seeming to come from your office, with respectto the capacity of foreign banks to expand beyond the 7 percent.Thank you.REDDY: Thank you very much. The way I would look at it is that the Indiansituation has to do with reference of the quality and the context. The number ofbranch licences being given in India are more than our WTO commitments. Themost important is qualitatively and I would say - I am confident to say and I havesaid that - qualitatively once a branch of a foreign bank is established in India,there are no restrictions on the type of business. In many countries, there is arestriction known as geographical restriction, whether it is written in the policy ornot. In some countries, domestic currency operations are not allowed , and inmost of the countries, the process of getting a branch license is also not easy.But I can fully understand the desire, and I feel it is a compliment, that there is somuch of enthusiasm about India. And in fact, yesterday, I was having discussionwith our own bankers. So always - all commercial banks globally have the feelingof a little frustration, when they are turning into very attractive markets. So  it isgood that we find interest in India and we will make sure that the interest willcontinue. The return on asset in India, understandably, at about 3 percent forforeign banks; is perhaps among the highest in the world. And so I appreciate theinterest, and that will be taken into account.WISNER: Good.Right here, left table.QUESTIONER: Thank you.Lyndsay Howard, the Dilenschneider Group. Sir, India has in the world an almostunique repository of knowledge on agricultural reform experiments, even thoughit is one of the most challenging issues. I wondered if you could address for usboth in the global context and in where the U.S. can be helpful, how you seeagricultural reform proceeding now, particularly in its efforts to both createsustainable development as well as poverty alleviation, and to relieve farmers inso many regions of the devastating effects of inclement weather. When there’sgood weather, good crops; when there’s not, not.REDDY: Well, thank you very much.As I said, I will be cautious in covering real economy issues. I always fear if Icover real economy, then I’ll find the real economy economists, possibly intrudingin the central bank. And if I cover too much of fiscal, then the fiscal authorities willmake inroads into monetary policy! (Laughs.)So, having said that, I must recognize that we have a role to play.  I don’t want toexplain how agriculture development should happen in India. But what should theRBI do in the context of agricultural development. One, our studies show that themajor instrument for credit to agriculture is cooperatives. And the cooperativeinstitutions which provide credit, have become very weak and just not able todeliver the credit. So there was a virtual institutional breakdown as far asagriculture credit is concerned and, therefore, the government of India recentlyappointed a committee to revamp the system. The Union budget has provided alittle less than 1 percent of GDP to revive the cooperative structure, and there isa committee which has been appointed, with me as the chairman, to coordinatewith the state governments to revive the cooperatives. That’s the first issue.The second issue is, in spite of the progress so far, the single-largest source offinancing for farmers is informal sector - money lenders. We thought that it isnecessary to analyze,  therefore, we have just constituted a group to analyze themoney lending legislation. This is also related to the issue of suicide of thefarmers - sad - it’s just hard for everybody.So there are two other things we are doing. One is to study the money-lendinglegislation and see how far we can rationalize the legislation and implement it sothat it is fair to the people who are lending and fair to the people who areborrowing, and bring it into a more formal system. The second area we are tryingto improve is cooperatives. And the third, having done all that, we also require onthe one hand greater penetration of insurance sector, and in that we have failedso far, but we have to do something about it, and that is being attended to. In theprocess, ultimately there is a need for mechanism by which we can helpdistressed farmers. These are the areas which are engaging our attention. But Ithink both from the Central Bank’s point of view and the government’s point ofview, the provision of credit to agriculture directly and indirectly in terms of inputas well as output processing are also critical. These are priority items, and theReserve Bank accords highest priority to that.WISNER: Excellent. Good.Manfred.QUESTIONER: (Inaudible)—financial sector, Malaysia. Governor, how you seethe evolution of the India-China economic commercial relationship? To whatextent do you view it as competitive? And to what degree do you regard it ascomplementary?REDDY: I would generally put the policy approach of India in the global context.And I think by and large, the Indian economic policymakers have nevervisualized policies in a national competitive sense. I think given the culturaldiversity, the democratic processes, the basic effort has been somewhat to seehow growth occurs and how the issues relating to poverty are taken care of. Sothat has been the major focus.So the bilateral relation and multilateral relations in some senses have to fall intothis bigger picture. But the fact remains that in terms of our relationship with Asiain general, and China in particular, trade is increasing, trade is increasing at avery rapid pace. So trade integration is occurring and is bound to occur, as I seeit.As far as the process in the global economy is concerned, the main drivers ofgrowth in recent years continue to be the USA, China, followed by India.So you know, therefore, the relationship between China and India is close,getting closer in economic terms. And I expect the same thing will continue aspart of the cooperation along with competition in a global economy situation.WISNER: Excellent.Boyd, you’re at the front table.Gentleman.QUESTIONER: Mohit Sudhakar from Freddie Mac. Governor, in terms of thegrowth of India’s surpluses, that’s a happy consequence of the growth in GDP.And as we see this growth of surpluses going on in the foreseeable future, howdo you see these surpluses being managed?WISNER: Yes.REDDY: Let me first put the issue of surplus in the context of the global situation.In the context of the global situation, we are not contributing either positively ornegatively to the global imbalances in terms of large current account surplus andlarge current account deficit. So, in fact, we have been generating a modestcurrent account deficit of about 2 percent, which is reasonable. And the saving-investments have been by and large balanced. And significantly, the economy isdomestic demand-driven, and therefore our policies, including exchange rate arenot determined and conditioned by the export situation itself.So in that sense, therefore, any surplus that is occurring to the Reserve in Indiais not on account of current account surplus. So to the extent it is not on accountof current account surplus, but on account of capital account surplus, it reallymeans capital is more than what is required to maintain the domestic balance. SoI just wanted to put that in perspective.So having done that, if there is an addition to reserves, it should be treated not somuch as self-insurance. So at this stage of development, given the resilience ofthe economy, the confidence of the international community in the Indianeconomy, these quote, unquote “self-insurance” is not a top priority item in termsof the management of reserve.So the addition to or reserve’s accumulation happens more in the context of theway in which the capital flows are up and the way in which the economy absorbsthe capital flows. We have to take a medium-term view of the current accountbalance, medium-term view of the capital flows, and a medium-term view of thegrowth prospects, and that is how we have to look at the totality of thesereserves.That brings me to the issue of the management of the reserves. When you havethe reserves, how do we manage? Now, what happens is, as the reserve levelrises and I can be very frank with you, at one particular level of reserve, themajor consideration is liquidity. But as acquisition to reserves keeps happening,then it is possible to diversify the portfolio, and increasingly there can be anemphasis on return at the margin. So very often, you will find that as the reservelevel increases, the marginal return will be far higher than the average return.But at some point of time, if you reach a position that aggregate foreign assetsexceed foreign liabilities, then the reserves will become a part of the nationalwealth, and not reserves as such. In such a case, as Singapore has done, youcan then create a separate corporation and do the wealth management. So weare familiar with the situation that perhaps we are comfortable on the liquidity, butwe have not reached the stage, where our external assets are far higher thanexternal liabilities, to treat it as purely a wealth management issue. We are in theintermediate stage. And therefore, our management of reserves will reflect thisintermediate position and intermediate requirement.WISNER: Excellent. Good.Imran Riffat.QUESTIONER: Mr. Governor, there is an internal debate going on in India aboutthe capital account convertibility of the Indian rupee. What is the position of theReserve Bank of India with respect to the timing of this event? And what are thepossible implications with respect to the domestic debt?REDDY: First, I think internal debate is something which is good. One of themajor reasons we have internal debate is that there are four English businessdailies. I don’t think there is any country which has four English business dailies(laughter) competing for news. (You’ve got one daily ?). Having said that, thecapital account convertibility issue has been flagged recently. The intensity ofdebate is because of the committee that has been appointed to revisit the issue.And just before coming here a few days ago, last week, I met the committee thathas been appointed. Let me explain that the Prime Minister, when he visited theReserve Bank of India -an incident that I am honored, the first time in the 70-yearhistory of the Reserve Bank that the Prime Minister has visited the Reserve Bank- and he said that the RBI and Finance Minister could revisit the issue of thecapital account convertibility and the state of the capital account liberalization,which we agreed. As the world has changed significantly since the East Asiancrisis, Indian economy and the Indian financial sector has changed significantly,and therefore we should revisit the issue. That’s the mandate.So the mandate is simply to revisit, capture the current realities and see how weshould go forward, and I have addressed this issue in the monetary policy. As faras the monetary policy link is concerned, in a way, some hard decision have tobe taken in terms of monetary management, exchange rate management,interest rate management as we have greater capital account liberalisation,quote, “openness.”So it is in this background that the committee has been appointed. So in mymeeting before the committee -and I want to confess with you - I confess to youthat I told the committee that the Reserve Bank has no position on this issue. Weare open, and we will share whatever technical papers, global experience andour assessment that are needed. The committee is being encouraged to meet asmany experts as possible, and come up with a report which indicates whatappear to be the basic factors that should be taken into account in the wayforward.And I have also requested the committee to make its report available in publicdomain. Whatever their analysis, assessment and road map is concerned, I saidwe will put it in public domain, being open to all the comments, discuss with thegovernment, and then proceed.So the frank answer is we are very open to all the good ideas, all the suggestionsto the committee, and further action. There is no stated, predetermined positionof the Reserve Bank on this.QUESTIONER: Thank you.WISNER: Young lady at the first table.QUESTIONER: Good morning. Nisha Kumar, Time Warner. Mr. Governor, fromyour perspective, what should be the priorities of U.S. policy towards India tohelp advance its growth? And practically, how do you think those can beachieved?REDDY: Again, that is not exactly my territory. (Laughs.) But at the outset Ishould say that our relations with the Federal Reserve and Federal Reserve NewYork are excellent. I will be meeting Mr. Tim Geithner later today. And I cannotfurther ask for a better relationship than what we have, in terms of the monetaryand banking sectors. And from the global point of view, as I understand,compared to at any point of time with the type of visitors that I get from the UnitedStates, it is a pleasure to interact, and I think there is total understanding of boththe problems and prospects. So if you ask me, I think the going is good, there isnothing wrong, and therefore, we need not try to fix thing. Let us keep doing whatwe are doing now. That would be my sense of it.WISNER: Good.Yes, sir? Right there. Second table.QUESTIONER: Sean Fieler with Equinox Partners. To the extent that yourpriority is improving growth in rural India and extending more credit to rural India,isn’t one of the obvious solutions accelerating the deregulation of the publicsector banks that have the dominant footprint and large deposit base in ruralIndia? And if I think of a HDFC (sp) or a ICICI (sp) running, you know, SBI (sp) asit were today, with the freedom to hire executives and promote people and havea more meritocratic and entrepreneurial culture. I think that that might go a longway to improving that particular problem. And I know there’s probably politicalproblems with anything that would allow firing of workers, but there’s got to beother things at the margin that can be accelerated there. If you’d comment onthat.REDDY: I think that is an idea. But as you know, in the Indian context there are alot of good ideas which keep floating around. (Laughter.) And some are pickedup, some are not, for a variety of reasons. And you know that.But having said that, I will say, I would most humbly submit that the performanceof public sector banks, if we just take the report of trends and progress inbanking, which indicate that the performance of the public sector banks in therecent years has been very impressive. And the more important thing is and letus accept that when we compare the performance, we should also take intoaccount the overhang problems. The public sector had a overhang problem oftechnological advance, but when a license was given for ICICI, we made it acondition that you must adopt modern technology. Second, there is an overhangproblem of personnel, and we cannot simply say that the personnel should gohome; it is just not on. Third, there is the overhang of nonperforming assets. Thehuge overhang of nonperforming assets in many other countries were taken overby government or separate companies for distressed assets were created or itwas taken over by the fisc. In India it was not taken over by the fisc and bankshave been asked to absorb the losses. So in terms of our predictive indicators ofperformance, given the background, the public sector banks have been able todeliver significantly both in terms of stability and in terms of penetration and thetechnological improvements that have happened during the last two to threeyears.Fourthly, and most important, in India the issue is not public sector banks versusprivate sector banks now. There are old private-sector banks, there are newprivate-sector banks, and then public-sector banks in which there is acombination of private and public ownership.So the way I look at it is, definitely from a NEW YORK perspective where I amsitting, the best judge of the performance of bank is the market, the stock market.And the stock market is every time giving a very good signal of what are publicsector banks, in spite of increased competition.Having said that, let me again repeat that there is a long way to go. And in thelong way to go, the way I look at it is there is a real increase in collaborations andcooperation between public and private sector banks. So the balance betweenpublic and private, foreign and domestic, in operations, in ownership, incompetition, in different market segments, will keep changing. And I only hopethat at some date we reach a point suddenly the world will notice that we aredoing well in financial sector also (Laughs) apart from macroeconomy.WISNER: Yes, sir?QUESTIONER: Jaime Juan, Granite Associates. You just mentionednonperforming assets. RBI has been very proactive in recent years regardingthese. With regard to the foreign investment in that sector, could you describehow you see that going forward?REDDY: I would say that the opening up of the securitization has been a morerecent phenomenon we have just introduced. But again, in many developingcountries, the securitization has come after the government took over thebusiness assets. So here we have been going a little slow in that matter, andonly recently the legislation has been passed. I think there is enormous scope forsecuritization. I think the foreign investors will be in a position to participate bothon the direct investment side and in picking up the securities as we go along. Butas usual, it is incremental, it is gradual, but I see a great potential both forimproving the banking system and for an opportunity for the foreign investment.WISNER: Governor, we have put you through your paces this morning, and Ithank you enormously on behalf of the Peter McCullough Series and the council,and thank all of you for coming to what I found a very spirited session.Governor, we were all raised on the discipline that Reserved Bank, Central Bankgovernors say very little. You said a lot. You were uncommonly frank andinteresting, and I must say, on my behalf and I know every one here, weappreciated it.Come back. You are a welcomed guest in the council, and we look forward toseeing you many times and particularly, sir, these terrific moments. Good luck inthe work that you and the RBI are doing.REDDY: Thank you very much  (Applause.) © COPYRIGHT 2006, FEDERAL NEWS SERVICE, INC., 1000 VERMONT AVE.NW; 5 TH FLOOR; WASHINGTON, DC - 20005, USA. ALL RIGHTSRESERVED. ANY REPRODUCTION, REDISTRIBUTION ORRETRANSMISSION IS EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.UNAUTHORIZED REPRODUCTION, REDISTRIBUTION ORRETRANSMISSION CONSTITUTES A MISAPPROPRIATION UNDERAPPLICABLE UNFAIR COMPETITION LAW, AND FEDERAL NEWS SERVICE,INC. RESERVES THE RIGHT TO PURSUE ALL REMEDIES AVAILABLE TO ITIN RESPECT TO SUCH MISAPPROPRIATION.FEDERAL NEWS SERVICE, INC. IS A PRIVATE FIRM AND IS NOTAFFILIATED WITH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. NO COPYRIGHT ISCLAIMED AS TO ANY PART OF THE ORIGINAL WORK PREPARED BY AUNITED STATES GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE AS PART OFTHAT PERSON’S OFFICIAL DUTIES.FOR INFORMATION ON SUBSCRIBING TO FNS, PLEASE CALL JACKGRAEME AT 202-347-1400.THIS IS A RUSH TRANSCRIPT.
