1FEMA administration- Prospects and Challenges1. It is a great pleasure and privilege to be here today. I thank the Kuwait/Muscat Chapter ofthe Institute of Chartered Accountants of India for the unique opportunity to address itsmembers and a cross section of Indian population in the Gulf Region. The Institute has sethigh standards in professionalism and contributed greatly to the development of thecorporate business. It is heartening to note that the Institute has a large presence in thisregion and that they are making important contributions to the business world here.2. India’s engagement with the Gulf region has been civilisational, dating back to ancient timesand beyond. Located strategically, the Gulf region provided a critical trading node betweenancient Indian civilisations, predominantly the Indus Valley urban centres, and the ‘FertileCrescent’ of Mesopotamia. Archaeological evidence seems to indicate a great deal of humaninteractions accompanied the trade and possibly, wealthy merchants from Indianprincipalities had set up base in the Gulf region, not very unlike the case today.3. Indians have been sea-faring into distant lands from both her eastern as well as westerncoast down the centuries. But systematic migration was not a phenomenon beyond whatwas necessary to support buoyant and sustained trade until the colonial era when the needof cheap labour for plantation industries lured large number of Indian labour to foreignshores. During the 1970’s, migration from India acquired a different structure which includedlarge scale flow of professional, skilled, and unskilled labour to support the oil-fuelleddevelopment and construction activity in the Gulf region. Today, I understand that about sixmillion Indians working in the Gulf region account for about 50% of the total remittance toIndia. That this magnitude of remittance has significant implications for our Balance ofPayments is undeniable. The future engagement has to traverse beyond this in greater trade,commerce, investment and entrepreneurial ventures.4. As you are aware, the regulatory framework for external sector transactions in India hasevolved over the years. The rather restrictive regime of the 1970’s progressively yieldedspace to liberalisations since the mid 1980’s. The process of economic liberalisation started inthe 1990’s hastened the pace of change in the regulatory framework marked by severalmilestones, including market determined exchange rate of the Rupee and current account1Address by Mr. G Padmanabhan, Executive Director at the Seminar organised byKuwait/Muscat Chapter of Institute of Chartered Accountants of India on August 3/5, 2014.Assistance provided by Mr H S Mohanty in finalising this address is gratefully acknowledged.1convertibility in compliance with the obligations under article VIII of the IMF. The progressthus far was then consolidated in framing a new regulatory framework under the ForeignExchange Management Act, 1999 the express objective of which was to facilitate externaltrade and payments and promote orderly development and maintenance of the foreignexchange market in India. With current account fully convertible, except only minimalrestrictions necessary to prevent a current account transaction being used as a camouflagefor a capital account transaction, the entire focus of the regulatory framework for externalsector transactions has been on the capital account transactions. We have not been able toapproach full capital account convertibility because some of the necessary preconditionssuch as persistently low inflation and stable fiscal conditions have not materialised.Notwithstanding this limitation, the capital account has been managed in a way as to meetthe needs of the economy in a non-disruptive manner.5. Why is capital account important? Firstly, India has generally run a current account deficitbarring a couple of years a decade back mostly due to relatively benign crude prices. Acurrent account deficit has to be offset by a capital account surplus: it is an accountingidentity. The challenge is to generate capital flows of the desired quality and quantity. I willcome to this a little later. Secondly, the Indian economy requires investment on a massivescale not only to sustain a high growth momentum, but also to create the physical and socialinfrastructure to fulfil the needs of one and a quarter billion aspiring Indians. India has a highrate of savings, but it is inadequate to meet the gargantuan investment needs of today.Thirdly, as the gathering here will appreciate, Indian entrepreneurship is second to none inits business acumen and can surely compete globally. Rather than shackling the Indianbusinessmen to the domestic arena, the aim has to be to encourage them to set up shopwherever profitable opportunities beckon them.6. Important as the capital account transactions are, as I have mentioned above, they alsousher in potential elements of instability. There was a time when capital account openness orconvertibility was extolled as a necessary virtue to hurl the less developed economies into apath of high growth. There were critics of this path then too, but now it is widely acceptedthat capital account openness has to be approached with caution and in certain situations,capital controls can even constitute a useful policy tool. Essentially, we are wary of shortterm capital flows that usually feed asset price boom and are susceptible to sudden stops orreversals.27. Within this general framework, I now turn to our approach to capital account management insome detail. As you know, capital account transactions are transactions in assets and non-residents can hold domestic assets in three forms: equity, debt and immovable property.Investment in equity can further be classified into foreign direct investment and foreignportfolio investment.  Similarly, flows relating to debt can be divided into three broadgroups, viz., contracted debt, marketed debt and bank deposits.8. Of all capital flows, FDI occupies the highest tier in preference order and therefore has themost permissive regime. In line with the FDI policy framed by the Government of India, theonly restrictions in FDI relate to investment caps in certain sectors, depending upon ourcomfort with the degree of foreign control motivated by strategic or socio-economicconsiderations. Reflecting the same concern, while a large majority of sectors are open to FDIthrough the automatic route, a few require a prior approval. The FDI policy framework is notexactly static and is open to review. It is evident from the Honourable Finance Minister’srecent budget speech wherein proposals to increase foreign investment ceiling in Defencesector from 26% to 49% and also a similar increase in insurance sector have been announced.9. While on the subject of FDI, I want to mention two specific policy developments of the lastone year that have evinced a great deal of interest.a. In January this year, we allowed companies to issue shares with inbuilt optionalityclause where the issuer of shares writes a put option so that the investor can exit atthe specified time by selling the share to the issuer. The key feature is that the salewould take place not at a pre-determined price but at the ‘fair price’ prevailing at thetime of exit. An option without a predetermined strike price may seem to be a bit ofa problem, but there is a logic behind it. Please appreciate that an equity that has aput option at a given strike price upon exercise becomes a debt instrument andtherefore, is contrary to a policy regime where there is a great deal of control ondebt flows. However, we realise that in certain risky investments, it is natural for aninvestor to be assured of a floor on the expected returns and venture capitalinvestment has indeed been granted that latitude. Allowing such an arrangement ona secular basis is a matter for future policy.b. It is a fair requirement that an asset must be sold at its fair value to an investor.Underpricing the sale of an asset to a non-resident investor is a stratagem to dodgetax and transfer value and accordingly the regulatory framework prescribed a specific3valuation methodology – the Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) method – for sale of sharesof unlisted companies. Surely, notwithstanding its problems, the DCF method may bethe most appropriate; but with a view to affording the investors and investeesgreater freedom in carrying out their transactions, we have last month amended theregulations to permit any internationally accepted valuation methodology at anarm’s length basis.10. As far as portfolio investment is concerned, the access to foreign investors is fairly welldefined - the only constraint, consistent with the international norm, is that portfolioinvestment by an individual investor cannot exceed 10% of the outstanding stock of acompany and the aggregate portfolio investment cannot exceed 24% or such higher limit asmay be decided by the company concerned. This is subject to the sectoral caps, whereverapplicable. Earlier this year SEBI has put in place a comprehensive regime for registration ofpotential portfolio investors, which has also been notified under FEMA, 1999. An importantrelaxation that I like to mention here is that RBI has dispensed with additional KYCrequirement for a bank account that a registered foreign portfolio investor has to open forthe purpose of investment. The Finance Minister, in his budget speech, has sought to addressa long-standing demand for level playing field in respect of tax treatment of foreign fundswhose fund managers are India-based. I am sure this will bring more professionalemployment and income to Indian shores.11. While on the subject of foreign investment, it is important to note about the proposedrevamping of the regulatory framework for Depository Receipts. Depository Receipts areessentially instruments to address the home-country bias of international investingcommunities and over the years has proved a useful tool for Indian companies to raisecapital abroad. With a view to further expanding the scope of these instruments, aGovernment of India appointed Committee (Chairman: Shri M S Sahoo) recently looked intothe entire gamut of issues and its recommendations are being taken up for implementation.Without going into details, the overarching principle that has guided the work of thisCommittee is that whichever asset class is open to a non-resident to invest in the domesticmarkets, should also be accessible to non-residents in international market through anappropriate institutional framework and safety measures, including compliance with KYC andother international norms.12. As indicated earlier, the policy regime in respect of debt flows, particularly contractedborrowings commonly known as ECB, has a pronounced bias towards long term flows. The4other restrictions at present relate to the type of lender, the type of borrower, the end useand the cost of borrowing. It is to be appreciated that these restrictions are aimed atcontrolling indiscriminate borrowing which has potential stability implications. Recognisingthe large and typical borrowing needs of the Infrastructure sector, we have effected severalrelaxations in this area. Even though a framework of general permission may not be in place,we are open to the specific needs depending upon the compulsions of the borrower and theinternational practice.13. The policy regime in respect of Rupee denominated marketable securities – both sovereignand corporate debt – has undergone change over time mainly by way of consolidation andexpansion of limits. At present, foreign portfolio investors are allowed to invest up to USD 25billion in dated government securities and an additional USD 5 billion is available to the longterm investors. Similarly, a limit of USD 51 billion is available for investment in corporatedebt. As a conscious policy stance, we have been trying to nudge the foreign portfolioinvestors towards investing in long term papers. It is to be appreciated that investment inshort dated papers, treasury bills and commercial papers are essentially volatile andconstitute interest rate play. This is not in sync with our policy imperative. Accordingly, wehave mandated last month that all fresh investment upon sale or redemption of existinginvestment in sovereign debt has to be necessarily in government dated security of aminimum residual maturity of 3 years. There is no lock in period and no restriction on sellingthe bonds to residents irrespective of their residual maturity.14. Let me state in this context, brief details of a pilot initiative taken last year. We wereapproached by IFC for floating a rupee denominated paper in international market with aview to investing the proceeds in the Indian markets. IFC was permitted to issue USD onebillion worth of such papers, which it has executed successfully. Subsequently, AsianDevelopment Bank has also been permitted to float a similar issue of USD 500 million.Because of capital account restrictions, we had earlier been averse to the idea of such rupeelinked offshore bonds abroad because of its potential impact on domestic currency and debtmarkets. The permissions to IFC and ADB are essentially testing the waters, as it were, andthe future view on such floatation will depend on the experience.15. Overseas direct investment is an inalienable part of India’s progressive integration with theworld economy. Apart from the quest for profitable business opportunities, overseaspresence enriches the Indian corporate in adapting itself to global competition and imbibingthe best management practice. It is also expected to serve the strategic interests of the5economy as well. With this in view, the regulatory regime has been fairly encouraging. For acapital-scarce economy like India, the cumulative overseas investment position at about USD140 billion is no small achievement. At the height of Rupee volatility last year, as a purelytemporary measure, RBI had reduced the ‘automatic route’ investment limit from 400% ofthe Indian company’s net worth to 100% - a measure mistakenly dubbed by some as capitalcontrol. Even when the restriction was in force, RBI’s approval was not denied to anyproductive venture. This measure was rolled back once the markets stabilised.16. It is a matter of some concern that the overseas investment has not been yielding as muchreturn as should be expected. The need for deployment of the surplus generated inexpansion activities is well recognised. But in reality, tax arbitrage also plays an importantrole which needs to be addressed.17. Recognising the benefit of asset diversification for the domestic investor, the regulatoryregime permits an individual to invest abroad in any asset class, including in real estate, up toUSD 125,000 per year. Though a major part of the remittance under this category is made forvarious current account transactions simply because of the ease of procedure, the routenevertheless does enable the domestic individual to own foreign asset in her portfolio. Todeal with the home country bias of the Indian investor and also to make the ownership offoreign security easily accessible, we have permitted Indian Depository Receipts under FEMAsince 2009. Ironically, the only IDR floatation we have had till date has been predominantlyinvested in by the FIIs! In this context, I may mention that the Sahoo Committee that I hadmentioned earlier also suggested exhaustive revamping of the regulatory framework for IDR.The Finance Minister too, in his budget speech, has proposed a liberal and ambitiousDepository Receipt scheme styled Bharat Depository Scheme (BhDR). I am sure this is goingto give a quantum fillip to the Indian capital markets.18. Speaking here before an assembly of predominantly non-resident Indians, I shall be failing inmy duty if I do not mention the foreign exchange framework as it relates to the NRIs. At theoutset, I must pay my encomium to Indian Diaspora for its support to the Indian economy inits moments of need. It is the buoyant remittances from the hardworking Indians thatprovided the first glimmer of hope during the gloomy 1970’s when the acute foreignexchange crisis almost stalled the Indian development story. As I have mentioned earlier, itstill provides a much needed support to India’s Balance of Payments.19. The regulatory framework for foreign exchange has also always recognised the contributionsof the Diaspora. In the early stages when the access to the Indian economy was rather6restrictive for non-residents, the NRIs enjoyed a preferential regime in investment, bankdeposits, etc. With gradual opening up of the Indian economy and financial liberalisation,some of the preferential treatment has become superfluous but still many remain. Forinstance, an NRI individual can invest up to 5% of the outstanding stock of a companythrough the portfolio investment scheme and has unlimited access to the debt securities atpar with a resident Indian.20. For the large number of Indian migrant workers, remittance home is extremely important.Over the years, we have enabled multiple channels to provide easy and efficient remittancefacility both for the remitter and the receiver. Apart from the traditional banking channel,the exchange houses and money transfer service agents have been handling the largevolume of remittances. If KYC requirement at both ends is sometimes viewed as onerous, wemust bear in mind that we live in difficult times and measures like KYC is a price we pay forthe safety and security of our society. At the same time we took a series of measurestowards electronification of the payment systems in India. Today payment to India andacross India happens in matter of seconds in a safe and secure manner. Secondly, we areproactively enabling alternate payment methods so that you are not required to carry or usephysical cash.21. I understand that acquisition of immovable property is a very important concern for not onlythe Non- Resident Indians – I mean Indian citizens residing abroad – but also Persons ofIndian Origin. I wish to make it clear that the regulatory framework is pretty liberal inasmuchas it permits both NRIs as well as PIOs to acquire any immovable property except agricultureproperty, plantations or farmhouse. The acquisition however is required to be fundedthrough the banking channel, which is a fair stipulation. While there is no restriction on NRIsfor sale, gift or otherwise transfer any property so acquired, PIOs can sell the acquiredproperties only to resident Indians. There is also a restriction on NRIs/PIOs acquiring propertyin India jointly with their spouse if she/he is neither resident in India nor an NRI nor a PIO.Such cases require prior approval of RBI and of late, there has been an increase in number ofsuch cases. This is an issue that requires examination in consultation with the Government ofIndia.   In fact, I have directed an comprehensive review of FEMA 21 before I embarked onthis trip.22. Let me mention in passing the problem of gold, as I realise the gulf region provides perhapsthe largest gold market with an Indian connection on the western side. The control on goldimports was imposed with a view to getting an immediate handle on the burgeoning current7account deficit. The insatiable Indian appetite for gold is well known.  It had probably beenfurther whetted by persistent inflation on the one hand and increased prosperity on theother. Thus restriction on gold import provided a much needed immediate reprieve forrestoring the imbalance in the current account. But it is well recognised this cannot be a longterm measure lest it engenders undesirable consequences. It will be a challenge to blunt thelure for gold, but it has to be faced in the medium to long term.23. So far, I have attempted to paint a broad-brush picture of our approach to the managementof India’s external sector. The narrative has been fairly simple: gradual opening up of thecapital account with a cautious eye on the potentially disruptive impact of unbridled capitalflows like what countries in several regions have faced in the past and may be facing now, aswe talk. Notwithstanding the straightforward approach, the devil is in the detail, as they say.From my vantage position, I cannot really say that the regulatory regime that a foreigninvestor seeking to engage with the Indian markets faces is as simple or transparent as onewould wish it to be. There are many reasons for the complexity of the regulatory regime thatobtains today. Let me mention just two. First, the external factors have changed rapidly inthe past. The post-Pokhran II sanctions during the closing years of the last millennium andearly years of this millennium; the global liquidity glut and unprecedented capital inflows of2006-07; the global financial crisis and its aftermath – all these events elicited regulatoryresponse to deal with the fallouts. The responses varied depending not only upon theexternal factor, but also the state of the economy. Secondly, the regulatory regime has oftento respond to the way market participants exploit the gaps and even benign relaxations togame the regulatory regime to their advantage, against the spirit of the game. Be that as itmay, the fact remains that there is an urgent need today to make the regulatory regimesimple, transparent and easily comprehensible. The Government of India and we in the RBIare making efforts at several levels to address this issue and I am sure that soon we shallmake progress in this regard.24. In this complex world of international business, the need for professional expertise cannotbe overemphasised. It has been rightly said that the foundation of the modern society owesthas much to Luca Pacioli, the 15 century Franciscan Friar who perfected the double entrybook-keeping, as to anyone else. The development of the post-industrial-revolutioncorporate sector would not have been possible but for the efforts of competent, diligent andcredible accounting professionals. Rapid economic development is a revolutionary necessityfor India today, so that the aspirations of one and a quarter billion Indians can be realised.8This process requires growing integration with the global economy: in trade and commerceas well as in finance and investment. I am sure the profession of chartered accountants shallplay the role of a facilitating catalyst in this endeavour. Having said this, I would also like tocall upon the professionals to equip themselves to render correct advice within the letter andspirit of FEMA to avoid compounding complications later. This is important to facilitatespeedier enablement of simpler procedures that are less intrusive.25. Let me end by reiterating that we are open to receiving suggestions to make FEMAadministration more user friendly, particularly from an important stake holder like the NRIcommunity.Thank you for your patience.9
