Development and Management of Mr. I am thankful to the me  to this Sessionof the 21 Forex Congress. I would like to add a special word of welcometo the delegates from Asia and the Pacific regions to Delhi to participate in thisCongress. For us, this is a very special occasion as India, I believe, has a lot to learnfrom the experience of countries in our region in the proper development andmanagement of foreign exchange markets. I  am particularly glad that also invited experts from various parts of the world to deliberate on contemporarytrends in forex markets, the impact of new technology as well as regulatory andorganisational issues.  I am sure your deliberations here will be fruitful. We in theforex dealers and experts, I do not have much tocontribute by way of market insights or new information. You are much more familiarforex markets than I am.  Perhaps thebest way in which I can help your discussions is to give you a central bankingtrends in the world economy. As you know, policy issues relating to the managementof the external sector, particularly the appropriate exchange rate systems, theappropriate intervention policy, appropriate foreign exchange reserve policy  figurevery prominently in the on going discussions on International Financial architecture invarious fora, such as IMF, the World Bank, G20, Financial Stability Forum and theBank of International Settlements. India has been participating in all these discussionsalong with Central Bank Governors, Finance Ministers of industrial and otherhave also given us a fair amount of experience on behavioural and regulatory aspectsof forex markets. Both in theory and in practice, the state of debate is still somewhatLet me briefly share with you the current thinking on some of the important  an important issue which has been extensively discussed in the literature as wellas in different international fora is that of an appropriate exchange rate regime,particularly for emerging markets.  You are all perhaps familiar with the so calledimpossible trinity, namely, full Capital Account Convertibility, (CAC) MonetaryIf CAC is accepted, according to accepted theory, you either have the choice of givingup monetary independence and setting up a Currency Board or give up the stablecurrency objective and let the exchange rate float freely so that monetary policy canthen be directed to the objectives of inflation control. In this scenario, exchange rateshould matter only if they affect domestic inflation. In theory, the recommended1approach is either free float or a currency board.Independence (for inflation control), and a Stable Currency.First,forex markets. which affect issuesunsettled. There are a number of issues on which worldwide consensus is still evolving.developing countries, including many of the countries represented here. Last few yearsforex markets in the light of recent perspective on the development and management of with all the issues connected with the working of In this gathering of specialists, Reserve Bank of India, very much look forward to the conclusions of your discussions.organisers have Asia Pacific stForex Association of India for inviting Venkataraman, distinguished guests and friends,A Central Banking Perspective*Markets : Forex In reality, however, the actual policy adopted by most Central Banks is different thanthe theoritical optimum.  A recent study by the IMF, for example, shows that by far,the most common exchange rate regime adopted by countries, including industrialcountries, is neither a currency board nor a free float.  Most of the countries haveadopted intermediate regimes of various types including fixed pegs, crawling pegs,undue fluctuations. By and large, barring a few, countries have “managed” floats orCentral Banks intervene periodically. This is also true of ECB recently and Japantraditionally.  The US has also intervened with ECB or BOJ in favour of moderatingBoard or a free float, the external value of the currency continues to be a matter ofPart of the reason why countries are concerned about exchange rates is and part real. Psychological – because of headline effect of a depreciating currency –“all time low”, “weak”, “tumbling” creates a negative impact about the soundness of acountry’s currency.  For an ordinary man or woman on the street and the politicalleaders who represent them, it becomes a matter of concern as nobody wants hisPart of the reason for concern with exchange rates is also real, as seen in East Asia,Russia and elsewhere.  The contagion effect is quick and a sharp change in thecurrency value can affect the real economy. Exporters may suffer if there isA fundamental change that has taken place in recent years is the importance of capitalflows in determining exchange rate movements as against trade deficits and economicgrowth, which were important in the old days. The latter do matter, but only over aperiod of time. Capital flows, on the one hand, are primary determinants of exchangerate movements on a day to day basis. For example, the US with the largest tradedeficit in the world today has the strongest currency. Europe, with a massive tradesame is happening the world over – East Asia, New Zealand, South Africa andCapital flows in “gross” terms which affect exchange rate can be several times higherthan “net” flows on any day – and these are also much more sensitive to whateverybody else is saying or doing than is the case with foreign trade or economicgrowth. Therefore, herding becomes unavoidable. I am sure you will agree that alldealers prefer to be wrong with everyone else rather than being wrong alone!  DailyRisk behaviour. In this situation, as recent experience2minimisation guarantees “herd” Australia.explained by movements in capital flows, which is a relatively a new phenomenon. Thesurplus, on the other hand (until lately) has one of the weakest currencies. This result isif there is a sharp depreciation, which can also lead to bank failures and bankruptcies.corporates may be affected badly unanticipated sharp appreciation and debtors or other and less sensational.was a new terminology to describe movements in exchange rates which is less emotiveit is a fact which has to be reckoned with by all Central Banks. It would be nice if therecountry’s economy or currency to be weak or tumbling.  However, irrational it may be,psychological,concern to most countries, and most Central Banks.It is thus a matter of fact that irrespective of the pure theoretical position of a Currencythe movements of Euro or Yen.floats with foreign exchange intervention moderating the rate of change and preventingfixed rates within bands, managed floats with no pre-announced path, and independentshows, the Central Banks have to intervene in some form or other – including themightiest and not so mighty. While the degree of intervention and management variesfrom Central Bank to Central Bank, concern about exchange rates is a fact that youdeclared policy of the Reserve Bank is to meet temporary demand-supply which arise from time to time. For example, in the current period, because of extra-ordinary rise in oil prices, RBI has been meeting the oil import requirements of IOCdirectly as also debt service requirements. Our objective is to keep market movementsorderly and ensure that there is no liquidity problem or rumour or panic- inducedCAC, Monetary Independence and Exchange Rate Stability. Some well knowneconomists are now in favour of temporarily or permanently giving up the CAC.Others seem to favour intermediate regimes. A recent theoretical study by Calvo andconcludes that “ all that we can say is that,when it comes to exchange rate policy, discretion rules the day .” Similar is theA Second Issue that has figured in the literature is that if some management of theFrom a competitive point of view and also in the medium term perspective, it is theREER which should be monitored as it reflects changes in the external value of acurrency in relation to its trading partners in real terms.  However, it is no good formonitoring short-term and day-to-day movements as “nominal” rates are the which are most sensitive of capital flows and also attract the most headlines. (ForInterestingly, while every one agrees that the value of a currency should be monitoredagainst all major currencies, all the headlines and comments by dealers areor Yen or vice versa. All we would hear is Euro, Yen, or Pound against the dollar.There is certainly a reason for it as the dollar is the currency that is mostly used intrade. However what it means is that Central Banks have to pay maximum attention toAnother interesting issue is “stability” versus  “volatility” in exchange markets. Inprinciple, it would be desirable if exchange rates appreciate when capital flows arestrong, and depreciates when they are weak. Unfortunately, in practice this option isnot always available to Central Banks during periods of uncertainty or turbulence,because the market behaviour is not symmetrical in both directions. There is a greaterbad and currencies are depreciating, then the other way round when news is good and3tendency to hold long positions in foreign currencies and hold back sales when news isUS dollar whether they like it or not.concentrated on the dollar. One hardly hears Pound hitting “all time high” against Eurobut to monitor nominal rate.the real rates of exchange of these currency!). Thus, in the short-run, there is no optionbehaviour of $ - Euro or $ - Yen hardly, anybody talks about example, in respect of the onesexchange rate is required, what is it that we should be monitoring – nominal or REER?Frankel. conclusion reached by Reinhart of NBER in the U.S. interestingly trniity of there has also been a shift in the theoretical position in regard to the “unholy” behaviour of exchange market, Interestingly, in view of the actual experience about the volatility.imbalancesare watched by the Reserve Bank very closely. Our markets are relatively thin, and theIndia, as you know, has “managed” floating with no fixed rate target. Daily movementsand I have to live with – at least for some time.currencies are appreciating. It is also a fact that corporates, investors, and   preferAnother issue which has figured prominently in the current debate on reserves. In a regime of free float, it can be argued that there is really no need forreserves. Some countries, where monetary policy is directed towards  is the singleobjective of inflation control, in fact maintain no reserves, except for operationalpurposes.  However, in the light of volatility induced  by capital flows and the self-fulfilling expectations that this can generate, there is a now growing consensus foremerging market countries to maintain “adequate” reserves.  How adequacy is to bedefined is still an open question. Earlier, the rule was in terms of months of imports.Now increasingly it is felt that reserves should also be adequate to cover likelyvariations in capital flows. “ Guidotti rule”, which has also been mentioned by AlanGreenspan, has argued that reserves should be adequate to cover one year’s importIn India, we are taking into account liquidity as well as import requirements andfurther augment our reserves to meet the cost of high oil prices. Reserves are nowmore than adequate to meet the oil burden as well as any other likely variations incapital flows for a fairly long period.   We have followed a very careful  policy toreduce our short-term debt, which is lower than 7/8 years ago, and also to ensure thatrelatively short-term deposits from NRIs, which are kept in FCNRB accounts, areThere is also a consensus on the need to make available information by Central Bankon reserves, including forward liabilities, as well as market  operations and turn-over,so that lenders and the markets have full information about a country’s externalliabilities as well as Central Bank’s assets and forward liabilities. We in the ReserveBank are also following international practice in this regard and are regularlypublishing information on all our transactions as well as reserve, liquidity and forwardBanks face as well as the issues that are currently being debated internationally at thelevel of Finance Ministers, Central Bank Governors and Heads of InternationalInstitutions. It may be useful to remember that floating exchange rate system, andvolatility associated with capital flows, are relatively new phenomena. Until the 90s,we lived in a world of fixed exchange rates with par values or, fixed but adjustableexchange rates, in response to changes in fundamentals. Floating rates, Capitalworld wide markets acrossdifferent time zones are relatively new phenomena. So, we are still on the learningmarkets, for example, as a result of emergence of common European currency, whose4full impact is not yet evident.organisation of curve. There are also some major structural changes taking place in the volatility, massive changes in technology and integration of Let me stop here. I have tried to give you a bird’s eye view of the dilemmas the Centralliabilities.matched by foreign assets of deposit-taking banks.$ 10 billion to our reserves in the last couple of years and have recently taken action tounforeseen contingencies in the management of reserves. For this reason, we added USand capital flow requirements.management is the question of appropriate policy for management of foreign exchangeforexrelative stability to volatility as hedging costs less when conditions are stable.FIIsRecent changes have brought tremendous benefits to the developing world, includingIndia.  Capital constraints and technological constraints to developments are fastdisappearing. As the new horizons open, we are also faced with some new challenges.here will be able to take maximum advantage from new technological and otherExcerpts from inaugural remarks made by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Asia Pacific Congress held in New Delhi on December 1, 2000521stThank you,minimising risks. advances while With your help, support and guidance, I am sure, India and other countries represented
