Boards of Governors-2003 Annual MeetingsSeptember 23–24, 2003World Bank GroupInternational Bank for Reconstruction and DevelopmentInternational Finance CorporationInternational Development AssociationInternational Centre For Settlement Of Investment DisputesMultilateral Investment Guarantee AgencyInternational Monetary FundStatement by the Hon. Mr. Y.V. Reddy,Alternate Governor of the Fund for India,at the Joint Annual DiscussionMr. Chairman:1. Since we met last in April 2003, there have been some signs of improvement in theglobal environment.  Recent economic data of some countries as well as some forward lookingmarket indicators, particularly those relating to financial markets indicate that we may be seeingsome signs of global economic recovery.  While we share the view that this could indicate thebeginning of a stronger recovery, we recognize that considerable risks still persist, though theupside risks appear to outweigh the downside risks.2. The outlook for the United States, Euro area and Japan presents a mixed picture.  Ifcurrent trends are  any indication, global recovery in the near-term would be led by the UnitedStates.  However, the widened and historically high twin deficits, in fiscal and current accounts,of the United States pose the threat of possible disruptive adjustment of the US dollar againstother major currencies.  We recognize this as a necessary short term trade-off for realizingmedium-term gains.  We, therefore, urge all the major currency areas to coordinate their policiesand to carefully monitor currency market behavior to minimize potential adverse repercussionson financial markets and on sustainability of global economic recovery.  The recent depreciationof dollar has, to some extent, minimized the possibility of such disruptive adjustment.  Further,continuing robust productivity trends support the strong prospect for recovery in the UnitedStates.  In this regard, there is considerable merit in the U.S. evolving a medium-term fiscalframework to bring its fiscal position on to a sustainable path.3. The outlook for the Euro area seems rather flat.  As in the US, there is a comparableelement of trade-off.  While the monetary stimulus provided by the European Central Bank isencouraging, scope exists for using fiscal stimulus in a more countercyclical manner.  In ourview, the Stability and Growth Pact should be applied in a flexible manner to allow theautomatic stabilizers to run their courses in the short-term, even if that results in marginalbreaching of ceilings on fiscal deficits, especially in countries where this could trigger recovery.- 2 -4. We welcome the reforms undertaken to improve the accounting and auditing standardsand corporate governance practices both in the US and the EU.  These improvements are partlyreflected in the strengthening of corporate bond and equity markets.  The primary bond marketissues have become more buoyant.  Sovereign yields, in general, have declined, combined with acompression of yield spreads.  We consider these developments as supportive of increasedcapital flows into emerging markets and for the general strengthening of intermediation ininternational capital markets.  Though there was a temporary upward shift in the long-term yieldsof bonds in the US, potential for significant risks of further increase in bond  yields appearremote.  First, the policy interest rates have declined to historically low levels and upward hikesin  quick succession are therefore unlikely. The housing and mortgage markets as also bondmarkets cannot withstand such sudden shocks.  Second, the probability  of inflationundershooting and the consequent adverse implications for deflationary expectations are fearedby many.5. The question also remains as to how long and to what extent the US would lead theglobal recovery.  It is important for the EU and also Japan to intensify structural and financialsector reforms with redoubled vigor.  In some countries, labor and product market reformsshould receive priority as important components of such reforms.  We encourage the Euro areacountries to take steps to promote productivity and efficiency gains, given the minimal scope, inthe short-run, for achieving higher labor participation rates.  The necessity of achieving thesegains, and a general increase in demand arises from the impending medium-term fiscal risksassociated with demographic trends and the attendant pension reforms.  Similarly, we recognizethat more vigorous steps may help Japan counteract deflationary expectations an address thefragility of the financial system.  In the medium-term Japan also requires further restoration offiscal stabilization.6. Growth is expected to remain robust in most emerging market economies and, to someextent, in Africa.  These are propelled in no small measure by stronger macroeconomic policies,structural reforms and improvements in the institutional structure.  Prospects have also improveddue to general improvements in major industrial countries, favorable terms of trade due to non-oil commodity price increases, and improved financial market conditions, especially in the bondmarkets.  It is imperative that greater resources flow into these countries to help sustain growth.The current favorable financial market conditions, no doubt, provide an opportunity for thesecountries to steer ahead with remaining structural reforms and achieve greater fiscal and externalsector sustainability.7. Among the developing countries, emerging countries in Asia continue to remain a brightspot.  They have shown extraordinary resilience in the face of the recent global slowdown andcontinue to exhibit healthy recovery.  While timely and complementary policy actions taken by anumber of countries to facilitate the revival of external demand and expand intra-regional tradeare promising, medium-term prospects would depend on the recovery in major industrialcountries.8. The scope for exchange rate flexibility, particularly in view of the recent build up ofreserves in many countries, has generated a lot of debate over the last few months.  This calls fora more dynamic and pragmatic approach in the analysis of recent trends in exchange rates and- 3 -reserve management practices keeping in view country specific circumstances.  The recentstrengthening of external position of many developing countries through building up substantialforeign exchange reserves can be viewed from several perspectives.  First, it is in part, areflection of the  lack of confidence in the international financial architecture.  Internationalliquidity support through official channels is beset with problems relating to adequacy ofvolumes, timely availability, reasonableness of costs and above all, limited extent of assurances.Second, it is also a reflection of efforts to contain risks from external shocks.  Private capitalflows which dominate capital movements tend to be pro-cyclical even when fundamentals arestrong.  It is therefore necessary for developing countries to build cushions when times arefavorable.  High reserves provide some self-insurance which is effective in building confidenceincluding among the rating agencies and possibly in dealing with threat of crises.  Third, thereserve accumulation could also be seen in the context of the availability of abundantinternational liquidity following the easing of the monetary policy in industrial countries.  Theresultant excess liquidity flowed into the emerging markets.  In the event of hardening of interestrates in industrialized countries, this liquidity may  as quickly dry up; in that situation, emergingmarket should have sufficient cushion to withstand such reverse flows of capital.  Fourth, andmost important, the reserve build up could be the result of countries aiming at containingvolatility in foreign exchange markets.  It should be recognised that the self correctivemechanism in foreign exchange markets seen in developed countries is conspicuously absentpresently among many emerging markets.9. It is also necessary to recognize that developing countries face major challenges in theireffort for sustained economic growth which could enable them to make a significant impact onpoverty reduction.  Recent studies by the World  Bank indicate that there would be considerableshortfalls in achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  These failures would notonly be limited to some under-performing low income countries; even  countries which havemade rapid strides in sustained economic growth over the past decade, would not be able to meetcritical goals.  The level of development assistance currently available and even the additionalcommitments made at Monterrey, and subsequently, would not be sufficient to meet theminimum financing needs.  Developing countries have huge unmet financing needs relative toMDG targets and even with their best efforts, they would not be able to make up the deficiency.There is a very strong case for substantially stepping up the quantum and improving the qualityof development assistance.10. There are two aspects to this which we would like to stress.  One, is the need to makeallocation of development assistance to countries equitable.  The guiding principles should be theincidence of poverty and the effectiveness of poverty reduction efforts.  This is best done inmultilateral settings so that allocation based on national or strategic considerations are kept to theminimum.  The breadth of their work, especially the analytic services and the richness of theirdevelopment experience improve the quality of policy dialogue.  There is also the need to reducetransaction cost of development assistance through better harmonization of procedures andprocesses. The Rome initiative needs to be followed up and bilateral donors should look at waysof working with multilateral institutions so that common mechanisms for project preparation,appraisal, procurement, monitoring, reporting, auditing, etc. could be evolved.  Another waywould be to cofinance projects and programmes that recipient countries draw up and avoidrunning parallel stand-alone projects that yield sub-optimal results and strain country capacities.- 4 -11. Developing countries have been taking courageous steps in reforming their policyenvironment, improving their institutions of governance  and in general, widening, deepeningand making more equitable the delivery of services to the poor. Timely and productivedevelopment assistance as well as increased access to markets are required to complement andstrengthen these efforts.  Developed countries must be prepared to play the role of partners inthis process as they agreed to do at Monterrey.  All players in the development process—developing countries, developed  countries and the multilateral institutions—have to work tobring about greater accountability.  The monitoring of policies, actions and outcomes needed toachieve MDGs can be a useful tool to bring about increased effectiveness of the developmentprocess.  While this would require considerable efforts at improving the capacities in developingcountries, particularly in gathering reliable and accurate statistical data, such efforts should be apart of the overall development process and should not be seen as an end in itself. Side by side,we need to develop strong partnerships so that country ownership is assured.12. Further work is also required in order to enhance the voice and participation ofdeveloping and transition countries in the multilateral institutions.  While we appreciate thatthere are no quick fixes, we would stress that on-going dialogue and efforts to evolve solutionsthat better reflect changed realities is the way forward.13. Together, we would work towards improving the environment where we see the benefitsof economic growth percolating to those who have been hitherto denied and to those who havesuffered painful adjustments.  There is no single mantra that would work everywhere and ourpolicies should recognize this.  But, if we are able to develop a real partnership, with each nationallowed to exploit its comparative advantage, and not be held back by artificial barriers andconstraints, there is no reason why we will not succeed.
