Economic Reforms and Evolving Role of RBI as Bankerto the GovernmentsMr. Chairman, Mrs. Usha Sahajpal and friends,I am thankful to the organizers for inviting me to the Silver Jubilee Year offounding of Accounts Organisation and I recognize it as a reflection of the closecooperation and understanding that have evolved between Reserve Bank of India (RBI)as a banker to Government of India and its Accounts organisation.  The title of theaddress refers to being banker to governments simply because RBI is a banker not only tothe Central Government, but also State Governments.  RBI by virtue of its charterperforms several functions, the most important being to secure stability in the internal andexternal value of the currency mainly through conduct of monetary policy, while at thesame time, ensuring adequate availability of credit to meet the genuine needs of agrowing economy.  Currency Management is yet another function of the RBI whichimpacts the transactions of a large number of people.  Managing public debt is alsoassigned to RBI, but this is sought to be separated from RBI in due course.  Its regulationof money and forex markets flows from its primary responsibility while its role in debtmarkets is closely linked to it being manager of public debt. RBI is also a regulator andsupervisor of banks, development financial institutions, and non-banking financialcompanies, but the process of supervision is overseen by an independent Board forFinancial Supervision, within RBI.  Incidentally, RBI is also a banker to banks.  PaymentSystem is also under the aegis of RBI, and the technological infrastructure for thefinancial sector, especially in the money and Government Securities market is providedby RBI to subserve its overall responsibilities.  To the governments it renders advice onfinancial matters, whenever called upon to do so.  Being banker to governments is also animportant function, but is seldom in high profile, perhaps due to the reason that it doesnot directly or visibly impinge on prices or output.  However, as will be explained today,though it is not a big-ticket item on RBI’s balance-sheet, its role as a banker togovernments is very significant and it has been evolving in the recent years reflecting theprocess of economic reform.The Bank provides banking services to both Central and State Governments suchas acceptance of moneys on Government account, payment / withdrawal of funds andcollection and transfer of funds by various means throughout India.  The Governments'principal accounts are maintained at Central Accounts Section of the Bank at Nagpur.Government accounts are handled by RBI at 15 Offices, besides two State GovernmentCells at Bhopal and Chandigarh.  Further, all public sector banks and two private sectorbanks handle Governments accounts through their 20,800 branches. Currently, theAgency banks handle Governments transactions of around Rs.12 lakh crore in a fullfinancial year.  Over and above these, sizeable transactions are handled at Reserve BankOffices. Some transactions, though minimal, are handled in Governments’ own treasuriesand sub treasuries, numbering 453, equipped with Currency Chests.  This data gives themagnitude and spread of transactions relating to Governments.The first part of today’s presentation will cover very briefly cross-countrypractices. The second part provides the legal and institutional framework in India forconduct of Government’s business in banking. The third section describes the range ofbanking services provided by RBI to Governments. The fourth part describes some of thereforms already undertaken in this area. The fifth section describes major issues while theconcluding section indicates a possible agenda for immediate actions.Cross-Country PracticesBy custom and tradition or by express provision in the laws by which they havebeen established, Central Banks are bankers to their respective Governments. In the viewof Sir Montagu Norman of the Bank of England and Benjamin Strong of the FederalReserve System, the Central Bank should undertake all the banking business on behalf oftheir own Governments.  However, the actual practices do vary among countries.In the UK, Bank of England is the main banker to Government and maintains thePrincipal Central Government Account.  Individual Government departments are notobliged to use Bank of England as their banker.  Typically Government Department withsignificant requirements for banking service put some or all of their banking business outto tender.  In the case of South Africa, the South African Reserve Bank acts as banker tothe Central Government.  Provincial Governments are, however, the clients of privatebanking sector.  In Japan, Bank of Japan carries out the transactions with the NationalGovernment but not with local Governments.  As regards USA, the Federal Reserve actsas the banker to US Government.  The Reserve Banks serve as depositories of the UnitedStates and perform several payment-related services.Legal and Institutional FrameworkGovernment business in India was initially handled by the Presidency Banks ofBengal, Madras and Bombay from 1862 to 1921 and thereafter by the Imperial Bank ofIndia, which came into existence as a result of amalgamation of the Presidency Banks.Since April 1, 1935, the Reserve Bank has been the banker to the Central and StateGovernments.According to Article 283(1) and (2) of the Indian Constitution, it is open to theCentral Government and to any State Government to make rules for the receipt, custodyand disbursement of all the amounts accruing to or held in its consolidated or contingencyfunds or in its public account. Sections 20 and 21 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934provide that the Central Government shall entrust the Bank with all its money,remittance, exchange and banking transactions in India and the management of its publicdebt, and shall also deposit all its cash balances with the Bank free of interest. The Bankmay, by agreement with any State Government, take over similar functions on behalf ofthat Government under Section 21A of the RBI Act.  Accordingly, the RBI is thecommon banker to the Central Government and all the State Governments in the IndianFederation with the exception of Jammu & Kashmir and Sikkim.2The Reserve Bank, as banker to various Governments, has well definedobligations and provides several services. First, the Central Government Treasury Rules,the Central Government Account (Receipts and Payments) Rules, in respect of thetransactions of the Central departments, and the corresponding provisions in the StateFinancial codes are deemed to be legally binding on the Bank. Second, the Bank carrieson the General Banking business of the Centre and the States in terms of the workingagreement between the Government and the Reserve Bank. The liability of the Bank tothe Governments in the conduct of the Government business is that of a banker to anordinary customer. Third, the Bank also undertakes to float loans and manage the loanson behalf of the Governments on agreed terms. Fourth, where there is no full-fledgedoffice of RBI, it appoints commercial banks as agents of RBI and they are maderesponsible for transacting the entire Government business. Fifth, the Bank does notcharge to Governments, the cost of carrying on Government business through its officesor the agency banks. Sixth, a facility for grant of ways and means advances is providedby Reserve Bank to the Governments, to meet the temporary mismatches in their incomestreams. Seventh, the RBI arranges for investments of surplus cash balances of theGovernments as a portfolio manager. Eighth, the RBI also acts as Adviser toGovernment, whenever called upon to do so, on monetary and banking related mattersbesides dispensing merchant banking services.Range of Banking ServicesBanker to Central GovernmentThe work relating to Government business is attended by the Public AccountsDepartment of the RBI. The discharge of the Bank's functions as banker to Governmentinvolves the receipt and payment of money on behalf of the various Governmentdepartments. For this purpose, under Section 45 of the RBI Act 1934, initially the RBIappointed State Bank of India as its sole agent at all places where the Bank had no officeor branch of its Banking Department. In turn, SBI entered into agency agreements withall its associate banks and delegated the agency functions to some of the branches of theassociate banks at certain centres. Considering the increasing volume of Governmentbusiness and nationalisation of some commercial banks, the Government and the RBIassociated nationalised banks, which had a vast network of branches, to conductGovernment business. In 1970, the Government empowered the RBI to appoint them asagents at any centre. By 1976, the SBI, Associate Banks and nationalised banks wereacting as agents of the RBI for this business. In order to facilitate the handling ofGovernment receipts and payments, currency chests were established with a number ofbranches of nationalised banks in addition to SBI and Associate Banks.Prior to 1976, the responsibility for arranging payments and compiling accountsof receipts and disbursals and auditing of transactions of all Central GovernmentMinistries devolved on a single authority, viz., Comptroller and Auditor General of India.The Government introduced from April 1976, a scheme in stages for decentralisation anddepartmentalisation of accounts of individual Ministries at the Centre, therebytransferring the responsibility for maintenance of accounts at all stages to the Ministries /Departments themselves.  Under this  scheme each ministry/ department has been allotted3a specific public sector bank for handling its transactions based on the principle of 'onebank - one ministry/department'.  Hence, the Reserve Bank does not handle government'sday-to-day transactions as before, except where the Bank itself has been nominated asbanker to a particular ministry/department.Banker to State GovernmentsThe financial transactions of the State Governments are carried out at a number ofoffices, including those of the RBI SBI, nationalised banks,  Treasuries, etc. TheGovernment transactions conducted at all such places are allowed without any referenceto the actual position of the cash balance of the State Government, the accounts of whichare maintained at the Central Accounts Section of the RBI at Nagpur. The transactionsthat are put through at various agency bank branches in the State concerned areconsolidated at the link cell in the respective State capitals and settled with the ReserveBank Office in the State. Currently, Reserve Bank also handles directly, banking businessof four State Governments viz., Karnataka, Maharashtra, Tamilnadu and West Bengal.The consolidated position including the State Government transactions put through atRBI Offices is ultimately booked in the Principal Account of the respective Statemaintained at CAS, Nagpur.Central AccountsThe Central Accounts Section (CAS) at the RBI maintains the principal accountsof both Central and State Governments. The principal accounts in Nagpur are  based onthe daily position / aggregate receipts and payments in respect of each Government,Ministry / department, received from RBI offices and agency banks. Each of theaccredited agency bank has set up a link office at Nagpur to liaise with CAS for fundssettlement. Thus, the Bank's offices and agency banks' branches function like tributaries,which flow in the direction and merge into the  Central Accounts Section.  CAS, Nagpur,thus plays a pivotal role in consolidating the transactions and working out the overalldaily position of each government.The actual day-to-day transactions are handled by the Bank's offices and agencybank branches. They render accounts to respective Government accounting authoritieswhile effecting monetary settlement with RBI. Since frequent adjustments between thevarious Governments are unavoidable, settlement of these transactions through CentralAccounts Section is convenient, accurate and expeditious.Reserve Bank through its Remittance Facilities Scheme operates a funds transfersystem. It carries out the adjustments as between the various Governments providing ineffect, facilities for the transfer of funds on a very large scale within the GovernmentSector.  In order to facilitate the actual conduct of Government transactions, the ReserveBank has built up over the years, a network of currency chests, repositories and smallcoins depots, all of which are intended to service all the Governments in the country.4As banker to the Government, Reserve Bank works out the overall funds positionand sends daily advices showing the balances in its books, ways and means granted andinvestments made. The daily advices are followed up with monthly statements, and areuseful from the point of view of enabling the Government to prepare their ways andmeans budgets.The arrangement between the Government of India and the Reserve Bank on theone hand and the public sector banks and the Reserve Bank on the other, are basedlargely on trust as well as being merely contractual.Treasury SystemAll payments on account of Central and State Governments are made either bycheques or by bills.  The Government of India, Reserve Bank and the banks, which servethe treasuries and sub-treasuries normally, prefer cheques to bills. Certain States likeMaharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, West Bengal etc. have adopted the system of paymentsby cheques at their Treasuries.  However, a large number of States are yet to introducethe cheque System. In view of the advantages of cheques as compared with bills, Officialpolicy continues to be in favour of changing over to cheque system.Since 1976, Treasuries and non-departmental Pay and Accounts Offices haveceased to be responsible for handling transactions on behalf of the Central (Civil)Departments as integrated financial advisers and principal accounts officers of thesedepartments have taken over the responsibility for receiving and paying money,compiling and maintaining the accounts, in respect of all the transactions relating to thesedepartments. The pay and accounts officer or a drawing and disbursing officer of eachMinistry or Department is linked to a designated public sector bank or RBI and is notallowed to draw on a treasury.Other ServicesIn addition to being a pure banker to Government, RBI provides a full range ofrelated services to Government.    These include exchange, remittance transactions,management of public debt and issue of new loans, handling the forex transactions of theGovernment of India, investment of surplus funds of Governments, providing safecustody facility, providing of ways and means  advances, management of special fundslike Consolidated Sinking Fund, Guarantee Redemption Fund, Calamity Relief Funds,National Defence Scheme, etc., issue and management of tap bonds like Relief Bonds,administration of the Scheme for disbursal of pensions of Central and StateGovernments’ employees through public sector banks, and as Advisor to Government onall matters involving monetary and economic perspective.The fee recovered by the Bank for some of the above services, which are renderedas an adjunct to its role as Banker to Government, are nominal and do not even cover thecosts, while for most other services no charge is levied.5Recent Reforms UndertakenFocal Point and Beyond.The experience of the working of the "Departmentalised Scheme" has shown afew shortcomings.  With the large number of bank branches handling the work, delaysoften occurred in the transmission of the relevant documents (paid cheques, challansscrolls etc) to Pay and Accounts Officers (PAOs) for accounting. Besides, there werecertain difficulties in reconciliation of figures between government departments andbanks.In order to obviate these difficulties as well as making reconciliation easier, aWorking Group was set up in 1986 to review the working of the scheme, and on the basisof its recommendation existing procedures were revised.  This marked the beginning offocal point approach for reporting and settlement of government transactions and set thepace for further refinement of the accounting system. The focal point approach envisages"one focal point branch - one (Pay and Accounts Office) PAO". This concept wasincorporated into the system to bring about an interactive method of resolving the day-to-day problems while achieving expeditious reconciliation. This system ensures updatingof accounts at PAO level and speedy settlement of funds at Central Accounts Section atNagpur.  It has, sought to bridge the gap between RBI accounts and Governmentaccounts.  Based on its success, it has been subsequently adopted in phases, in CentralBoard of Direct Taxes (CBDT) and extended to Departmentalised Ministries Accounts(DMA) (both civil and non-civil ministries).  There has been a close alignment betweenaccounting jurisdiction of the government and the dealing branches of the bank.However, in the envisaged computerized environment, with electronicconnectivity, the settlement of funds on real time basis, directly between the dealingbranches and CAS at Nagpur for credit of Government Account without the interventionof the Focal Point and Link Cell may be a distinct possibility in the near future.Standing Committee on ComputerisationGiven the large magnitude of the transactions in Government account, the manualsystem results in delays in handling transactions.  Complete electronic data processing inthe preparation and settlement of the accounts of Government business by the agencybanks as also for compilation of accounts at Treasury/Pay and AccountsOffice/Accountant General will eliminate the time lag in the flow of information andimprove standards of accuracy. During the last few years, RBI offices and agency bankshave initiated steps for computerization of Government transactions at their dealingbranches. The Committee on Technology Upgradation in Banking Sector laid down theroad map for computerization of bank branches handling Government business, to beachieved in phases. The first phase envisaged computerization of all Focal Point branchesof agencies by March 31, 2000 and State government Link Cells / dealing branches in thesecond phase thereafter. The Committee desired that efforts should be made to inter-connect the computerized branches dealing in Government Accounts with Link Offices/branches, and the Public Accounts Departments of the Bank and also Central Accounts6Section, Nagpur where it is ultimately accounted for in the books of accounts. OnGovernment side, the Committee suggested that all PAOs/Circle Offices of Governmentshould be computerized by March 31, 2001 and the Drawing Offices / Treasury Officeswell before March 31, 2002 in alignment with computerization of Focal Point andDealing branches.A Standing Committee comprising members from RBI, Government and agencybanks is monitoring the computerization of government transactions. There have beensome delays in adhering to the time schedule mentioned. RBI has been urging the agencybanks to capture 80 per cent of Government business by June 2002.Payment Systems ReformsPayment and Settlement Systems constitute the backbone of any economy and theexistence of competent payment and settlement systems have a positive impact on theefficient functioning of the various sectors of the economy. Central Banks in the worldare according great importance to well established payment and settlement systems. TheReserve Bank, too, has taken up as its mission, the establishment of a robust, safe, secureand efficient payment and settlement system for the country as part of its initiativesaimed at financial sector reforms in this area. Constituted in 1999, the National PaymentsCouncil is the Apex level body, which provides general policy directions and guidelinesfor reforms in the Payment and Settlement Systems of the country.Initiatives aimed at improvements in the payments and settlement systems arecentered on the three-pronged strategies of consolidation, development and integration ofthe various components of the payment and settlement systems. Consolidation takes itsbase from existing activities such as computerised clearing, etc. Development envisagesopening of new clearing houses, introduction of systems such as the Centralised FundsManagement System and Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) and Integration of allthese initiatives both within the Reserve Bank and for the banking Sector as a wholewould result in the culmination of the reform process.Non-paper based payment systems, such as Electronic Funds Transfers (EFT) andElectronic Clearing Services (debit and Credit Clearing), have been accepted widely foruse within the country. The proposed introduction of the Real Time Gross Settlement(RTGS) System would ensure settlement of funds in real time and in an electronicmanner. All these would have positive impact for the government sector too, which couldexploit the benefits of ECS and EFT for even their conventional payments - such as taxcollections, various payments, tax refunds, drawback payments, etc.Since movement of funds is scheduled to take place using electronic means, theneed for providing for a more elaborate and clear  legal infrastructure has also beenrecognized. Accordingly, work has commenced on draft  legislation to regulate thepayment systems, which may not only be restricted to banks and financial institutions,but could also go beyond that. The proposed legislation will also have powers to regulateEFT, except that the proposed EFT regulation will deal only with credit transfer. The7debit transfer transactions will continue to be governed by the Negotiable InstrumentsAct, 1881. Further, in order to deal with electronic instruments like e-cheques, which arein the nature of debit transfer, amendments to the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881 andIT Act 2000 have been suggested for consideration of Government.Improving Connectivity between CGA and CASComputerisation in Central Accounts Section and connectivity to various user agencies:Since July 1, 2001, a state-of-the-art technological Architecture for managementof Government Accounts at Central Accounts Section, Nagpur was set up. The systemprovides online data processing capability in front office mode and on line connectivityto all the RBI offices, agency banks and State Governments.  The system is designed toprovide information on a real-time on-line basis to Central and State Governments forascertaining their cash balance position and other transactions.As a further improvement, a Virtual Private Network (VPN) is being establishedbetween CGA and Principal Accounts Officers of various ministries. The network is alsoproposed to be extended to the Pay & Accounts Office level. The network would act as ahub for electronic interchange of information between CAS Nagpur and various civil andnon-civil ministries. While Inter Government Transactions would be handled on anonline basis, the Agency Bank transactions will be available as and when reported toCAS. The above arrangements when fully put in place will enable the various PrincipalAccounts Offices to send Inter-Government Transactions, along with details of therelative sanction orders to CAS electronically, get confirmation advices (clearancememos) instantly and eliminate most of the reconciliation problems not only at the levelof Central Government but also facilitate proper accounting in the States.In fact State Governments have been complaining regarding delays in receipt ofsanction orders as a result of which they are unable to know the purpose of the fundsbeing given from Central Government at the time of such amount being credited by RBIto their accounts. RBI has also taken initiative in redesigning the format of the IGA (InterGovernment Adjustment) advice and Clearance Memo to ensure that the advice beingsent to CAS is comprehensive and meets requirements of the State Governments as well.I would request the Office of CGA to examine the suggestions made by us in this regardand implement the revised IGA format at the earliest.Another benefit of the connectivity would be strong MIS support. From theBank's view point, on-line access will eliminate the need for periodical statements beingsent to the accounting authorities as the authorities will be able to choose the period (aweek, fortnight, month or more) for which they want the data and then can use it for anynumber of MIS purposes. Maintenance of parallel records can also be eliminated.8The RBI is also examining the feasibility of using the Internet to connect all StateGovernments, Central Government Departments and various agency banks to implementtotal workflow automation in respect Government transaction. Under the current procedure, the fund settlement at CAS Nagpur takes place afterthe rendering of accounts by the focal point branches to the local PAO. The focal pointbranches receive the scrolls and the documents from the dealing branches by post(normally by Registered post).  This means that settlement of funds is inevitably delayedfor the period of postal transit plus the time for consolidation at focal point branchcreating a lag in final accounting in government account with CAS Nagpur. During thislag, the funds remain in pipeline as a float at the cost of government departments. Often,the banks also suffer opportunity loss due to delay in monetary settlement.  With thecomputerization of transactions both at the bank branches and government departments, itwould be possible to re-engineer the process. Forwarding of paper scroll/receiptedchallans and paid cheques to government offices could take place at a later stage than theelectronic transmission of transactions.  This means that the focal point branch wouldtransmit the transactions to CAS Nagpur without waiting for the scrolls received from thebranches to be consolidated and verified.  The Committee on Technology Upgradation inBanking Sector examined this aspect and felt that this would help in quicker finalisationof government account and fund settlement at CAS Nagpur. The issue remains open.Interaction with States A forum has been provided by the Reserve Bank bringing all the FinanceSecretaries of State Governments and the Union for exchange of ideas and sorting out theproblems. These conferences are held in Reserve Bank for the last few years and thedeliberations have proved useful in identifying the common problems and developingbest practices in regard to Government finances. Between November 1997 and November2001, nine  such conferences have been held. A number of important initiatives relatingto ways and means advances, approach to market borrowing programme, investment ofsurpluses, ceilings on State guarantees, apart from changes in the content and format forreporting have emanated and taken shape as a result of interactions in these meetings.Major IssuesMinimum Balances Requirements in GovernmentThe RBI is authorized to provide Ways and Means Advances to Central and StateGovernments in terms of Section 17(5) of the RBI Act.  Until 1994-95, the needs ofGovernment were accommodated through automatic monetisation by issuing ad hocTreasury Bills at 4.6 per cent. Considering the ill effects of automatic monetisation ofGovernment deficit, the Reserve Bank and the Government agreed mutually inSeptember 1994 to restrict the issue of ad hocs for the year-end and also within the yearand for scrapping the issue of ad hoc treasury bills from 1 April 1997.  Accordingly theissue of ad hoc treasury bills was discontinued with effect from 1 April 1997.Simultaneously, a scheme of granting Ways and Means Advances by the Reserve Bank to9Government of India has been introduced to accommodate temporary mismatches inGovernment receipts and payments, interest on which was initially concessional, ispresently at Bank Rate.  Currently, Central Government is required to maintain aminimum balance of Rs.10 crore on a daily basis and Rs.100 crore on Fridays. The limitfor Ways & Means Advances for 2001-2002 to Central Government has been fixed at Rs.10,000 crore for the first half year and at Rs. 6,000 crore for the second half year. Whenthe Government utilizes 75 per cent of the WMA limit, the Reserve Bank considers freshfloatation of market loan depending on market conditions.State Governments were expected to match the outflows with inflows verycarefully so as to avoid recourse to ways and means advances from RBI. If a StateGovernment allowed its account to emerge in overdraft, this would have been regardedwith extreme disfavour and also as reflecting on the competence and ability of the StateGovernment to manage its own finances. Over the years, the State Governments resortedincreasingly to WMA and overdraft. The WMA limits were fixed as a multiple ofminimum balance of States. However, while the multiples increased, the minimumbalances required to be maintained by the State Governments were not revised between1976 and 1999. Since 1999, the WMA Scheme is being worked out on the basis of therecommendations of the B.P.R.Vittal Committee (1998). The Committee recommendedthat the minimum balance should be revised and linked to the same base as normal WMAwhich itself is worked out taking into account the sum of revenue receipts and capitalexpenditure. The first revision after the implementation of the Vittal Committee formulawas effected from April 1, 1999, followed by the next revision from February 1, 2001.The latest revision took effect from April 1, 2002. However, the minimum balances havenot been revised since April 1, 1999. A review of the WMA scheme will be made inApril 2003.Automatic Debit Mechanism The Technical Committee of State Finance Secretaries on the State GovernmentGuarantees has observed that such a mechanism runs the risk of resulting in insufficientfunds for financing minimum obligatory payments and other grounds as well.  Using anautomatic recovery mechanism for inviting subscription to bonds issued by autonomousbodies with State Government Guarantees not only erodes the credibility of the StateGovernment, but also would prompt other States to request for such assurance to offeradditional comfort for investors. The matter is under the consideration of the ReserveBank and the Central Government.Expansion in Agency Banks At present, the RBI, SBI and nationalised banks conduct business relating toGovernments. More recently, private banks promoted by the all India FinancialInstitutions (AFI), which meet the defined criteria, are also being considered forinduction for conduct of Government business.  The objective is to help the StateGovernments to get better, quick service with safety of funds. The question is to strike a10balance between the two and this may have to be decided by the States with the help ofRBI. Thus, there can be competition for Government business in the future.The Reserve Bank, being a Central Bank, for achieving the functional focus, mayhave to consider in due course, shedding of the retail banking business in relation toGovernments in favour of the agency banks with a view to ensuring that in the long run,the Bank will maintain only the Principal Accounts of the Governments, leaving the day-to-day banking business to the commercial banks functioning as its agents.TreasuryThe treasury system has evolved very gradually over a number of years and hasworked with reasonable satisfaction.  Nevertheless, there is scope for improvement with aview to providing more facilities to the general public in a number of ways. First, thenon-banking treasuries / sub-treasuries, which handle the cash business itself, could begradually converted into banking treasuries by transferring their cash business to banks.Second, States may weigh the option of introducing separation of audit and accounts anddepartmentalization of accounts on the lines of Centre gradually. Third, as cheques forvarious reasons are preferable to bills, it is desirable to encourage wider use of cheques.The treasury is the primary accounting unit and its cash accounts are prepared andrendered to Accountant General. Fourth, in order to cut short delays, many treasuries,sub-treasuries and pay and accounts offices have made arrangements for disbursing smallamounts in cash without the intervention of the bank, even when they are served by thepublic sector banks as agents.  It may be advantageous to raise the monetary limit forpayments across the counters, without requiring the payees to visit the banks.Rationalising Agency ChargesThe agreements entered into by Bank with the State Governments provide that theBank shall not be entitled to any remuneration for the conduct of ordinary bankingbusiness of the Government other than such advantage that may accrue to it from holdingof cash balances free of obligation to pay interest thereof. The minimum balances by nomeans compensate the Bank for the cost of conducting Government business. On thecontrary, the Bank has been remunerating the Agency banks for conducting theGovernment business on its behalf at a rate related to the costs incurred by them forconducting Government business.  The rate is revised from time to time quinquenniallyafter ascertaining the actual cost of conducting the government business and the presentrate is 11.80 paise per Rs.100 of Government turnover. Agency banks requested for arevision of the methodology of determining the rates and an Expert Committee wasconstituted to study their request.  Recently in its report, the Expert Group on revising themethodology for determining the cost of conducting Government business, has observedthat in most of the countries, the cost is borne by the respective Governments and not theCentral Bank. The cost of conducting government business has been rising in the recentyears. A possible way of rationalising the agency charges from the present cost plussystem could be to move over to a system of bidding for Government business by agencybanks.11Reducing Lags in CreditAt present, banks have been allowed a transit time of 5 days in respect of localreceipts and 9 days in respect of outstation receipts for settlement of funds.  In order toensure expeditious credit to Government account by the dealing branches, a deterrentmeasure has been put in place.  Accordingly, any delay in crediting the receipts toGovernment account beyond the stipulated period (of 15 days in case of delayedremittances over Rs.1 lakh and one month in other cases) attracts penal interest. Ascompared to public sector banks, the newly inducted private banks are allowed merely 5days for settlement.  This is based on the distinction in regard to the degree ofcomputerization of public sector banks vis-à-vis private banks. With the upgradation ofpayment systems in the country and electronic connectivity, the cut off limits needs to bemade more stringent with the ultimate goal of achieving real time settlement inGovernment Account, with CAS, Nagpur.Possible Improvements by GovernmentSubmission of Scrolls in Electronic Form At present, the scrolls are submitted in paper form separately for receipts andpayments. With the computerization of bank branches and government departments, thescrolls in magnetic media (floppy form) should be acceptable to Governmentdepartments.  A switch over to submission of scrolls on magnetic media, will necessitatedelinking of paid instruments and the payment scrolls.The Reserve Bank has introduced 'Electronic Clearing Service' (ECS) for bulkreceipts / payments which involve multiple credits with a single debit or vice-versa. ECSis customer friendly and remains untapped by Government.   Government should useECS for bulk and repetitive transactions like salary, pension, income tax refund ordersetc.  As recommended by the Committee on Technology Upgradation in the BankingSector, the Government may examine the feasibility of introducing a variant of anelectronic funds transfer system to facilitate collection of taxes, beginning with directtaxes.Elimination of Paper-based Reporting SystemUnder the present system, it is a government requirement that all deposits in thegovernment account should be accompanied by an appropriate challan. The challans arein multiple copies, different shapes and sizes. This requirement of the government hasconstrained the process of electronic banking in government business.  Over the years,despite the deliberations in various fora, it has not been possible to reduce the number ofcopies of challan. With the swift progress in banking, and the electronic connectivity asenvisaged, it would become possible for the assessees to deposit the government dues inany designated bank by using a simple pay-in slip as in the case of bank deposit, and at a12later stage, electronically by quoting the PAN. The elimination of the challan would pavethe way for electronic settlement.Discontinuance of Advice System for Income Tax Refund OrdersAt present, Income-tax refund orders advices for value upto Rs.999 are sentdirectly to assessees while advices for Rs.1,000 and above are forwarded to payee banks.The advices are not received promptly resulting in the return of refund orders causinginconvenience to assessees.  Significantly, even after switchover to MICR form with allits in-built security features on par with a cheque, the advice system has been continuedregardless of the difficulties caused to the assessees. At the Government level, issuesrelated to ECS and forwarding of advices in electronic formats viz., magnetic media, etc.,are being considered.Customer ServiceGovernment of India has constituted a standing committee at Apex level tomonitor the working of the schemes pertaining to Departmentalised Ministries. Similarmonitoring committees at local level are also functioning for Central Board of Excise andCustoms (CBEC) and CBDT.Reserve Bank has been proactive in extending prompt and courteous customerservice. The bank has an institutionalized set up for redressal of complaints fromcustomers on regular basis. The Bank has also taken Citizen Charter initiatives anddisplayed the Charter for frontline Departments with public interface. Specific to this,customer satisfaction surveys are organized at frequent intervals and appropriateresponses are formulated for improving service and avoiding recurrence of complaints, tothe extent feasible.In order to assess the level of customer satisfaction rendered by the Reserve Bankand its agencies in acting as banker to Governments in the light of all round technologicaldevelopments taking place at RBI/agency banks/ Government Departments and tosuggest improvements in the day-to-day operations of the Government business, ReserveBank had constituted five sub-Groups in October 2001, one each at Bangalore, Chennai,Hyderabad, Mumbai and Nagpur offices comprising officials from Reserve Bank,representatives from Finance Department of the State Governments. The sub-Groups haddeliberated on the day-to-day operational procedures in vogue in Reserve Bank andevaluated their efficiency in relation to the users and accounting authorities.The Groups came up with very valuable suggestions in January 2002.  Thisincludes laying down a roadmap for enhancing the level of computerization, both atagency banks and Government Departments, provision of tele-banking facility at all LinkOffices, simplification of challan forms, making the challans easily available throughinternet, transmission of scrolls / DMS through electronic media in addition to regularmode, phasing out of non-MICR instruments, acceptance of only local cheques forGovernment payments instead of outstation instruments, cheque system to replace bill13system at Government Departments, use of ECS for effecting Government payments,introduction of note sorting machines at Government Departments, easing pensioners'problems, acceptance of cash by RBI beyond working hours, curtailing the cut-off periodfor levy of penal interest on delayed remittance of Government collections / funds to RBIby agency banks progressively, extension of time available at CAS for settlement offunds by link cells of agency banks at Nagpur.The RBI is earnest in its intent to implement all these recommendations inconsultation with the Governments/agency banks. The RBI is also formalizing the reviewmechanism by setting up Standing Advisory Committees under the Regional Directors ofRBI offices at all centers, so as to ensure optimum customer satisfaction at all times. Theday-to-day procedures are being recast in the light of the suggestions, which haveemerged.Conclusion The endeavour of the RBI is to create conditions for the common person to payGovernment dues at his/her bank branch of choice, while ensuring instantaneous credit tothe Government account with Reserve Bank. This can be achieved with a high degree ofcomputerization with appropriate connectivity / net-working, encompassing agencybanks, Government Departments and Central Bank for expeditious, cost effective andseamless financial flows, in a paperless environment.In view of the enormous work of Government and complexities and inter linkagesbetween the Central and State Governments and the banking system, it maybe possible toexplore the setting up of an Advisory Board, which could meet quarterly, for evolvingbest practices in the overall interest of discharging the Reserve Bank's duties as Banker toGovernments. This arrangement will be analogous to the Cash and Debt ManagementGroup in which Government of India and the RBI are involved. I commend theacceptance of this proposal as a fitting tribute to this Silver Jubilee Celebrations.Thank You.· Address of Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Conference of the SilverJubilee Celebrations of the Indian Civil Accounts Organization, at New Delhi on April 3, 2002. Dr.Reddyis thankful to Mr.K.Venkatappa, Dr.A.Prasad, who also presented on Dr.Reddy's behalf,Mr.G.D.Kallianpur and Mr.P.Loganathan for their assistance.14
