Financial System Stability and Basel II  -Way ForwardThe initiative of the Association of Professional Bankers – Sri Lanka inorganising this conference on Financial System Stability and Basel II –Way Forward is indeed commendable. Basel II is an importantmilestone in banking regulation and supervision and ought to beviewed as a necessary process for promoting the safety andsoundness of the banking sector and thereby strengthening financialstability.What is financial stability?2. In a situation of financial stability, financial institutions andmarkets are able to efficiently mobilise savings, provide liquidity andallocate investment.  The growing role of the financial sector in the rightallocation of resources at appropriate prices could significantlyenhance the efficiency with which our economies function. If financialmarkets work well, they will direct resources to their most productiveuses. Risks will be more accurately priced and will be borne by thosewho have appetite for absorbing risks. Real economic activity withhigher investments, in both quantity as well as quality, would result ingrowth with macroeconomic stability and fewer financial uncertainties.The objectives of financial and macro-economic stability are, thus,mutually reinforcing.  As Governor Reddy has put it, ‘financial stabilityneeds to be particularly ensured when the financial system isundergoing structural changes’.3. Financial stability does not mean total absence of failure ofindividual financial institutions, and fluctuation of prices in markets forfinancial assets. Such events become a cause for concern only if theylead to an impairment of the basic intermediation function or a severemisallocation of capital._______________________Address by Smt. Kishori Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India,that the  17 Annual Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers –Sri Lanka, in Colombo on August 26, 20054.     Before talking about the Indian financial system I must commendthe efforts made by the Sri Lankan authorities towards strengtheningthe financial sector.  Its resilience is borne out by the fact that theTsunami devastation at the end of 2004 did not affect the stability ofthe Sri Lankan financial sector.Indian financial system5. In recent years, there has been a considerable widening anddeepening of the Indian financial system, coupled with the increasingglobalisation of financial services. India is fast approaching an era offinancial conglomerisation and ‘bundling’ in the provision of financialservices. These developments are opportunities for the marketparticipants but nevertheless pose serious challenges to regulation andsupervision of the banking system.6.   In India, the pursuit of financial and macroeconomic stability hasemerged as the central plank of financial sector reforms.  Stability ofthe financial system has a critical influence on price stability andsustained growth, which constitute the principal objectives of policy.  Astable financial system facilitates efficient transmission of monetarypolicy initiatives and the smooth operation of payment systems.  Fromthe perspective of regulation and supervision, safeguarding depositors’interest, and ensuring strong risk management within payment,clearing and settlement systems, is the mandate of the Reserve Bankof India (RBI).  The RBI has put in place Prudential SupervisoryReporting System, covering all vital aspects and a wide range ofindicators, which serves as an early warning signal as well.  Macro-Prudential Indicators (MPIs) are being compiled since March 2000,collating data from various reports that are received in the regulatoryand supervisory wings of the Bank.  The review of MPIs covers theareas of capital adequacy, asset quality, risk management,management soundness, earnings and profitability liquidity, interestrate, maturity structure of assets and liabilities, and various indicatorspertaining to major segments of financial markets such as debt, forex,capital market segments, besides macroeconomic indicators such asgrowth, inflation, interest rate and exchange rate.  The MPI review isaccompanied by a review of developments in the global environment.As part of the efforts to disseminate these Financial SoundnessIndicators (FSIs), the Reserve Bank has started publishing the core setof indicators in its various publications.7. Financial sector reforms adopted in the 1990s have enhancedthe strength of banks and financial institutions in India.  A strikingfeature of these institutions has been their improved resilience to thedomestic and the external environment.  The reform process haschanged the relationship between the RBI and commercial banks fromone of micro regulation to that of macro management.  Aided by therobust macroeconomic environment, banks’ bottom lines haveimproved significantly over the last two years.  The aggregate capitalratios of scheduled commercial banks at 12.83 per cent as at endMarch 2005 have been well above the stipulated level of 9 per cent.8. The Reserve Bank, along with the Government, has initiatedseveral institutional measures to contain the levels of NPAs.  Notableamong these include establishment of Debt Recovery Tribunals, LokAdalats (people’s courts), Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARCs)and Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) mechanism.  SettlementAdvisory Committees have been formed at regional and head officelevel of commercial banks.  Enactment of the Securitisation andReconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of SecurityInterest (SARFAESI) Act, 2002 has helped in improving the recoveryclimate in the country.  The Government amended the relevantprovisions of the Act to address the concerns expressed by theSupreme Court regarding a fair deal to borrowers through an ordinancedated November 11,2004. The declining trend in gross and net NPLsfor scheduled commercial banks has continued despite the adoption of90-day delinquency norm and unprecedented surge in growth ofadvances.9. Legislation has since been enacted to facilitate the compilationand dissemination of credit information including data on defaults to thefinancial system by the Credit Information Bureau of India Ltd. (CIBIL).The legal provisions and practice in bankruptcy of the real sector arehowever still inadequate and need further reform.10. The Reserve Bank is also making efforts to formulate policies todeal with risks arising on account of operations of large and complexfinancial institutions as these pose a systemic risk.  As a first step inthis direction, an inter-agency Working Group on FinancialConglomerates (FC) comprising three supervisory bodies, viz., theReserve Bank, the Securities and Exchange Board of India andInsurance Regulatory and Development Authority, in June 2004,identified 23 FCs and a pilot process for obtaining information fromthese conglomerates has been initiated.11. The year 2004-05 has witnessed a surge in credit off-takeleading to a sizeable decline in the liquid assets of the bank. Consistentwith the shift to functioning in a competitive economy and to theadoption of prudential best practices, the major challenges facing thebanking sector are the deployment of funds in quality assets and themanagement of revenues and costs.Basel II12. Unlike Basel I, which is simple, Basel II is complex. Therefore,the BCBS does not expect Basel II to be adopted widely or quickly.They believe that countries should adopt the options and approachesthat are most appropriate for the state of their markets, their bankingsystems, and their supervisory structures. Supervisors can adopt theframework on an evolutionary basis and use elements of nationaldiscretion to adapt it to their needs.Why move to Basel II13. Under Basel II the capital requirements are more risk sensitiveas these are directly related to the credit rating of each counter-partyinstead of counter-party category as it is under Basel I. Further, itrequires banks to hold capital not only for credit and market risk butalso for operational risk (OR) and where warranted for interest raterisks, credit concentration risks, liquidity risks etc. This makes Basel IImore comprehensive than Basel I. Where banks were required to holda uniform level of 8 per cent as minimum capital under Basel I,supervisors have the discretion to require banks to hold higher levels ofminimum capital under Basel II. Basel II has other advantages such asproviding a range of options for counter-party capital requirements andin the process reducing the gap between required capital andregulatory capital. Basel II recognises a wider range of collaterals andprovides incentives for improved risk management practices.14. An interesting point to note here is that Basel II recognises theelement of diversification of risk in the SME sector and has assigned alower risk weight for retail SME exposure under standardisedapproach. The non-retail SME exposure would also attract a lower riskweight where they have better external ratings under the standardisedapproach. Shifting to Basel II, therefore, could be advantageous foreconomies whose banks have significant SME exposure.Indian Approach to Basel II15. With the commencement of the banking sector reforms in theearly 1990s, the RBI has been consistently upgrading the Indianbanking sector by adopting international best practices.  The approachto reforms is one of having clarity about the destination as alsodeciding on the sequence and pace of reforms to suit Indian conditions.This has helped us in moving ahead with the reforms withoutdisruption.  With the successful implementation of banking sectorreforms over the past decade, the Indian banking system has shownsubstantial improvement on various parameters.  It has become robustand displayed significant resilience to shocks.  There is ampleevidence of the capacity of the Indian banking system to migratesmoothly to Basel II norms.16. The policy approach to Basel II in India is such that externalperception about India conforming to best international standards ispositive and is in our favour.  Commercial banks in India will startimplementing Basel II with effect from March 31, 2007. They will initiallyadopt the Standardised Approach for credit risk and the Basic IndicatorApproach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed, bothby the banks and also by the supervisors, some banks may be allowedto migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRB) Approach.17. Some of the regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank ofIndia, relevant for Basel II are as follows: First, we have tried to ensurethat the banks have suitable risk management frameworks orientedtowards their requirements dictated by the size and complexity ofbusiness, risk philosophy, market perceptions and the expected level ofcapital. Second, Risk Based Supervision (RBS) in 23 banks has beenintroduced on a pilot basis. Third, we have been encouraging banks toformalize their capital adequacy assessment process (CAAP) inalignment with their business plans and performance budgetingsystems. This, together with the adoption of RBS, would enablefactoring in of the Pillar II requirements under Basel II. Fourth, we havebeen expanding the area of disclosures (Pillar III), so as to havegreater transparency in the financial position and risk profile of banks.Finally, we are trying to build capacity for ensuring the regulator’sability for identifying and permitting eligible banks to adopt IRB /Advanced Measurement approaches.18. As per normal practice, and with a view to ensuring a smoothmigration to Basel II, a consultative and participative approach hasbeen adopted for both designing and implementing Basel II. A SteeringCommittee comprising senior officials from 14 banks (public, privateand foreign) has been constituted with representation from the IndianBanks’ Association and the RBI. The Steering Committee had formedsub-groups to address specific issues. On the basis ofrecommendations of the Steering Committee, draft guidelines to thebanks on implementation of the New Capital Adequacy Frameworkhave been issued.19. Implementation of Basel II will require more capital for banks inIndia due to the fact that operational risk is not captured under Basel I,and the capital charge for market risk was not prescribed until recently.Though the cushion available in the system, which at present has aCRAR of over 12 per cent, is comforting, banks are exploring variousavenues for meeting the capital requirements under Basel II.20. Even while we have decided to take the Indian banking systemon to the simple approaches under Basel II, we have taken someinitiatives which would clearly demonstrate that we have no intentionsof either diluting the standards or picking on the less stringent optionslaid down in Basel II. Through these initiatives, we have prescribedstringent prudential requirements for banks in India e.g. with regard toadoption of risk weights for claims on State Governments, PublicSector Enterprises, banks and for capital market and real estateexposures.  Further even though banks can be allowed to useunsolicited ratings under the Standardised Approach, we would notallow the use of unsolicited ratings.21. Also, we have been expanding the area of disclosures so as tohave greater transparency with regard to the financial position and riskprofile of banks. Illustratively, with a view to enhancing furthertransparency, all cases of penalty imposed by the RBI on the banks asalso directions issued on specific matters, including those arising out ofinspection, are to be placed in the public domain. Such proactivedisclosures by the Regulator are expected to have a salutary effect onthe functioning of the banking system. In addition to the above, anypenal action taken against any foreign bank branches in India are alsoshared with the Home country regulator with a view to enhance thequality of consolidated supervision. These initiatives will be animportant supplement to the Pillar 3 disclosures prescribed under BaselII, which in our opinion will further the cause of a stable bankingsystem.The Way forward22. On the way forward it has to be recognised that implementationof Basel II will make considerable demands on scarce resources interms of both economic resources and human resources.  Banks musttake on the challenges and convert these into opportunities.Here I would like to quote Ms. Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of theBoard of Governors of the US Federal Reserve System:“Banking will remain a highly dynamic industry. Supervisors will have tobe especially attentive to changing best practices and ensure thatBasel II does not inhibit adoption of new banking practices andfinancial instruments”“Maintaining financial stability in global banking and financial marketscontinues to be an important objective of regulators, bankers, and othermarket participants, particularly because of the negative impact thatfinancial instability has on economies as a whole. Basel II, in my view,will help improve financial stability…Even though minimum regulatorycapital ratios are likely to be more volatile under Basel II, this reflectsgreater risk sensitivity.”23. Some of the issues which emerging economies in particularwould need to address on the way ahead are higher capitalrequirements, improved IT architectures, data issues, consolidation,capacity building, external ratings, use of national discretion, validatingthe concept of economic capital and corporate governance.(a) Higher capital requirements – The Basel document prescribesthe minimum capital requirements and banks need to be encouraged tohold more capital than the minimum. As a part of their strategy, banksare expected to operate at levels above the minimum to take care ofthe fluctuations in capital requirements in response to the fluctuationsin the quality of risk exposures. Further, it will be necessary to ensurethat all elements of expected losses should be fully met by provisioningand that capital is available exclusively to support unexpected losses.Higher capital requirements could pose difficulties if there are stateowned banks. This may require consideration of options such aspreference shares and other innovative tier-I instruments, hybrid tier-IIcapital instruments and tier-III capital instruments.(b) Improved IT architecture/MIS – The basic requirement forimplementation of Basel II is improved information systems formanaging and using data for business decisions. Banks should,therefore, be encouraged to strengthen their IT architecture and alsoimprove their information and reporting systems. This would also equipbanks to cope appropriately with the Pillar 3 disclosure requirements.(c) Consolidation – In the normal course of operations bankswould be constantly looking for opportunities of inorganic growth.Banks which operate with capital above the minimum levels have anedge over the other banks to the extent that they would be able toseize an opportunity for merger / acquisition as and when it is availablewithout any loss of time. However, it would be necessary for suchbanks to improve their internal controls and risk management systemsbefore embarking on a path of inorganic growth.  Basel IIimplementation would enable banks to meet the above pre-requisitesand place them in a situation where they can take advantage ofopportunities as and when they arise.(d) Data issues – Implementation of Basel II, both underStandardised Approach and IRB Approaches, would involve utilisationof data for computing capital requirements. While the dependence ondata under the Standardised Approach would be largely similar toBasel I, the data requirements are considerable under the AdvancedApproaches. Banks would require adequate and acceptable historicaldata to compute capital requirement under these Approaches. At theminimum banks need to have historical data for computing theprobability of default, loss given default and operational risk losses.While building up this data base banks also need to ensure purity andintegrity of such data.(e) Capacity Building – Above all, capacity building, both in banksand the regulatory bodies is a serious challenge, especially with regardto adoption of the advanced approaches. Banks would need to focuson equipping their staff suitably to handle the advanced riskmanagement systems and supervisors need to equip themselves withequal skills to have effective supervision. Given the demand for skills inthe sector, the level of attrition is likely to be high. Hence, banks needto focus on motivating the skilled staff and retaining them. We haveinitiated supervisory capacity-building measures in India to identify thegaps and to assess as well as quantify the extent of additional capital,which may be required to be maintained by such banks. Themagnitude of this task, which is scheduled to be completed byDecember 2006, appears daunting since we have as many as 90scheduled commercial banks in India.(f) External ratings – In a situation where countries do not havedomestic rating agencies or where the extent of rating penetration islow the capacity of banks in these countries to relate capitalrequirements to the actual underlying risk will be seriouslyhandicapped. It would be necessary to develope domestic ratingagencies and look at methods for increasing the rating penetration ofthe rating agencies.(g) Use of national discretion – As I have mentioned earlier,discretion is available to national supervisors under Basel II frameworkon many aspects. It would be necessary for the national supervisors toexercise this discretion with caution. There could be various sectors ofthe economy which may deserve a preferential treatment taking intoaccount their national relevance. It would be in order to lighten theburden of Basel II on these sectors within the limitations of nationaldiscretion provided the resulting capital requirements reflect theunderlying risks in these sectors. In case the situation prevailing in acountry reflects higher risks then it would perhaps be necessary for thesupervisor to factor this while formulating the national rules for Basel IIimplementation.(h) Validating the concept of economic capital – The Basel IIFramework will promote adoption of stronger risk managementpractices by banks which will address all major risks comprehensively.Basel II, by being risk sensitive, will enable banks to bridge the gapbetween economic capital and regulatory capital. Through the Pillar IIrequirements under Basel II, banks are expected to have their owninternal methodologies for assessing the risks and computing thecapital requirements to support those risks even for banks adopting thestandardised approach for credit risk.  This would aid the banks tomove in the direction of building their own economic capital models,which can direct their business strategies. It is possible that many ofthe banks in emerging economies might not have developed theirinternal capital adequacy assessment processes (ICAAP).Implementation of Basel II would now require these banks to have inplace an ICAAP which meets the Basel II specifications. The regulatorswould perhaps be required to take the initiative in this regard toenhance the level of understanding of ICAAP in banks, the benefitsthat may accrue to them by adoption of ICAAP and the likely focus ofsupervisory assessments in this regard.(i) Improving governance standards and oversight – The Basel IIframework places considerable emphasis on internal processes formanaging risk and for managing capital requirements. This along withthe Pillar 3 disclosure requirements places tremendous demand on theGovernance and oversight standards within a bank. Banks shouldtherefore focus their energies on raising their governance andoversight standards to greater heights.  The Basel Committeerecognises that primary responsibility for good corporate governancerests with boards of directors and senior management of banks.Corporate Governance can be improved by addressing a number oflegal issues such as protecting and promoting shareholder rights,clarifying governance roles. Ensuring that corporations function in anenvironment that is free from corruption and bribery; and aligning theinterests of managers, employees and shareholders throughappropriate laws, regulations and other measures. All of these can helppromote healthy business and legal environments that support soundcorporate governance and related supervisory initiatives.  In India thegovernance issues have been addressed by prescribing guidelines oncorporate governance in banks. These include fit and proper standardsfor not only the Board of Directors but also for the shareholders and thechief executives. In this regard, it might be appropriate to mention thatimportance of corporate governance is relevant for the state ownedbanks also. The focus of the standards should be, at the least, to equipthe boards of banks to ask the right questions.24. ConclusionBasel II is expected to foster financial stability through its risk sensitiveframework which will encourage banks to adopt improved riskmanagement practices; require supervisors to review the efficiency ofbanks’ risk management practices and capital allocationmethodologies; and empower market participants to make informedjudgements on the efficiency of banks and accordingly punish orreward banks.While it is true that implementation of Basel II is not the be all and endall on the subject of financial stability it must be recognised that banksare “special”.  Their sound and efficient functioning is critical not only tothe growth of the real sector but also for strengthening the socialinfrastructure.  Internationally, therefore, banks have moved centre-stage and their performance is the cynosure of all eyes.___________________Acknowledgements for inputs are due to K. Damodaran and Dr. N.D.Jadhav, Reserve Bank of India.References:1. Y V Reddy: Banking sector reforms in India - an overview - theInstitute of Bankers of Pakistan, Karachi, May 2005.2. Jaime Caruana: Overview of Basel II and its reflections onfinancial stability - the International Conference on FinancialStability and Implications of Basel II, Istanbul, May 20053. Jaime Caruana: Consequences of Basel II for SMEs – theEuropean Parliament Workshop, Brussels, July 20034. Susan Schmidt Bies: Financial stability benefits andimplementation challenges of Basel II – the InternationalConference on Financial Stability and Implications of Basel II,Istanbul, May 2005.
