Corporate Governance and Financial Sector: Some IssuesMr. Bhide, Dr. Saha, Distinguished Chairpersons of banks, FIs, and friends,The Annual Day of the NIBM has become an important event in the Bank’scalendar that all of us look forward to, and I am glad to be with you once again. I amthankful to Mr. Bhide and the Board of the NIBM for giving me this opportunity foran exchange of views on the important subject of Corporate Governance in banks andfinancial institutions.This is a timely initiative as the events of last year have made it clear that we inIndia still have some ground to cover in order to make all our banking institutionssafe, sound and efficient. Banks including co-operative banks, NBFCs and FIs, are thecustodians of public money, and it is of utmost importance that the public – asdepositors, borrowers, and as participants in the economy - has full confidence in thebanking system and the sanctity of banking transactions.This is not possible until each and every institution participating in thefinancial system has internal management, governance and accountability structureswhich are upto the best possible standards. This is the reason – the overwhelmingpublic interest – why this subject is so important.I am also happy to know that, as part of its Annual Day celebrations, NIBMhas organised seminars on two other important subjects - interest margins/cost offunds and convergence of business strategies with IT plan. The technical seminarsmake the Annual Day. – not only an occasion for celebration, but also for aninterchange of views on important subjects of common interest among bankers. This isan important initiative and I would like to convey my appreciation to NIBM fororganising the seminars at RBI’s request.Needless to say that both these subjects are exceedingly important and havetremendous long term significance for improving the performance of banks,particularly public sector banks. The question of differences in interest spreads indifferent segments of the banking sector, and the high operational costs of publicsector banks in particular was discussed by the Board for Financial Supervision (BFS)of RBI, and NIBM was requested to conduct a study sometime ago.  The study hasbeen extensively discussed by banks and further refined in the light of comments. Theseminar today will no doubt help in working out an action plan to reduce costs andmake the interest rate structure more flexible.Similarly, the study done by NIBM at the request of RBI on IT is of immenseinterest. Introduction of computerisation and IT is no longer a matter of choice –unless banks provide easy and fast access to their services, they are bound to losebusiness. This matter was also discussed by BFS, and followed up with asupplemental comparative study by the RBI on actual productivity and financial gainsassociated with IT in banks with different levels of computerisation and inter-branch1connectivity. The technical sessions this afternoon on this subject, I am sure will be ofinterest to all the representatives of banks present here.I am also glad that, in order to participate in the seminars and to give thebenefit of his views, Shri Malegam, a member of the BFS and Board of RBI inaddition to the RBI Deputy Governors, is also here. We are thankful to him for sparinghis valuable time.I have no special experience on issues relating to Corporate Governance, onwhich volumes have been written by management and business experts as well assome important committees in several organisations and countries, including OECD,U.K., U.S., and also in India. So with your permission, I would like to just share somerandom thoughts with you without any rigorous structure. I hope some of the generalissues that I mention would be of relevance to your more technical discussions later.Banks, corporations, financial institutions have been around for a very longtime, and an interesting question to ask ourselves is – why this sudden flurry ofinterest in Corporate Governance? In the last few years, this subject has come to thefore, and a number of committees – the Cadbury Committee, the OECD Code,Combined Code of London Stock Exchange, the Blue Ribbon Committee in U.S, andthe Kumara Mangalam Birla Committee in India - why? Why has this subject attractedso much attention in 2002 and not 10 or 20 years ago when all the institutions, banks,and corporations were very much there.It seems to me that there are some fundamental reasons why CorporateGovernance issues have become crucial.(1) First, liberalisation and deregulation the world over. The regulatoryframework and the sophistication of financial markets. In India, for example,earlier either the Government or the RBI will tell you what to do, today thereare policies and priorities but considerable deregulation – who to lend, whatmaturity structure, interest rates, asset management – have to be decided byeach bank.  Greater freedom implies greater responsibilities. And there aremany more players –public sector banks, private banks, co-operatives andNBFCs, etc. Markets are free and more complex.(2) You may ask – so what? It is upto each corporation or its shareholders – if itdoes well, they will gain; if they don’t, they will lose and so be it.  It is theirbusiness, why should we collectively worry? Here, banks and financialinstitutions are in a completely different category. What happens in aparticular bank is a concern of all. Fear of contagion and systemicimplications. Think of some recent bad cases involving banks, including co-operative banks. Relatively small, but affected a lot of institutions, includingsome several times larger. In India, because of the dominance of public sectorinstitutions, investors expect more. (Example of LTCM Fund in U.S).2(3) Another factor is that we live in a more volatile and inter- linked world.Effects are instantaneous. If one Letter of Credit fails, it may affect othercountries and other institutions. So much greater international attention.Examples of East Asia and Japan. So international institutions are gettinginvolved – in codes and standards, and in  assessment of CorporateGovernance Structure.So, for all these reasons, this subject has acquired a completely new dimensionand wider interest. And we can no longer avoid it. As you discuss the subject, pleasekeep this in mind.What is the core of Corporate Governance – for private entities, it may beprofit. In the banking sector, it seems that it is risk containment, and early warningsystems and prompt corrective action to avoid failure. It is not risk aversion, but riskassessment and providing adequately to cover risks.  It is also clear that earlier thedetection, the lesser the cost.Obviously, without a viable and accountable Corporate Governance structure,all this is not possible, however able the CEO. The three essential ingredients ofCorporate Governance in this context are:(a) Checks and Balances: Auditing Committees, External and Internalaccounting systems which are independent of decision making oncredit and borrowings.(b) Clear division of responsibility: Both vertical and horizontal, sothat responsibility is taken by those who make the decisions.(c) Disclosure and Transparency: So nothing stays hidden for long,once a decision has been made.How do we in India fare in Corporate Governance in the financial sector? I amtold that there are number of models of Corporate Governance –(a) the “Outsider” model of the U.S. and U.K. type where there is separationof Ownership and Management; and(b) the “Insider” model – as in Europe or Asia, where a small group of inter-connected shareholders exercise control over management. East Asianmodel is more family oriented while European model involves inter-connected entities. In the “insider” model, it is difficult to distinguishbetween shareholder and management respectively.In India, in the financial sector, we now have all the three varieties with certainimportant differences with the U.S., Europe or Asia. Public sector banks/FIs, forexample, are more akin to the ‘outsider’ model with separation of “Ownership’ and‘Management’. Private sector banks/NBFC/Co-ops – much more “insider” modelswith families, inter-connected entities or promoters running the management. There issome uniformity in the Corporate Governance structure in the “outsider model”consists of relatively large public institutions, and which are also relatively old.3On the positive side:(a) difference in ‘Ownership’ and ‘Management’;(b) Disclosure and transparency(with one or two exceptions). They arealso becoming subject to better accounting standards;(c) Prudential norms – Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR), provisioning,rec. norms are fairly good. Because of sovereign risk, money is alsosafe with one - two aberrations.On the negative side:(a) there is separation of ‘Ownership’ and ‘Management’, but nochecks and balances. CEO as well as the Board is appointed by theowner, i.e Government(b) Very little accountability to the Board as Board cannot remove theChairman;(c) Substantial limitations on management as staff issues are outsidethe purview of management;(d) Weak on internal auditing and risk management.The crucial issue that the country has to debate is whether CorporateGovernance is compatible with public ownership, which makes the systemaccountable to political institutions and not to the economic institutions or evenregulators. This is a big and fundamental issue which our country has to debate anddecide. Is a “via media” possible? Could we have public ownership withoutGovernment or political control or do we need to change to a corporate structure? Is itpossible to make the Boards responsible for appointment of CEOs, and make theBoard appointments less discretionary on the part of the Government in power?I don’t want to express a view, but these are real issues. As the resolution ofthese issues will take considerable time, our task is to see what can be done within thepresent public sector structure.Something can be done – better internal checks and balances, better auditing,better transparency, better enforcement of policies, better action over NPAs, timelyaction against frauds. I hope you will give consideration to these in the interim, whilewe debate the larger issues.As regards the “insider” model, there is a tremendous variation both in termsof risk as well as Corporate Governance structure. By and large, the structure is veryweak in Co-operatives and NBFCs for historical reasons, local practices, andmultiplicity of regulators and laws. Old private banks also have very poor auditing andaccounting systems. New private banks – generally good on accounting, but poor onaccountability. More modern and computerised, but less risk conscious, One thingwhich is common to all is that Corporate Governance is highly centralised with very4little real check on the CEO, who is generally also closely linked to the largest ownergroups. Boards or auditing systems are not very effective.So, in all the segments, and all different sizes of institutions, we have a greatdeal of work to do in the area of Corporate Governance. RBI has been working on newaccounting, auditing and disclosure standards. Work is also in progress in settingbetter internal auditing and better system of checks and balances. A Committee of Ind.Dir. has also been set up under Dr. Ganguly, Member of the BFS to learn from thepast experience. RBI and other regulators would do their best to bring about betterstandards, but ultimately it is upto the individual institutions, and the people managingthem to ensure what actually happens on the ground.Let me conclude. Corporate Governance has never been more imp than now. Itis not only the business of an individual bank or entity, but of all of us. 5 or 10 yearsdown the line, you would not be able to operate unless we have Corporate Governanceof the best standards. In many areas, we have made progress in laying down whatneeds to be done. The important task now is to put appropriate mechanisms in place toenforce accountability, asset liability management, early warning and promptcorrective action systems. With your help, and the leadership shown by NIBM, I amsure we will get there.In the end, let me congratulate Mr. Bhide and Dr.Saha once again. As youknow, following Tarapore Committee, RBI has introduced important changes in themanagement structure of NIBM.  NIBM has made substantial progress in the lastcouple of years I have no doubt that with the help of all of you, NIBM would becomea truly national institution of distinction for improving the management and CorporateGovernance in banks and financial institutions.* Excerpts of the Speech delivered by Dr. Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at theNational Institute for Bank Management, Pune, on January 6, 20025
