CHALLENGES IN BANKING SECURITYByV. LEELADHARFellow Participants and Colleagues,It gives me great pleasure to be in your midst, as we commence thisworkshop on Banking Security. I am particularly happy to be here to addressa group of involved persons who are the harbingers of change – so to say – inthe use of technology in Banking.Banking as a business involves the management of risks. While muchhas been said about the financial risks, the risks arising out of the large scaleimplementation of technology is of recent origin, with banks having taken tolarge scale use of technology for their normal day-to-day business. Security inbanks has thus assumed significant proportions, comprising both physicalaspects in addition to those relating to Information, Information Systems andInformation Technology, all of which have an impact on the reputational risk ofa financial organisation.In a world where geographical barriers are losing significance and thedeath of distances is already a reality, it is but essential that security be givenprime importance in a transnational scenario where large sums of money areat stake. While the challenges related to physical security are those which canbe confronted with relative ease, the position is much more complicated inrespect of IT security. It is widely accepted that security is as effective as theweakest link in a chain. And, in the case of banking, the weakest link, in myview, does not relate to the components of technology (which do have animplication although), but on the person who is part of the information supplychain, and is typically the insider in the bank itself. This reminds me of aninteresting or rather disturbing question one of the top police officials asked ofthe bankers in a security conference. “Are you keeping a track of some sort ofthe officials who left the organization ? Are you at least aware where they arenow ?” There was complete silence around the table. He went on to clarifyInaugural speech of Shri V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at theBanking Security Conference - 2005 arranged by Indian Banks' Association on June 22,2005 in Mumbai. that most of the financial crimes had insider links. This is supported bystudies carried out by international organisations. These studies haveindicated that a substantial portion of the breach of security in financialinstitutions have occurred on account of, or have been triggered with the aidof internal exposures or internal controls being compromised. Against thisbackdrop, the security requirements of the banking sector need to beassigned high levels of priority.Information Security is something which is best experienced thanexplained. All of us have at some point of time experienced the flow ofinformation to persons others than to the intended users – even in a non-electronic traditional environment. With networking and access to informationbeing available at rates much larger than before, Information Security is anactivity which provides some comfort to both the policy makers and the usersof data.The largest set of functions in the banking sector which has benefitedfrom the advances in IT relate to payment systems since quick, safe andefficient transfer of funds across the length and breadth of the country is therequirement of the day. Security in Payment Systems cannot be addressed inisolation. It requires the integration of work processes, communicationlinkages and integrated delivery systems and should focus on stability,efficiency and risk control.  Yet another prime aspect of concern in a goodsecurity policy is the role that the human beings have in a securecomputerised environment.It would be advisable to build security features at the application level inrespect of banking oriented products, because of the critical nature of financialdata transfer. The financial messages should have the under noted features:v The receipt of the message at the intended destinationv The content of the message should be the same as the transmitted onev The Sender of information should be able to verify its receipt by therecipientv The Recipient of the message could verify that the sender is indeed theperson2 of  5v Information in transit should not be observed, altered or extractedv Any attempt to tamper with the data in transit will need to be revealedv Non-repudiationThese features boil down essentially to authentication (to verify the identityof the sender of the message to the intended recipient to prevent spoofing orimpersonation), authorisation (to control the access to specific resources forunauthorised persons), confidentiality (to maintain the secrecy of the contentof transmission between the authorised parties), integrity (to ensure that nochanges/errors are introduced in the messages during transmission) and non-repudiation (to ensure that an entity cannot later deny the origin and receiptand contents of the communication).I must add here that in a recent case of a co-operative bank, the entireoperations, maintenance and management of the computer systems weretotally in the hands of the firm which supplied the computer software and thisled to a fraud   and loss for the bank. Such cases cause reason for substantialconcern. While the aspects relating to physical security leave a lot to bedesired with even the most basic security requirements not being in place (likeaccess for unauthorised personnel even to sensitive Cash holding areas), thesecurity features in the computer systems are not fully fool proof in somebanks.There are at present a number of security standards available fordifferent financial applications; most of them are internationally accepted andpart of the ISO standards. These international standards should be examinedand adopted keeping in view the requirements of the Indian banking industry.Banks need to put in place measures which conform to there is policies andensure the regular, periodical audit.An important issue is relating to the security levels of use within thevarious operating departments in the banks. The common level of entry is theuse of validation of authorised access (in the form of authorised User-Ids) tobe further authenticated by correctness of passwords keyed in by theauthorised users. Passwords often become ‘passed’ words in our context withno change at all in the passwords since passwords tend to be rather fixed for3 of  5long periods of time. It is absolutely essential that passwords lapse aftercertain periods of time – generally not exceeding a month at the latest.Authorisation of users is another activity that needs to be closelyregulated and monitored. One of the basic requirements for implementation ofsecurity and monitoring thereof at the various departments is the need forsystem administrators. Most of our offices and departments have the systemadministration function clubbed to the normal operational functions assignedto a particular officer. The proliferation of networks within an office also actsas a negative factor in implementation of strict security features. Further,rights assigned need to be changed upon change of functions assigned to theoperative staff and that updation, including those related to staff who retirehave to be looked into.There is an imperative need to imbibe a culture of security among alloperative functionaries – whether officers or other staff and cutting acrossadministrative gradings. Access to databases in computer systems and to thedata contained therein have to be strictly restricted and not available to anybut those authorised to make any changes in case of an eventuality forresolving a software lock / malfunction which is a conscious decision by theauthorised personnel taken in conjunction with the head of the officeconcerned.Change Management is another aspect that needs to be viewed fromthe security angle. Software (and at times hardware too), undergoes frequentupdation and version control and levels of software in use across offices is anissue which needs to be examined in its totality for practicable implementationat all offices / departments.I am sure that most of the newer software programmes would have allthe essential and desirable features as mandatory part of their architecture.The software that are currently in use would have to be scrutinised from thepoint of view of conformity to the minimum security requirements that I haddwelt upon. As leaders who would be using technology as a cutting edge towardsexcellence in services, you would all agree that these key requirements ofsecurity are required to be addressed in the sessions of today. It is gratifying4 of  5to note the initiative taken by IBA in organizing such seminars andconferences which facilitate transfer of knowledge. I am sure that thedeliberations of the day would be enriching to all the delegates.I wish the Conference all success. Thank you.5 of  5
