BANKING WITH TECHNOLOGY – THE ROAD AHEADLadies and Gentlemen,I deem it a privilege to be present at this conclave being conducted by the IndianBanks’ Association, on an appropriate topic at an appropriate time and to an appropriateaudience who would be the catalysts of change as banking in India is poised for greater leapsin the near future. I am sure that bankers in India are feeling the positive impact of thetechnological revolution in the way banking is being transformed. Banks need to be ready totake on the challenges unleashed by  various external forces such as competition,globalisation, shrinking margins, and internal forces relating to human resources, need forchanges in procedures etc. To my mind, a substantial portion of these challenges can beeasily addressed by technology; I shall, therefore, dwell a while on the role of technology inthe banking of the near future.2. Banks in India need to be complimented on the inculcation of technology in a largeway in their day-to-day operations. Credit must be given to Indian Banks who have brought onthe new wave of techno-banking in the country. In a short span of less than two decades,customers of banks have felt the positive impact of technological solutions implemented bybanks. The customer of banks of today have a virtual menu of options as far as deliverychannels are concerned and all these are the benefits of technology, with the most visiblebenefits happening in the areas of payments for retail transactions. A variety of cards,Automated Teller Machines, electronic based funds transfers, Internet banking, Mobilebanking are all some of the latest technology based payment solutions, which have gainedlarge acceptance amongst the Indian banking public. With technological solutions rapidlyevolving, more new products and services may soon become the order of the day.3. While addressing a critical topic such as Technology which has today become a basicnecessity rather than a luxury in the banking sector, I must examine the various componentswhich comprise the building blocks on which banking would be functioning in the morrow. Iwould, therefore, enlist some of the major aspects which, to my mind, appear to be the cornerstones in the road that we are paving so that the highway would ensure free, safe and secureconduct of banking business.4. The first major aspect which needs to be addressed is that of Consolidation. Bankingin India has evolved as a mix of various independent functions. Thus we have credit functionsas a separate activity, deposit taking as another different function, a host of payment facilities– each as a distinct activity, other services and so on. It is now time to look at consolidation ofall these inter-related functions. Technology has already provided an answer in the form ofTotal Branch Automation, which has now given way to the Core Banking Systems, and thefacility of single-window service at branches. While this traditional approach towardsconsolidation may be ensuring that the customers of today are retained by a bank, the growthof new clientele will, however, be related to other progressive measures to be taken by banks.An outward looking consolidation holds the key. Consolidation of all types of financial serviceswhich a customer of a bank may require needs to be offered by banks. While some stepshave been taken by banks in the form of universal banking and the offering of related financialservices such as insurance, tax advice, securities market operations, depository functions andthe like, the future may witness alliances with service providers who may in today’s contextappear to have to relationship with traditional banking concepts. For example, a mobile phoneuser, who is a customer of particular telecommunication service provider, may switchpreferences to another bank if the phone company does not link its services to that of aparticular bank with whom the user is banking with. Thus strategic alliances with variedservice providers may become a necessity.5. The next major challenge arises out of the forces of competition. Traditional conceptsrelating to competition from other players in the same line of business will indeed exist butthese will pale into oblivion in the form of competition from hitherto unexplored andunanticipated areas. Easy finance schemes by retailers of consumer durable articles willobviate the need for short term loams by customers of banks, thus resulting in a dwindlingretail loan portfolio. Banks can overcome this challenge by providing refinance to the retailerwho would be in requirement of funds for improving his business turnover portfolio. Theessence of this is that competition may have to be exploited as an opportunity. Planning forthe unanticipated and looking for opportunities hold the key to the successful bank of thefuture. In this connection, I draw your attention to the report of the RBI group on rural creditand microfinance and suggest that banks which are first movers would stand to gainsubstantially in terms of expanding their retail portfolio.6. Technology implementation comes with its attendant requirements too.  A few majoraspects which need to be reckoned relate to the§ Need for standardisation – across hardware, operating systems, systemsoftware, application software to facilitate inter-connectivity of systems acrossbranches§ Need for high levels of security – in an environment which requires highlevels of confidentiality, security is an important requirement§ Once both the above are achieved, the next logical approach would betowards communication and networking – use of networks which wouldfacilitate centralised databases and distributed processing. Exploitation ofcomputer networks by banks would result in savings in cost and increase inefficiency§ Need for a technology plan which has to be periodically monitored and alsoupgraded consequent upon changes in technology itself§ Need for business process re-engineering with the large scale usage ofcomputers – the objective is not to merely mechanise activities but to result inholistic benefits of computerisation for both the customer and the staff atbranches§ Need to address the issue of Human Relations in a computerisedenvironment especially from the point of Human Resources Development§ Sharing of technology experiences and expertise so as to reap the benefits oftechnology implementation across a wider community7. All these changes have, however, a host of attendant challenges. Prominent amongthem is the paradigm shift in the concept of security. With the delivery channels relating tofunds based services – such as movement of funds electronically between different accountsof customers – taking place with the use of technology, the requirements relating to securityalso need to undergo metamorphosis at a rapid pace. Various concepts such as digitalsignatures, certification, storage of information in a secure and tamper-proof manner allassume significance and have to be part of the practices and procedures in the day-to-dayfunctioning of banks of tomorrow. I must at this juncture, add that all these would be addedrequirements and the well established practices of today may also have to not only continuebut also co-exist along with the new requirements. Security requirements have to be providedfrom a two pronged perspective – first for the internal requirements of the banks themselvesand the second relating to the legal precincts of the laws of the land. It will be a matter ofsatisfaction to note that the INFINET (Indian Financial Network) is a safe, secure and efficientcommunications network for the exclusive use of the banking sector, which provides for inter-bank communication – which implies that banks have to now function as a group and at thesame time competing with one another too. The key advantage of the INFINET is its ownsecurity framework in the form of the Public key Infrastructure – PKI, which is in conformity tothe provisions of the Information Technology Act, 2000.8. An effective security policy which would offer a shared vision of how the controls inthe workplace should be implemented with the objective of protecting data, information andeventually, the economic value of the organisation. This has to be supplemented by educationand training in these areas and reinforced by the actions and concerns of the topmanagement so that a culture of security can be created. These controls have to besupplemented by surveillance, monitoring and auditing to detect unusual usage patterns anddeficiencies. Banks have to put in place such a policy and ensure that it is being implementedeffectively, and then audit the IT related functions so as to ensure that there are no lapses ordeviations from the approved Information Security Policy.9. Another major challenge relates to the bridging the divide caused by distances.Today, banking has broken all geographical barriers and demand from customers relates to‘anywhere and anytime banking’. Currently, IT based offerings such as Internet and MobileBanking have provided customers with the means for meeting the requirement of being ableto perform banking transactions from anywhere. The death of distances have alsonecessitated that banks in India do not merely look inward. Developments elsewhere in theworld have also a strong impact on the efforts of Indian banks and these have to be factoredin an always vibrant world of technology based banking. Added to this is the fact that marketshave shrunk digitally and this gap would reduce further in the morrow.  It would be necessaryto prepare ourselves for functioning in a very small knit shrunk world. Information availabilityacross a large section of people will bring in the challenge of being able to process such largemasses of information. This is an opportunity not only for the banking sector but for othersectors including the IT industry as well. Banks will, therefore, brace themselves for co-operation and co-existence and geographical boundaries may move away into oblivion just assharing of resources (such as ATMs) has already commenced propagation.10. We have all heard of the digital divide which is a challenge to be overcome by thebanking industry as well. While the average Indian customer may be as technology savvy oreven better than his Western counterpart, the cultural aspects of his relationships maynecessitate a personal touch to the offerings of banks. Further, all the technology basedofferings by banks have a bias towards the major towns and cities and the need for reachingthe mid size cities as well as the large rural population assumes significance. These pocketshold promises of substantial growth prospects and today with networking capabilities beingavailable at much higher reliability levels than before and at affordable costs, banks may haveto pay attention to these segments of the country as well.11. To achieve all these, banks will also have to re-orient their internal processes andprocedures. Just as mechanisation of processes in a manufacturing company requiredchanges in the steps involved in the production cycle, suitable changes in the job processeswithin banks will also have to be made. No technology implementation is complete without theattendant changes in the basic way of process functions at the organisation where suchimplementation shave been made, and if technology implementations have to be successful,they have to be accompanied by suitable changes in the process flows across all sectors ofthe economy, which is at the base of Business Processing Re-engineering. It is essential thatbanks embark upon Business Process Re-engineering in a large scale and preferable evenbefore the large scale implementation of technology has commenced.12. The management of external relationships is another requirement which would haveto be taken care of by bankers of the future. Convergence of the services of more industriesand organisations is emerging so as to provide holistic service offerings to the discerningcustomer, and banks would be the prime target by customers if they have to provide servicelevels which match their expectations. This would necessitate that banks operate in anenvironment which will facilitate ease of inter-operability. Just as inter-operable IT systemsand Straight Through processing (STP) will become the order of the day, inter-operablebusiness domains will also prevail and banks have to overcome this challenge in their stride.This will also be observed in managing external functions such as Business ProcessOutsourcing, management of IT service providers and better vendor management – all ofwhich are hitherto unknown domains for the banks’ personnel.13. The challenges staring at banking today need not result in a feeling of inadequacy.The I T framework in India is on strong ground and the industry has been showing significantgrowth rates in the previous years, with the financial sector having benefited immensely fromthe offerings of IT. Banks, for their part, have proved their mettle and I must add that in thefew years since liberalisation, banks in India have proved that they can not only withstand theforces of change but blend the changes gracefully in such a manner as to even provide achallenge to the hitherto existing leaders in the line of business. Banks have commenced togrow laterally and at an exponential rate. We have the best talent of personnel and the bestinstitutes to develop more resources and the best brains to manage these changes.14. Our society has held a pride of place of being largely knowledge based, ever sincethe time of the Vedas and the early days of the world. As India develops into a formidableforce, it is Information Technology which holds the key to the process of transformation. Ourkey strengths lie in knowledge processing and as bankers we have been performing thisfunction quite well both for our customers as well as for the growth of our own organisations.This underlying strength will ensure our key to success.15. As banks are poised for challenging but exciting times ahead, I am sure that thisconclave will also provide substantial inputs as the day progresses on the variousopportunities which banks will harbour for implementation within their respective confines. Iam sure that this conclave will provide the kindling fire of transformation which banks in Indiawill light up with enthusiasm and as Indian Banking transcends all barriers and gains greatercoverage, they would make a mark as world leaders in providing unparalleled, efficientservice at affordable rates resulting in high levels of customer satisfaction and an overallvibrant economy.  Lastly, before I conclude I would like to draw your attention to the twovision documents , one relating to payment system and the other a draft of the proposedfinancial sector technology that RBI have recently put out on its website. These documentsset out our vision for the next three years. We welcome your reaction. Need less to say yourpreparedness should be synchronous with the vision of the Central Bank.I wish the conclave all success.Thank you.* Key note Address BY Shri V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, atthe IT@BFSI-200 Conclave, Bangalore, on June 9,2005
