New Dimensions*At the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to Dr.Shanker Acharya, Mohan and Mr.Sanjay Kathuria, who gave me an opportunity to attend this seminaron ‘Corporate External Debt Management’. The deliberations have indeed been afeast and there is nothing but admiration for the outstanding organisational abilities ofall concerned. There has been an ideal mix of participants and subjects. In theprevious Seminar on external debt at Trivandrum last year ,  we had flagged corporateangle to external debt as a priority item. We should all be happy that the suggestionhas been acted upon now. Like the proceedings of the earlier seminar which havebeen published by RBI, I hope CRISIL would arrange to get the papers andA number of valuable suggestions have been made in the Seminar and someof them are particularly relevant to RBI. Some of them require clarifications as to therationale of current policies and procedures. A few of them need immediate attentionwhile others have to be pursued for the medium-term. They require carefulexamination. I assure that we in RBI will consider all of them seriously and we seekLet me not try to either summarise the  highlights of this seminar or respondto the valuable insights. I intend sharing with you some thoughts on new dimensions`in external debt policies of emerging economies, consequent upon the recent crisesin East Asia, Latin America and Russia. New approaches are being advocated in theThe responses to the recent crises, the follow-up consideration of measures toprevent similar crises, and possible actions to meet them when they occur, havecovered a wide spectrum of policies. The debate covered many policy issues :domestic and external, macro and micro, financial and regulatory, national andmultilateral relating to both  developed and emerging economies. Eminent academicshave also contributed to the debate. At policy level, there have been discussions in G-7, G-24, and new found G-22, G-33 and Financial Stability Forum, not to speak ofCommonwealth Secretariat, UN, IMF, World Bank and BIS. India has been invited toparticipate in most of these. In all these deliberations, external debt policies were  acrucial part. Perhaps, this is an ideal forum to describe these new dimensions  brieflyThe new dimensions relating to external debt policies can be analysed under fivebroad heads, viz., level of reserves and external debt; maturity pattern; issues  relatingand narrate the Indian position.context of discussions on the new international financial architecture.your advice and cooperationproceedings published soon.Mr.RaviMr. Chairman and friends,Economies : External Debt Policies in Emerging to short-term debt; policies relating to transparency and standards; and involvingThere has always been a continuous but inconclusive discussion on theoptimum level of reserves. Traditionally, however, the adequacy of reserves has beenmainly linked to import requirements. Incidentally, recent experience has shown thatcountries which were holding large levels of reserves did not necessarily escape thecrisis. This shows the importance of appropriate policies and avoidance of excessivecomfort from level of reserves. Nevertheless, the level of reserves continues to be animportant source of comfort on matters relating  to stability in external sector andconsequently on domestic economy. Because of the importance of real level ofreserves in a transparent manner, there are increasing efforts to measureunencumbered reserves. The emphasis has also shifted from measuring the adequacyof reserves only in relation to imports, to short-term liabilities, in particular short-termTwo notable suggestions in this regard have emanated – one from PabloGuidotti, Deputy Finance Minister of Argentina, and the second from Bank forInternational Settlements. Mr.Pablo Guidotti proposed a simple guideline for policymakers  in emerging market economies. He suggested that countries should managetheir external assets and liabilities in such a way that they are always able to livewithout new foreign borrowing for up to one year. In other words, usable foreignexchange reserves should exceed scheduled amortisation of foreign currency debtsassuming  no rollovers) during the following year. In terms of debt management, thisimplies a limit on the size of the debt, in particular short-term debt and debt that isThe BIS, in its latest Annual Report ,  recognises the importance of countriespreparing themselves for the possibility of sudden outflows, and identifies ways inwhich reserves can be built up. One way of doing this is to run trade surpluses andwhat BIS terms as a less disruptive solution is the Argentine proposal, namely toborrow reserves and arrange contingent lending facilities with the private sector. Inthe view of BIS, “Given the swings of mood in these markets, the authorities might atcertain times find it relatively easy and inexpensive to lock-in longer term foreigncurrency loans for later use. Finally, countries might then make use of the recentlyannounced  Contingent Credit Lines offered by the IMF. In conjunction with similarprivate sector arrangements this would be a joint testimonial to the soundness of thecountry in question, and could contribute materially to the avoidance of contagion2problems”.falling due for repayment.(debt.Level of Reserves and External Debtprivate sector in forestalling debt crisisIn a somewhat similar vein, Chairman Greenspan expressed a view thatcountries could adopt a “liquidity-at-risk” standard to manage their exposure tofinancial risks. This standard would give the ex ante probability that a country wouldIn India, we have been steadily building up reserves by encouraging non-debtcreating flows and de-emphasizing debt creating flows. India’s foreign exchangereserves have been steadily increasing over the years. For instance, the last threeyears saw increase in reserves in the range of $4.7 billion in 1996-97, $2.9 billion in1997-98 and $3.1 billion in 1998-99, i.e. a cumulative $10 billion However, betweenend-March 1996 and December 1998, India’s total external debt increased by a mere$2 billion.Our policy of building and maintaining adequate level of reserves while at thesame time constraining debt, especially short-term debt, will continue though weIn many emerging countries, with deregulation and liberalisation, adequateattention has not been paid to the maturity profile of external debt portfolio. In fact, insome cases, even information gathering on this subject was dispensed with as part ofderegulation. Determining the maturity was a micro decision left to the finalborrowers, whose main consideration was cost. Thus, borrowers in many emergingmarket economies have tended  to borrow short with a view to minimising cost.Creditors lent short-term since they expected their claims to mature quickly. Therecent crises showed that this could be risky. The policy dimension relating to anappropriate maturity structure, which was earlier viewed as a micro decision is nowrecognised as a macro aspect and a stability issue.Elongation of the average maturity ensures a sort of private sector burdenrecognise that the insurance embedded inThese issues have direct relevance to corporates’ access to external funds,both in terms of cost and the period of borrowings. The cost of borrowings mayincrease on account of longer maturities, but they will have the comfort of stableflows. In times of crisis, the costs of disruption on account of destabilising flows mayThere are issues on how the policy makers could promote or ensure anoptimal maturity structure. There can be several views on what an optimal maturityitself is. There is one influential view that the average maturity of a country’s external3liabilities should exceed a certain threshold, say three years.far exceed the cost of raising longer-term debt.long-term debt often outweighs the cost.sharing in times of a crisis. It is important to being Maturity Patternwould continuously monitor the international debate in this regard.avoid new borrowing for one year, based on the level of reserves.In India, from 1992, emphasis has been laid not only on the cost and size ofdebt, but also on the maturity. The desired maturity profile is taken into account inpolicy articulation and clearance of individual cases. The average maturity of ourECB, as you may be aware, is five years. Basically, considerations of the size, costThus, the ECB policy, though it is being liberalised gradually, will ensurebuilt-in measures towards an optimal maturity. The instruments by which thisobjective is achieved will continue to be refined from time to time taking  account ofA major source of vulnerab ility in the Asian crisis was the large stock ofshort-term liabilities of banks and corporates. In the short-term liabilities, debtconstitutes a contractual obligation and is thus on a different footing. As mentioned,the link between short-term debt and reserves has come to the fore in thesedeliberations. There is a cost  to building up reserves through large debt flows sincethe cost of debt would generally be higher than return on reserves. However, not allshort-term flows are bad and some short-term finance is essential to financetransactions. In fact, it is recognised that trade related short-term credit is not asOverall, there appears to be a consensus now in favour of restraining theinflow of short-term capital until markets, institutions and regulatory frameworksThere is, however ,  a growing debate on the means by which short-term flowscan be controlled. Major suggestions relate to effective monitoring, tax on spottransactions, varied reserve requirements, increased capital requirements on transactions, changes in capital adequacy requirements of lending banks to non-OECD countries, and discouraging local firms from undertaking external borrowingThe oft-quoted measure relates to reserve requirements imposed on short-termflows. Chile and Colombia imposed unremunerated reserve requirements of 30 percent on short-term flows, subsequently reduced to 10 per cent. This represented a taxA favourite for economists has been the never-tried Tobin Tax, though it hasoften been seriously considered by policy makers. The Tobin Tax proposal envisagesa levy of uniform tax on all spot transactions in foreign exchange. The objective is to4on short-term holdings. The empirical evidence on its effectiveness is inconclusive.recognised as effective. imposing  taxes. Quantitative controls have also been by interbankhave been sufficiently strengthened.volatile as non-trade related credit.Short-term Debtinternational developments also.ECB. and maturity are embedded in the clearance mechanism for discourage a one-night stand by speculators in the foreign exchange market as the taxburden will be inversely proportional to the maturity of flows.   Another economistDornsbusch  seeks a variant of Tobin tax, viz., to impose a tax on all cross-borderPaul Krugman has recently suggested that emerging nations should considerusing taxes to discourage local firms from borrowing in foreign currencies. Tax atuniform rate will have a larger impact on short-term borrowings, and will thus operateTobin tax.The role of financial intermediaries, especially banks in short-term flows hasfigured predominantly in these deliberations. Alan Greenspan has also proposedimposing increased capital requirements on borrowing banks  to bring greaterIt is now accepted that just as there is no irresponsible borrowing withoutirresponsible lending, there is no short-term borrowing without short-term lending.Hence, it is argued that capital requirements in the banking system should be soprescribed as to discourage lending banks also. In fact, the current policy is biased infavour of short-term lending.  The current Basle Accord provides that all claims onbanks incorporated in  countries and short-term claims (i.e. up to one year) onbanks incorporated in non- countries carries a risk weight of only 20 percent, countries carry a risk weight of 100per cent. The New Capital Adequacy Framework, which has just been issued by Most of the above proposals have the effect of increasing cost of short-termIn India, we carefully monitor short-term debt. We maintain a difference intreatment between trade and non-trade related debt. The authorities sanction short-term debt over six months on a case-by-case approval of purpose, amount and terms,NRI deposits arecontrolled through specification of interest rates or interest rate ceilings for differentmaturities in respect of deposits in select schemes. According to the latest StatusReport on External Debt circulated by the Ministry of Finance, our short-term debt isThe international consensus on the need for controlling short-term debtvindicates our policy thrust with regard to discouraging short-term flows. We willhave to continue with the objective of restricting short-term flows, though the meansof doing it could be refined from time to time in consonance with domestic and to5somewhat similar to ,some extent, global developments.very modest by all criteria. very within a sub-ceiling of total external commercial borrowings ceiling. debt. Hence, these developments would be of interest to the corporate sector.comments is reviewing this norm. as a consultative paper for BISOECD whereas long-term claims on banks in non-OECDOECDinterbank market. discipline on cross-border flows. This is also on the drawing table so far.Policies Relating to Transparency and StandardsA major area of concern has been lack of transparency in regard tomacroeconomic and financial health. The issue of transparency has generated somedebate. Transparency cannot be one-sided – say only by public systems and notcorporate sector. Transparency provides information and inference is a matter ofinterpretation or judgement. There are country specific circumstances also that governIndia is one of the earliest members of the SDDS of the IMF. The RBIprovides upto date weekly data on all relevant macroeconomic and financialindicators through the Weekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin, which isavailable on website. In addition, the RBI and Government disseminates as muchThe World Bank, IMF, BIS, OECD and other international institutions areactive in the evolution of standards relevant for the functioning of domestic andinternational financial systems. These cover wide range of areas including datadissemination , fiscal, monetary and financial policy transparency ( IMF), bankingregulation and supervision ( BIS), securities market regulation (InternationalOrganisation of Securities Commissions),  insurance regulation (InternationalAssociation of Insurance Supervisors), accounting (International AccountingStandards Committee), Auditing (International Federation of Accountants),Bankruptcy (United Nations Commission on International Trade Law) and CorporateGovernance ( OECD, World Bank and Basle Committee).  In addition, work relatingto improving the robustness of payments systems, general principles of good practicesin social policies, identifying practices and structures that support deep and liquidIt would be interesting to see how these standards evolve. While it may not bepossible for all countries to adopt these standards completely and promptly, countrieswill have to take account of these standards, depending on individual countryIncreasingly, these international standards will have to be adapted to suit localrequirements. These will have an impact on our corporates trying to accessinternational markets in terms of costs and regulatory compliance. Corporates will6Role of private Sector in forestalling Crisisneed to impute these into their debt management strategies.circumstances.forward markets is in progress.information as possible through monthly, quarterly and annual publications.the degree of transparency, which includes timing of some disclosures.The efforts to involve the private sector in debt management has manyobjectives, viz., bring about more orderly adjustment process, limit moral hazard,strengthen market discipline, help protect countries against volatility and contagion.The idea is to institute mechanisms in place before any crisis takes place – so thatWhile there is consensus regarding the need for private sector to share theburden, discussions in the various   have centred on the mode of burden sharing.Ideas that are being considered include contingent credit lines, embedded call options,debt-service insurance, bond covenants, bankruptcy procedures, debt standstill andBasically, these mechanisms bind private sector participants to either provideadditional funds, or reduce debt service burdens in times of crisis without creatingmoral hazard or disrupting the normal market conditions.  For instance, countriescould contract market based Contingent Credit Lines with commercial banks totrigger liquidity support in times of crisis. If the credit lines are fairly priced, theycould provide effective insurance against adverse market developments. Call optionsin interbank credit lines would provide the basis for extension of maturities duringtimes of trouble. Standstill arrangements will allow private sector to give additionalborrowing when there has been default on existing debt. Creditor-debtor councilscould serve to improve the flow of information. Bond and debt covenants couldintroduce sharing clauses , provisions for the modification of terms by qualifiedmajorities will speed up the negotiation process. There is also a suggestion that G-10countries could start including these new contractual terms in their fresh sovereignAnother proposal relates to universal debt rollover option with a penalty. Theidea is that  all foreign currency debt should have attached to it an option, exercisableIt is too early to comment on how these suggestions would evolve. Thesedeliberations and their outcomes are of interest  not only to Government of India andRBI, but to the corporates, since these would impinge on their operations. I trust thatfinancial intermediaries are closely following these developments. RBI wouldWhen I started this address, I expressed happiness over the focus on corporateangle to external debt  in this seminar. Encouraged by the response, I have asuggestion for the next seminar. It would be worthwhile if the next seminar focuseson external debt management by financial intermediaries, viz., banks, developmentfinancial institutions and non-bank financial companies. The discussions could7creditor-debtor councils.forainclude risk management systems.welcome and indeed invite suggestions in these matters.at the discretion of the borrower, to roll over the liability at a penalty rate.bond issues in order to initiate the demonstration effect.resolution of the crisis is more orderly.Friends, in conclusion, I would like to place on record the excellent ambience* Valedictory Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Seminar onCorporate External Debt Management organised by CRISIL with participation of The World Bank andMinistry of Finance, Government of India, at Kathmandu, Nepal, on June 11, 1999. Dr.Reddy isthankful to Dr.A.Prasad for his assistance.8Thank you.and hospitality of Hotel Yak and Yeti.
