A Synoptic View of theTwelfth Finance Commission’s RecommendationsI am indeed very happy to be in the midst of familiar faces and familiarsurroundings. This is perhaps the first public occasion on which I am commentingon the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission. As such, thismeeting has some special significance at least to me. I congratulate the ReserveBank of India in organizing this meeting of Finance Secretaries so that the fullimplications of the various recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commissioncan be understood. It will also pave the way for action by the States, the Centreand the RBI. Today’s meeting is yet another example of the proactive role beingplayed by the RBI in the field of economic policy.In federal fiscal systems, on grounds both of equity and efficiency,resources are generally assigned more to the central government whereas statestogether with the local governments have the larger responsibilities. The resultantvertical imbalance requires transfer of resources from the Centre to the States.States also have different capacities and needs, and this lends a horizontaldimension to the issue of resource sharing. Neither vertical nor horizontalimbalance is expected to be static.  Some of the core provisions regardingsharing of resources are built into our Constitution itself. But changes in theeconomic and fiscal situation warrant a review of the arrangements from time totime.  The Indian constitution has provided for both continuity and change.  TheFinance Commission is entrusted with the task of periodically examining theseissues according to the constitutional provisions and the terms of reference.The Twelfth Finance Commission has recommended a scheme of fiscaltransfers that can serve the objectives of equity and efficiency within a frameworkof fiscal consolidation. The effort needed to achieve fiscal consolidation must beseen as the joint responsibility of the central and state governments. Forachieving vertical and horizontal balance, consistent with the responsibilities ofthe two levels of governments in respect of providing public and merit goods andservices, both the centre and the states need to raise the levels of revenuesrelative to their respective revenue bases, exercise restraint in undertakingunwarranted expenditure commitments and prioritizing expenditures.The finances of the central and state governments, individually and in theaggregate, have evinced large and persistent imbalances in the period precedingthe Commission’s award period.  Not only have fiscal and revenue deficitsincreased, the proportion of revenue deficit to fiscal deficit has increased.Outstanding debt as a proportion of GDP touched 81 per cent in 2004-05. Fourfactors have accounted for the continuing deterioration: fall in centre’s tax-GDPratio compared to the peak levels achieved in the late eighties,Inaugural Address by Dr. C. Rangarajan Chairman Economic Advisory Council to thethPrime Minister at the 16 Bi-Annual Conference of the State Finance Secretaries ReserveBank of India Mumbai on April 8, 2005substantial increase in the level of salary and pension payments,particularly for the states, in the wake of the recommendations of the FifthCentral Pay Commission, high levels of nominal interest rates in the late ninetiescombined with the subsequent fall in inflation rates, and the low growth rates inthe first three years of the new decade. Besides, the tax devolution to states wasless than projected because of the deterioration in the tax-GDP ratio of thecentre. While these reasons account for the acuteness of the ailment, there arealso underlying structural reasons for the persistence of fiscal deteriorationbecause of the tax structure and expenditure pattern.Vertical TransfersIn the scheme of fiscal transfers, the correction of vertical imbalance is, tosome extent, based on judgment. An assessment has to be made of the gapbetween resources and responsibilities at the two levels of government.Sometimes it is not recognized that the share of states in the combined revenuereceipts undergoes a radical change after tax devolution. For example, during theTenth Finance Commission’s period, the share of states which was 38.6 per centbefore transfers became 63.0 per cent after transfers. Taking into account avariety of factors including the historical trends, the Commission hadrecommended an increase in the share of states in the divisible pool of taxes to30.5 per cent from the previous level of 29.5 per cent.  This increase was alsonecessary to provide some cushion to states whose share in the total taxdevolution might go down as a result of any modifications in the formula ofhorizontal distribution. The Commission felt that this increase could beaccommodated by the central government by pruning their activities that fall inthe domain of the states.   The Commission had raised the indicative limit ofoverall transfers out of the gross revenue receipts of the centre from 37.5 percent to 38 per cent.Horizontal TransfersIn the context of horizontal imbalance, the Twelfth Finance Commissionfelt that the equalization approach to transfers was appropriate as it wasconsistent with both equity and efficiency.  It has not, however, been possible toimplement this approach fully, as the extent of disparities in the per capita fiscalcapacities of the states is too large and some of the better-off states are also inserious fiscal imbalance. In the devolution scheme recommended, theCommission has endeavored to strike a balance among different criteriareflecting deficiency in fiscal capacities, cost disabilities, and fiscal efficiency.While the Commission has retained, by and large, the indicators used by theEleventh Finance Commission for determining the horizontal transfers, it hasaltered the weights to some extent.  The distance criterion combined with thecriterion of population, representing together the needs and deficiency in fiscalcapacity have a combined weight of 75 per cent. The cost disabilities get aweight of 10 per cent through Area and fiscal performance 15 per cent.Role of GrantsThe Twelfth Finance Commission has increased the proportion of grantsto tax devolution in the scheme of transfers. Grants constitute around 19 per centof total transfers compared to around 13 per cent in the Eleventh FinanceCommission. Grants achieve certain purposes which cannot be fulfilled by taxdevolution. First, they provide greater stability to revenues of states whichbecame an important issue in the recent period. Second, they enable theapplication of equalization principle. The Twelfth Finance Commission has madean effort in this direction by focusing on education and health which are twocritical merit services. Third, special purpose and conditional grants can be givenwhich promote specific objectives. It is therefore necessary that in judging thetransfer to states, tax devolution and grants should be taken together intoaccount. The coefficient of correlation between comparable GSDP per capita(average of 1999-00 to 2001-02) and the recommended per capita transfers,comprising tax devolution and all the grants, among the general category statesexcluding Goa, is estimated at -0.89, which emphasises the redistributivecharacter of the transfers.A word must also be said about the estimation of non-plan revenue deficitgrants. Very often such an approach is called ‘fiscal dentistry’ or gap fillingapproach. This approach has been misunderstood. No Commission goes by justthe gaps projected by the states. The Twelfth Finance Commission alsoexamined each item of expenditure and adjusted it according to some commonnormative criteria. These are detailed in the Report. Similarly, adjustments weremade for revenue projections as well. Even base year figures were adjusted. Animportant adjustment made by the Twelfth Finance Commission in the base yearfigures relates to fiscal capacity. In the final analysis, the pre-devolution non planrevenue deficit was 25 per cent of the states projections. It has also to be notedthat nearly 85 per cent of the deficit grant goes to special category states.The Commission has laid emphasis on strengthening the local bodies inkeeping with the constitutional mandate for effective and autonomous local self-governance, recognizing that local bodies must be supported by a scheme oftransfers that encourages decentralization and own effort for raising revenues.The recommended transfers for the local bodies constitute about 1.24 per cent ofthe shareable taxes and 0.9 per cent of centre’s gross revenue receipts.Debt RestructuringThe Commission has recognized that the debt burden of the states iscurrently heavy. It has, therefore, recommended a scheme of debt relief, which isin two parts. First, there is the relief that comes from consolidating the past debtand rescheduling it, along with interest rate reduction. The second part consistsof a debt write-off, which is linked to the reduction in the absolute levels ofrevenue deficits. Both reliefs will be available, only if states enact appropriatelegislations to bring down the revenue deficit to zero by 2008-09 and commit toreducing the fiscal deficit in a phased manner. With the relief that has beenrecommended, it should be possible for states to pursue their developmentalgoals with fiscal prudence.  The condition imposed also mitigates the moralhazard problem.Institutional ChangesThe Commission has argued that important institutional changes arerequired to tackle some of the structural problems in managing governmentfinances. One central change relates to the regime of government borrowing. Ithas recommended that states, like the centre, must decide their annualborrowing programme, within the framework of their respective fiscalresponsibility legislations. In fact, as the background papers for this Conferenceindicate that if the state governments move on a path of fiscal correction, themarket borrowing programme of the states will be sustainable and should notface difficulties in terms of eliciting the necessary subscription. There is also aneed to let the states access the market directly for their borrowing requirements.Such a practice will bring in the needed fiscal discipline. The overall limit to theirannual borrowing from all sources should be supervised by an independent bodylike a Loan Council with representatives from the Ministry of Finance, PlanningCommission, Reserve Bank of India, and the state governments. This Councilmay, at the beginning of each year, announce borrowing limits for each state,taking into account the sustainability considerations into account. Our suggestionfor de-linking grants and loans in plan assistance, as these need to bedetermined on different principles, is part of the reform of the borrowing regime. Itis this part of the Finance Commission’s recommendations dealing with thechanges in the borrowing scheme that will receive detailed attention at thismeeting.Restructuring Public FinanceThe scheme of restructuring envisages the fiscal deficit to be reduced to 6per cent on the combined amount of the centre and states and revenue deficit tozero by 2008-09. This will result in an increase in the aggregate saving rate aswell as an increase in government capital expenditure as a percentage of GDP.In consequence, as aggregate investment rate increases, growth is stabilized atabove 7 per cent. The reduction in the revenue deficit by 4.5 percentage points isto be achieved by an increase in the total revenue receipts by 2.9 per cent and areduction in total revenue expenditure by about 1.6 per cent.In our plan for restructuring government finances, we expect a positivegrowth dividend, as revenue deficits relative to GDP progressively fall, implying afall in government dis-savings, and an increase in the overall savings relative toGDP. A higher tax-GDP ratio combined with higher growth on a sustained basis,and fall in interest payments, create the necessary space for increasinggovernment capital expenditure, and productivity enhancing non-interest, non-salary revenue expenditure. The virtuous cycle of reforms, robust governmentfinances, and an equalizing system of fiscal transfers, should help establish asound federal fiscal system in India.
