Indian Agriculture and Reform :Concerns, Issues and Agenda*Professor  garu , Vice Chancellor ,  and friends. I am honoured by the fact that you have invited me to deliver the address. When the  first spoke to me about this lecture, I humbly submittedto Professor  that, in the past, many eminent personalities like Governor,Dr. , Professor G.S. , Professor , Dr. K.  Rao andProfessor  had delivered this address and so we should together explorean appropriate scholar for the purpose.  But, Professor Parthasarathy insisted and saidthat I had no choice. I do realise now that there is some merit in the invitation in thesense that the Reserve Bank of India is perhaps the first central bank in the world tohave taken interest in matters relating to agriculture and agricultural finance and itcontinues to do so.  RBI had conducted the first ever Rural Credit Survey in theworld, promoted the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development(NABARD) and, is financing endowment chairs on the subject in Universities.  Apartfrom this, belonging to Andhra Pradesh and having worked in the Finance andPlanning Department in the State of Andhra Pradesh for several years, I haveOn hearing the annual report on the activities of the Society, one cannot but beimpressed with the remarkable enthusiasm and commitment with which the IndianSociety of Agricultural Marketing is able to carry on its endeavour.   I think the workmethods of this Society should be advocated as a role model for other similaracademic societies to emulate. There is also a distinguishing feature of thConference on Agricultural Marketing. Unlike some associations where thousands ofpeople assemble for a gala-conference, the discussions in this Conference seem to befocused and purposeful way. Moreover, this must be one of the few societies, whichdoes not restrict membership to only those who have specialized qualifications. Theparticipation is allowed on the basis of the functions that one is performing, be itregulator, regulated or academia. Hence, by way of productivity or contribution toknowledge, the approach of this Society to the conduct of a conference is extremelydesirable and I will certainly advocate this model. I am most grateful to the for the honour conferred on me by choosing me as the Conference President for theNow on the subject itself, namely agriculture marketing, I went through theconference papers carefully and I do not think that there would really be much valueaddition in my commenting on these valuable papers. I would, therefore, place beforeyou some broad perspectives of what we in the RBI have been grappling with, asThe most important aspect that has been referred to in the Reserve Bank ofIndia Annual Report and in the Report on Currency and Finance of recent years is aserious concern that of late, real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in agriculture andallied activities recorded absolute declines.  The decline is of 1.3 per cent in the thirdConcernsconcerns and issues relating to agriculture.year 2000.organisersconducted in aenaturally been taking significant interest in matters related to agriculture.RadhakrishnaSubba Vyas Bhalla RangarajanParthasarathyorganisersPresidentialSathyanarayanaProf Radhakrishna Parthasarathyand fourth quarters of 1999-2000. In 2000-01, the first quarter growth of real GDPoriginating from agriculture and allied activities of 1.7 per cent has increased to 1.9per cent in the second quarter. In the third quarter, the lower growth of 1.2 per centcan still be considered significant when compared with the absolute decline of 1.1 percent during  the corresponding quarter of 1999-00.  The movements in the index ofagricultural production suggest that this recent downturn is part of a longer-termtrend. The annual trend growth rate of agricultural production has decelerated to 2.2per cent in the 1990s from 3.1 per cent in the 1980s. The 1990s also witnessedconsiderable degree of variability of agricultural output with five years in the decaderecording absolute declines in output.Overall, it may be argued by some that the secular decline in output growth isnot a matter of serious concern since structural transformation of the economy mayimply that growth in agriculture would be less than that in non-agricultural sectors.Although the contribution of agriculture and allied activities to the GDP has declinedfrom 35 per cent in the 1980s to 25 per cent in 1999-2000, more than two-third of thepopulation continues to depend upon agriculture.  Growth in sectors other thanagriculture is not absorbing work force on a significant scale. Agriculturaldevelopment has, therefore, rightly come to be regarded as an indicator of the qualityof life at the grassroot level making it what may be called peoples sector. Theagricultural sector also makes a significant contribution to India’s exports, accountingfor a little less than a fifth of total merchandise exports. Also, despite some degree ofweatherproofing acquired by the economy in recent years, agriculture continues toplay a critical role in determining the macroeconomic balances in our countryIt is no surprise therefore, that considerable anxiety is being expressed in somequarters that perhaps the poor performance of agriculture in the ‘nineties indicates thatthe process of reforms has by-passed the agricultural sector. It is also argued thatwhile there has been emphasis on trade, industry and the financial sector, attention ofthe reform in some sense has not percolated to the agricultural sector, although as willObservers who compare the performance of India and China feel that in thereform cycle in China, agricultural reforms were started in the early stage, whichhelped increase China’s rate of growth of this sector and consequently the potentialoutput of the economy as a whole, thereby placing it on a high growth path. In India,while financial sector reforms have been undertaken early in the reform cycle, thecommentators feel that reforms in agriculture sector have not been as much in theforefront both in terms of sequencing and overall priority.  This issue of appropriatepriority for agriculture in our reform process needs to be explored further in view ofthe fact that the trends in recent years are clearly indicative of a possible long-termSome studies have been undertaken in the Reserve Bank of India focussing onsome of these issues. The internal research studies seem to indicate that there are twomajor areas, which are constraining the upward movement of output towards itspotential for India. These relate to agricultural sector and physical infrastructure.These preliminary findings, which are yet to be confirmed, add weight to the2deceleration in agriculture.be explained later, terms of trade improved for agriculture.especially in generating private consumption demand.argument already articulated in the recent Annual Reports that agriculture has to be onIn regard to the importance of agriculture in a broader socio-economic sense,all the three basic objectives of economic development of the country, namely, outputgrowth, price stability and poverty alleviation are best served by growth of agriculturesector. It may sound ironic that agriculture is one sector where there is convergence ofall the three main objectives of economic policy in India but we seem to haverelegated the sector to the background in the process of economic reform.  In fact,there is a feeling that the economy may face slowdown if there is inadequate pickupin demand from rural areas and the depressed price conditions in agriculturalcommodities in the recent past have brought to the fore the criticality of agriculturesector in enabling Indian economy to maintain a respectable growth rate.Eminent economists such as Professor Hanumantha Rao, ProfessorVaidyanathan, Professor Vyas and Dr. Radhakrishna have been working on theproblems of and prospects for agricultural growth and their contributions are wellknown.  Hence only select issues relating to macro balances, public expenditureFirst issue relates to macro economic balances.  In terms of macro balances,the overall saving-investment gap in India in the recent years has been between 1.0and 1.4 per cent of GDP. This is very low, and it has tended to move down in thesecond half of 1990s.  This is contrary to the general impression that afterliberalisation, increased dependence is being placed on foreign flows. It is, howeverFurther, it may be noted that the public sector investment-saving gap hasincreased.  The objective of reform is that more investible resources should bereleased to the private sector.  But the data, particularly the recent CSO data, indicatesthat the contrary has occurred. Earlier, government savings used to be negative andthe public enterprises savings were positive, and between the government and publicenterprises put together, the public sector as a whole showed marginal positive saving.Now, the government and the public sector as a whole are contributing negatively tosavings. So, during the reforms, though it is popularly felt that more resources havebeen released to the private sector to enable them to undertake larger investments, theway the fiscal reform has been managed did result in a situation where the saving-investment gap has moved adverse to the private sector, and public sector (includingGovernment)  has in fact increased in recent years.It can be observed that out of the gross domestic saving of 22 per cent, 19.8per cent are household saving, 50-60 per cent of which is financial saving.Furthermore, about 80 per cent of the financial saving of household sector by the public sector (i.e. government and public enterprises) in India.  Moreover, thecontinuing revenue deficits of the Centre and States indicate that much of the privatefinancial savings absorbed by public sector is being used up for consumption and notinvestment.3is absorbeddissavingnot so, since the role of foreign savings has been reduced in the second half of 1990s.policies, and credit flow are addressed here.Issuesthe top of the agenda of reforms in India.The share of gross capital formation in agriculture as a proportion of totalgross domestic capital formation has declined from 6.8 per cent in 1993-94 to 5.5 percent in 1998-99. The decline in capital formation has been more pronounced in thepublic sector, reflecting the persistent and large revenue deficits. The share ofagriculture and allied activities in total Plan outlay has declined from 6.1 per cent inthe Sixth Plan Period to an estimated 4.4 per cent in the Ninth Plan Period. The shareof irrigation and flood control in total outlay has also shrunk from 10.0 per cent to anEarly correction of overall macro imbalances by improving fiscal managementwill help to release higher investible resources in the country, which would benefitagriculture also.  But, this cannot be an excuse for not increasing public investmentsSecondly, while public investment in agriculture is coming down, the subsidybill accruing towards agriculture is going up though the general impression is that allsubsidies have been pruned in recent years. Budgetary subsidies for the agriculturesector have been increasing in nominal terms over the years. The increase isconcentrated on input subsidies, though food subsidies are also incurred to maintainhigh levels of food stocks.The share of fertilizer subsidies in the total explicit subsidies of the centralgovernment steadily increased from 35 per cent in the 1980s to 42 per cent in the firsthalf of the 1990s and further to 49.8 per cent in the second half. Fertilizer subsidy as aratio to GDP fell from 0.8 per cent in 1990-91 to 0.7 per cent in 1999-00. In absolute,390 crore to Rs.13,463 crore during the same period.  Thoughthis subsidy is formally attributed to agriculture, in reality, most of it supports manufacturing industry. States’ power sector subsidies to agriculture havealso undergone steady growth during the 1990s. Power sector subsidies to agricultureaccount for well over one per cent of GDP. Hidden subsidies provided by the Statesfor agriculture increased from Rs.5 ,938 crore in 1991-92 to Rs.25,577 crore in 1999-00. In comparison, in 1990-91, the Plan outlay of agriculture sector includingirrigation was Rs.12 ,515 crore,  which increased to Rs.33,858 crore during 1999-2000. Therefore, the issue that arises here is that a conscious choice has to be madegiven the overall resource constraint, as to what would be good for agriculture at thisjuncture in our country – increase in subsidies or more investment.  Although it isrecognized that subsidies can be regarded as production equivalents, the question thathas to be raised in the context of overall balance is whether it would be worthwhileshifting the total spending on subsidies to investment, especially in terms ofcontribution to agricultural employment and poverty alleviation. Thus, the trade-offbetween investment in agriculture and increase in subsidies should be an importantThe third issue relates to inadequate flow of credit to agriculture. This couldbe viewed in two different ways.  One, the Reserve Bank has been taking a number ofinitiatives to ensure adequate credit to agriculture sector and recently the CapoorCommittee had made a number of recommendations on issues relating to cooperativesector.  Two, the issue may also be viewed in the broader perspective of institutional4item on the agenda.fertiliserterms, it rose from Rs.4in agriculture.estimated 6.5 per cent over the Plan periods.dynamics. There are broadly three categories of institutions which deliver credit torural areas, i.e., commercial banks, Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs) and cooperativebanks. Owing to accumulation of losses in public sector banks on account ofNPAs, the flow of credit to rural areas by banks in recent years has not beenup to the mark.  There is also a marked change in the orientation of commercialbanks, which are being subjected to greater competition from private and foreignbanks. Some of the public sector commercial banks are sometimes adopting theircompetitors’ strategies without recognising that their comparative advantage lies inrural and semi-urban areas. Sooner the public sector banks recognise the importanceof rural economies better it is for their long-term commercial sustainability. TheRRBs have been in the early years subjected to an interest rate regime that ledinexorably to accumulated losses, which are continuing to constrain their operationsupto expectations in large partsdependant on flow of finance from NABARD.   The issue, therefore, is what are the ideal instruments that would deliveradequate and timely agricultural credit. It is not necessary that the same institutionsthat have been responsible for providing agricultural credit for the last twenty years orso should continue to do so as they did in the past. The moment agriculture isaccorded high priority, revamping the rural cooperatives also come on top of theagenda, which would require recapitalising them.  More attention to the actualrevamping process of RRBs would need to be bestowed.The third item of the agenda will, therefore, be the appropriate institutionalchanges that are required to ensure necessary credit flow to agriculture. Clearly, thereis a  need to examine the issue of rural credit and rural credit delivery systems  in anobjective as well as transparent way and accord them priority in legislative actionsFourthly, as a result of reform measures, there are some commercial banks thatare not able to reach the prescribed target of lending to agriculture. As per the currentprescription, they are required to place funds to the extent of the shortfall withNABARD, which in turn, would place these funds with State Governments forinvestment in agriculture related activities, mainly rural infrastructure.  An issue hasbeen raised that such a process amounts to indirect borrowings from the banks byState Governments and that funds originally meant to be deployed for agriculture arediverted for public investment. Incidentally, it is worth noting that even afteraccounting for such Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) allocationsduring the reform era, public investment in agriculture has slackened.  Furthermore,the risk based rates of return on banks’ investments in RIDF are better than similarreturns by lending to agriculture, implying incentive incompatibility of RIDF with themain objective.  Also, coverage of definition of priority sector lending has beenbroadened significantly in the recent years, thus overestimating credit flows to actualagricultural operations in recent years. It can, therefore, be argued that the RIDFshould be refocused, if possible by diverting such funds to agricultural operationsthrough revamped systems of RRBs and cooperatives. Incidentally, banks have beenarguing that a constraint facing them with regard to deployment of agriculture creditis lack of viable credit products, implying lack of demand for credit. On the otherhand, there exists an informal sector which provides agricultural credit at high interestrates, which indicates that there is no demand constraint. The dichotomy between the5and financial allocations.of the country and is heavily even now. The rural co-operatives sector has not come mounting formal and informal sectors could be explained by the lack of banks’ capacity to reachpotential borrowers, which in turn could be explained by attitudinal, procedural andinstitutional factors. In fact, the very purpose of deregulation of interest rates for thissector, which was expected to encourage banks to lend higher, does not seem to haveFifthly, one of areas the Reserve Bank has taken a lot of interest in the recentpast relates to micro-finance. A Committee was constituted under the leadership ofNABARD for this purpose. Lending under micro finance can be formal or informal.In Professor Ram Reddy memorial Lecture delivered by the same author, it has beenmentioned that the temptation to bureaucratise and regulate microfinance must beresisted. Sixthly, another matter that has been engaging the attention of the policymakers for the past ten years relates to the huge food stocks, but the problem hasexacerbated in recent years. There are several aspects that need to be carefullyconsidered.  The world food market and the market instruments by which food stocksare imported have changed in recent years.   It is possible to buy options so that wecan pay now merely for an option to import specific quantities at a price. Anotherissue relates to types of storage facilities that need improvement in public sector andthe compelling requirement of creating private storage facilities. The cost andefficiency of operations of Food Corporation of India have also been a subject ofscrutiny more recently by a study conducted in Administrative Staff College of India.The pattern of food consumption, food storage, food production and food trading inthe world have changed.  Therefore, our policy on what constitutes optimal foodstocks would need to be revisited and this was raised in the RBI Annual Report lastyear. Of direct interest to the RBI is the monetary and fiscal implications of bufferstock operations. The Reserve Bank of India has requested the Administrative StaffCollege of India to study this issue separately and submit a technical report.Seventhly, the issue of terms of trade is important. The terms of trade inagriculture in India is not dwelt upon have except to recognise that the terms of tradehave on the whole moved somewhat favourably to agriculture in recent years.Recently the global competitiveness of our agriculture sector has gained attention ofpolicy-makers but the aspect of supply elasticities in our economy needs to be lookedinto. If public investment and market infrastructure in agriculture continue to beinadequate, there could be a serious problem of competitiveness and adequate supplyresponse. No doubt, India is a large producer of several agricultural products. In termsof quantity of production, India is the top producer in the world in milk, and secondlargest in wheat and rice. We should, therefore, be concerned about improving qualitywhile maintaining the lead in quantity. If the focus is on global agriculture, it isimportant to think of both quality and quantity of production. The issue is whether it in global standards has several dimensions. Quality may mean rigidadherence to global environmental and health standards.  It may also mean rigidadherence to delivery-schedules, in terms of both quantity and quality, and timeliness.Global orientation would require a complete re-orientation of what may be called‘towards a more aggressive thinking’, rather than ‘defensive thinking’, to create anenabling institutional environment to compete and survive. For example, it is not6 Qualityis possible to create an environment where we can compete in terms of quality also.This aspect is also being carefully looked into by the RBI.served its purpose fully.desirable to have highly segmented markets, although large quantities are available inthe country. Certification of quality requires institutional arrangements within thecountry that carry credibility in both domestic and foreign markets.  In this context,the institutional arrangements such as commodity exchange assumes importance andit is an area where we are still rooted in the past.  A thorough review of adequacy ofinstitutional arrangements in quality control, certification and trading in agriculturesector should be a national priority to take advantage of global opportunities. Indeed,with liberalisation of imports, even domestic markets would demand such institutionalchanges if our agriculture sector has to survive competition brought about tradeEighth, another important aspect relates to the mindset on role of middlemen.In India the general attitude to trade especially in agriculture has been to elimination of middlemen or ensure that middlemen’s functions are carried out bypublic sector or cooperatives in name, but public sector in reality.  However,experience has shown that public sector as middleman also utilises other middlemenand in any case has not been cost effective.  In a modern economy, it is inconceivablethat the role of middlemen can be eliminated. This underscores the need to regulatethe middlemen in order to make them more efficient, competitive and accountable. Itis necessary to move to a situation where an efficient system of market intermediariesis created in agriculture sector. The related issue of mindset relates to There needs to be a mechanism for hedging risks. Again, this should be adequatelyregulated in a competitive environment so as to ward off unworthy speculation. raises among others, issues of financing trade, settlement mechanisms, ensuring thatfutures contracts are honoured, etc. The concept of nationwide multi-commodityexchange has been mooted in the country. A Committee was appointed, of which RBIwas a member, to work on these issues. The Report of the Committee is underNinth, farmers face uncertainties with regard to weather as well as price. Theissue of uncertainty should be distinguished from the issue of commercial viability.Thus, advocating subsidised credit to tackle the problem of distress among farmersdue to weather failure or depressed prices is not enough. The current regime ofsubsidies does not tackle the major problem of agriculture viz. uncertainty.Uncertainty of weather may be alleviated by insurance-mechanisms but unfortunatelythe experience so far, with what has essentially been insurance of credit to agriculture,has not been encouraging. Commercialisation of agriculture can progress only wheninstitutional arrangements such as insurance penetrate deep within the agriculturesector.  In the financial world, it is recognised that there are certain uncertainties andhence financial participants are encouraged to devise mechanisms for hedging.Similarly, modern agriculture too will have to have a mechanism by which farmersare able to hedge risks. This is possible only if there are proper institutionalmechanisms and incentives to hedge. The traditional approach of handling demand orsupply side problems or problems of uncertainty directly and essentially byd hoc manner, can no longer serve the purpose.Finally, Reserve Bank of India recognises Self Regulatory ( SROs) in the financial sector.  The RBI encourages them to produce standard7OrganisationsGovernment in an aconsideration of the Government of India.Thisfutures-trading.favourliberalisation.documentation for trading in repo market. However, genuine self regulatoryorganisations do not seem to have been nurtured in agriculture sector and in any caseinteraction between regulatory agencies and SROs has not taken roots in agriculturesector, though it has achieved some progress in the financial sector.It is clear that improving the growth rate and competitiveness of agriculture isvery critical at this juncture for a variety of reasons, including the lacklustreperformance of agriculture in the recent past and specially the impact of trade-regime being announced. There is some merit in the argument that  the reformprocess has bypassed agriculture so far and that this is best illustrated by the co-existence of segmented and overregulated domestic markets with liberalised export–Briefly stated, those relevant are overall fiscal imbalances, declining andinadequate public-investments in agriculture accompanied by increasing share ofpatently unproductive and distortionary subsidies.  Serious deficiencies relate to thelegal and institutional framework for flow of credit to agriculture, maintenance ofhuge food stocks with considerable fiscal and monetary implications, virtual non-existence of institutional mechanisms to promote assurance of quality and assureddelivery in a nation-wide market, outdated attitudes to the role of so-calledmiddlemen, insurance, hedging and finally overarching  with littleattention to promotion of Self-Regulatory . In this background, theagenda for reform virtually encompasses a thorough change in mindset and overhaulof legal and institutional mechanisms to enable a growing, healthy and efficientagriculture sector. In brief, the role of Government in agriculture needs to beFirst, there is a need to define the parameters of an optional pattern ofutilisation of fiscal resources in agriculture and a medium term time-bound plan totransform the existing system of subsidies in favour of a few to a more desirable wellspreadout public investments. In other words, incrementalism in policy-change shouldSecond, the distortions and outdated policy approaches to the deployment ofcredit to agriculture must be recognised and the institutional as well as instrumentchanges urgently needed should be spelt out, but this would need governmentalintervention. In a deregulated financial sector, enabling environment and incentives uncertainty in agricultural activities is admittedly more than in otheractivities and the institutional arrangements, whether in public domain or privateinitiative are non-existent. Commercialisation of agriculture and competition warrantmechanisms to meet uncertainties while enhancing productivity.  Meeting uncertaintyis different from  non-viable operations, and putting in place aninstitutional framework for insurance, hedging and public resources to make suchmechanisms initially viable are necessary as part of refocusing the mindset andresources of government to the emerging challenges of current slowdown and future8threat of global competition.subsidising  Third,are infinitely superior to directions or moral suasion.not be mistaken for a sequenced reform in deployment of public funds in agriculture.comprehensively and urgently redefined, perhaps somewhat on the following lines.Organisationsbureaucratisationimport regime in agricultural commodities.liberalisedAgenda : Redefine Role of Government Fourth, public policy should turn immediate attention to trading andmarketing aspects, with a clear admission of need to change mindset.  For example,middlemen are inevitable and the issue is how to foster competition and assureregulation of such middlemen keeping in view the interests of producers as well asconsumers. Certification and credible regulation of trade to ensure competition qualityand transparency protects both producer and consumer far better than price anddistribution controls, provided public distributing systems are oriented to be morefocussed, selective and efficient.  A national commodity exchange is but one elementof reform. More but a different type of governmental intervention is needed inmarketing and trade while genuine co-operatives like in diary sector need to beFifth, genuine self-regulatory organisations need to be founded and nurturedand experiences in other countries may not be irrelevant though our needs and culturalmilieu are unique. A major challenge is to devise nationwide formats that can cater tonationally integrated markets while allowing for local variations and initiatives To sum up, inadequate finance and outdated as well as inappropriateinstitutional framework are the twin problems and, of the two, institutional reformsare needed immediately requiring changes in mindset and redefining the role ofgovernment.. . 9 for their assistance. Prasad Patra and DrReddy is thankful to Dr. Michael Vizag on February 3, 2001.  Dr. Society of Agriculture Marketing at Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Conference of Indian * Address by Dr. Y.V. particularly at the state level.considered afresh.
