Inclusive Growth and the Role Technology Can Play in It(Tenth D. R. Gadgil Memorial Lecture  delivered by Dr. Raghuram Rajan, Governor, ReserveBank of India on February 13, 2014 in Mumbai)Thank you for inviting me to speak here today.  Shri D.R. Gadgil is well known not onlyas an economist but also as a great educationist and a statesman, having served as a memberof Rajya Sabha. We all know of the great contribution he made towards the distribution of plantransfers amongst the Indian states through the famous ‘Gadgil Formula’. The Gadgil formulaattempted to ensure that there was objectivity in distribution of funds amongst the states inIndia. He wrote extensively on Indian agriculture and farm sector and the planning process inIndia. The basic principles advocated by Shri Gadgil on food self-sufficiency and employmentorientation of planning, are significant even today for achieving 'inclusive growth'. I thus, feelthat the topic that I am going to speak on today has great relevance to what he thought of viz.Inclusive Growth and the role technology can play in it.The Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee Report has given the RBI much food for thought on theissues of financial inclusion. I want to reflect on the recommendations, even while putting someadditional issues on the table.But before that, let me offer a quick recap of the macroeconomic situation. Growth isstabilizing on the back of a good harvest, strengthening exports, and some early signs ofresumption of large stalled projects. However, growth is still very weak. We have to work toensure macroeconomic stability, which means strengthening growth, especially throughinvestment, maintaining a moderate current account deficit, achieving a fiscal deficit consistentwith the government’s fiscal roadmap, and reducing inflation. The government has to becommended for its efforts to revive growth, narrow the current account deficit, and meet fiscaltargets. I have no doubt that the fiscal deficit for the year 2013-14 will be close to, or below, thefinance minister’s red line.1Going forward, however, we need to continue on the path of fiscal consolidationconstantly improving the sustainability and quality of fiscal adjustment. It is very important thatwe spend money on needed public investment, even while reducing misdirected subsidies andentitlements.Good fiscal control will help us in our fight against inflation. So will moderation inagricultural support price inflation, which will ensure that these prices only provide a baselinelevel of support when the farmer is in difficulty, without displacing market prices. Accuratemarket prices, together with good dissemination of data on sowing patterns, can do a far betterjob than support prices in directing agricultural production to where it is most valuable andneeded.Somewhat paradoxically, raising energy prices to market levels will also lead to lowerinflation over the medium term, the horizon over which the RBI is trying to contain inflation. Thereason is that higher prices will reduce excessive consumption, reduce subsidies and fiscaldeficits, and incentivize investment and competition, even while allowing prices to bedetermined by an increasingly stable and plentifully supplied global market for energy. Theconsequences of inappropriate or inadequate price adjustments will be that the Reserve Bankwill have to bear more of the burden in combating inflation.Let me turn now to financial inclusion. Financial inclusion is about (a) the broadening offinancial services to those people who do not have access to financial services sector; (b) thedeepening of financial services for people who have minimal financial services; and (c) greaterfinancial literacy and consumer protection so that those who are offered the products can makeappropriate choices. The imperative for financial inclusion is both a moral one as well as onebased on economic efficiency. Should we not give everyone, that is capable, the tools andresources to better themselves, and in doing so, better the country?Last week, I met with some members of Ela Bhatt’s Self-Employed Women’sAssociation. In a room full of poor but confident women entrepreneurs, I asked how manyborrowed from moneylenders before they came to SEWA. About half the women raised their2hands. When asked how many thought of approaching a regular bank before they came toSEWA’s cooperative bank, not one raised her hand. Interestingly, many of them said that theloan from SEWA freed them from the moneylender’s high interest rate, which gave themenough to service SEWA’s loan fully even while focusing on other productive activities. I haveheard this from other micro-entrepreneurs – the highest return initial investment is often to freeoneself of the clutches of the moneylender. Despite this high return from the delivery of credit tothe poor, and despite much of our financial inclusion efforts being focused on credit, we stillreach too few of the target population. So there is much more to be achieved.We have tried to effect inclusion in the past through mandates – whether it be throughdirection on branch opening or on lending to priority sectors. That we are still far short of ourgoals has led some critics to suggest we should abandon mandates because the market willtake care of needs; If the poor have demand for financial services, the critics say, providers willemerge to supply it. Markets do respond to need, and competition is a very healthy force forimprovement, but market functioning can be impeded by poor infrastructure, uneven regulation,natural or regulatory monopolies, and even cartelization.While enlisting competitive forces wherever possible to compete for the bottom of thepyramid’s business, as a development central bank we also need to offer a supportive hand. Byputting in place the right infrastructure and enabling regulation, we have to encourage thedevelopment of the products, institutions, and networks that will foster inclusion.Let us start with products. We have been trying for decades to expand credit. We havefocused much less on easing payments and remittances or on expanding remunerative savingvehicles or on providing easy-to-understand insurance against emergencies. Perhaps weshould try to expand financial inclusion by encouraging these other products, and allow credit tofollow them rather than lead. Indeed, many successful organizations working with the poorest ofthe poor try to get them to put aside some money as savings, no matter how little, before givingthem loans. Some of our self-help groups (SHGs) work on this principle. Not only does thesavings habit, once inculcated, allow the customer to handle the burden of repayment better, it3may also lead to better credit allocation. With the power of information technology, perhaps theanalysis of the savings and payment patterns of a client can indicate which one of them is readyto use credit well.One roadblock to access, even to something as simple as a universal basic savingsaccount, is Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements. Experts have emphasized the need tomake it far simpler to open basic accounts, and have suggested minimizing the requireddocumentation. In an effort to do so, the Dr. Nachiket Mor Committee recommends requiringproof of only a permanent address. This is nevertheless more onerous than current RBI norms,which allow an applicant to self-certify her address and other details for accounts belowRs.50,000. But despite RBI’s exhortations, few banks have reduced their demand fordocumentation – they fear that they will be held responsible if something goes wrong, no matterwhat the regulatory norms. The acceptance of third party KYC certification is particularly difficult.Today, stringent KYC norms keep too many out of the banking system, and lead tounnecessary harassment for others. Banks may adopt these norms more because of regulatoryor legal liability than to safeguard against true criminal or terrorist activity. Can’t we do better?Some bankers suggest that by monitoring activity patterns in accounts carefully, even whileputting some limits on basic accounts (such as holding a large value cheque for a few daysbefore it is cashed), much of the suspicious activity can be detected and stopped. Could weallow a commercial bank some regulatory dispensation in case there is minor mischief in somelow value accounts, provided the bank has a reliable system in place to detect greater mischief?Could the gains in easing widespread access to safe accounts outweigh the costs of minorfraud? How can we get entities within the system to rely on each other’s KYC, without theprocess having to be continuously repeated? How can technology assist in effectivelyaddressing the above issues? These are questions we have to examine and address.The broader issue is whether through sophisticated state-of-the-art technology, we canoffer customers products that are simple, low-cost, and easy to use. We have done this withmobile phones, can we do it with banking? Payments may be another obvious product. I should4note that our payments infrastructure in India is very advanced. We have three large RBItechnology centers devoted to supporting payments and robust payment and settlementnetworks for both large value and small transactions. We have introduced an additional factor ofauthentication for all e-commerce transactions – which makes these transactions more secure --and are swiftly moving to Chip and PIN technology for credit card transactions. SMS alerts forbank and credit card transactions are an important advance relative to even the United States,where thieves find it easy to bill thousands of dollars to your credit card even before you know itis stolen. All this means that we have the infrastructure to provide cheap and safe payments andremittances. What we need are non-governmental players to utilize this infrastructure to providethe products and access that people want.With over 900 million mobile phones, the potential for mobile banking as a deliverychannel for financial services is a big opportunity in India. We have consciously adopted thebank led model for mobile banking, while the non-banks, including Mobile Network Operators,have been permitted to issue mobile wallets, where cash withdrawal is not permitted as of now.The key to cheap and universal payments and remittances will be if we can find a safe way toallow funds to be freely transferred between bank accounts and mobile wallets, as well ascashed out of mobile wallets, through a much larger and ubiquitous network of businesscorrespondents. The Nachiket Mor Committee suggests the creation of Payment Banks as astep towards this goal. Other suggestions include interoperable business correspondents whowill get the scale economies to serve in remote locations, and the usage of NBFCs as bankingcorrespondents. We will examine all this.In the meantime, interesting solutions are emerging. Cashing out is important forremittances, because we have a large recipient population in the country, most of whom do nothave access to formal banking services. We have recently approved the in-principle setting upof a payment system which will facilitate the funds transfer from bank account holders to thosewithout accounts through ATMs. Essentially, the sender can have the money withdrawn from hisaccount through an ATM transaction. The intermediary processes the payment, and sends a5code to the recipient on his mobile that allows him to withdraw the money from any nearbybank’s ATM. The system will take care of necessary safeguards of customer identification,transaction validation, velocity checks etc. We need more such innovative products, some ofwhich mobile companies are providing.In India, despite the high mobile density, it is also a reality that most of the handsets arevery basic ones and many of the mobile connections are prepaid subscriptions. These areimportant constraints. The RBI’s Technical Committee on Mobile Banking has recommended,among others, the need for a standardized and simplified procedure forregistration/authentication of customers for mobile banking services, a cohesive awarenessprogramme to be put in place, the adoption of a common application platform across all banksto be delivered to the customers independent of the handset being used, along with use of SMSand USSD technology for providing necessary level of security (through encryption) for suchtransactions. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) has prescribed optimum serviceparameters, as also a ceiling on charges for provision of USSD services by telecom operators tothe banks and their agents. We have a great opportunity for banks and telecom serviceproviders to come together to deliver mobile banking services of all kinds in a seamless andsecure manner to their customers. In the next few months, we will accelerate the dialogbetween key players.Technology can also be used to facilitate credit, a product I started the talk with.MSMEs get squeezed all the time by their large buyers, who pay after long delays. All would bebetter off if the MSME could sell its claim on the large buyer in the market. The MSME would getits money quickly, while the market would get a claim on the better rated large buyer instead ofholding a claim on the MSME. The large buyer could get a better price for his purchases. All thisrequires setting up a Trade-receivables Exchange, which the RBI has been discussing withmarket participants. Once again, the key is to reduce transaction costs by automating almostevery aspect of the transaction so that even the smallest MSMEs can benefit.6One of the difficulties the poor and small businesses have in accessing credit is the lackof information about them, both up front as they are being evaluated for credit, and after lendingwhere the lender has to monitor them. If savings and payments products are sold widely, andinformation, including payments to mobile companies, utility companies, as well as thegovernment, collected, then the excluded can build information records that will help themaccess credit. If, in addition, negative information on defaults is shared in a fair and responsibleway through the financial network, every individual borrower will have something at stake -- theircredit history – which can serve to encourage timely repayment. This, in turn, can improve thewillingness of banks to lend.The Nachiket Mor Committee has also opined on how priority sector norms can bealtered so that we achieve the objective of credit to priority sectors, even while doing it moreefficiently. So, for example, banks that are good at rural lending should do more of it, whilebanks that are good at lending to micro and small enterprises should be free to specialize there.The Committee advocates attaching weights to performance on different norms and addingperformance up. So one bank may achieve its priority sector target by lending predominantly toagriculture, while another may lend only to MSMEs in meeting its target. The weights will beadjusted so that overall targets are met by the system. So if agricultural lending is inadequatewhile we are getting over-performance on MSME loans, the weight on the former will beincreased while the weight on the latter will be reduced. These are interesting ideas, and we willexplore them in greater detail.Finally, let me turn to consumer literacy and protection. As we reach more and more ofthe population, we have to be sure that they understand the products they are being sold andhave the information to make sensible decisions. Caveat emptor or let the buyer beware istypically the standard used in financial markets – that is, so long as the buyer is not activelymisled, she is responsible for researching her product choices and making purchase decisions.While this puts a lot of burden on the buyer to do due diligence, it also gives her a lot of freedomto make choices, including of course the freedom to make bad choices.7But with poorly informed and unsophisticated investors, we should consider the Dr.Nachiket Mor Committee’s recommendation of setting some guidelines on what products aresuitable for different categories of investors. Broadly speaking, the more complicated theproduct the more sophisticated should be the target customer. Should we move to a normwhere a suite of simple products is pre-approved for dissemination to all, but as products getmore complicated, financial sector providers bear more and more responsibility to show that thebuyer was sophisticated and/or appropriately counseled before she purchased the product?Of course, the longer run answer is for customers to become more savvy. Can thetechnology sector help educate people in financial matters? After all, finance is not somethingmost people learn in schools, but it is something they encounter every day in the world. Lowcost but high quality distance finance education is something the country very much needs andwe look to entrepreneurs here to think of innovative ways to provide it.Before I conclude, one caveat. Technology can magnify the reach of finance for badpurposes as well as good. Many of you must receive frequent emails, purportedly from me,informing you of a large sum of money that awaits you at the RBI, and urging you to send meyour account details so that I can transfer the money to you. Let me assure you that the RBIdoes not give out money, I do not send these emails, and if you do fall for such emails, you willlose a lot of money to crooks and be reminded of the adage – if anything looks too good to betrue, it probably is not true.Of course, technology can also offer answers to check fraud. Can we enlist social mediain enabling the public to identify fraud and help regulation? How can we do this in a responsibleway? Again, these are questions at this point, but I am sure we will find the answers.Let me conclude. Technology, with its capacity to reduce transaction costs, is key toenabling the large volume low ticket transaction that is at the center of financial inclusion. Bycollecting and processing large volumes of data easily, technology can also improve the qualityof financial decision making. When products have network effects, technology can ensure notjust interoperability, key to obtaining the benefits of networking, but also security, key to8maintaining the confidence of people and preventing them from withdrawing from the formalfinancial system once again. I sincerely hope the successful ICT industry will partner with thefinance industry to revolutionize financial inclusion in this country.9
