Role of Quality Human Resource in Target Setting for Economic GrowthI am indeed thankful to Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC)and especially to Dr. R. Chidambaram, Chairman, TIFAC for inviting me to join thedistinguished participants and share my thoughts on ‘Role of Quality Human Resources inTarget Setting for Economic Growth’.As I understand TIFAC has undertaken an ambitious programme known as ‘MISSION REACH’as a follow up of the Technology Vision-2020 recommendations.  The MISSION REACH isthree years old now and has track record of significant achievements.  As the distinguishedaudiences are aware the thrust of MISSION REACH is to make technical education morerelevant to the needs of industry.  Appropriately, therefore, the organizers have emphasized onthe theme: “Role of Human Capital in Economic Growth”.  This is a topic closer to my heartbecause as a banker and central banker, my preoccupation has been with the qualitative aspect ofhuman resources in banking industry.At this stage, I would make a brief sojourn to theoretical and empirical literature on therelationship between human capital and economic growth, which has been reflected in theframework of Endogenous Growth Theory, which focuses on continuous advances in humanskills and technology upgradation through research and development, along with factoraccumulation to off set the dampening affect of diminishing returns and sustained economicgrowth.  Two basic frameworks those can be derived from the Endogenous Growth Theory are:(a) Nelson-Phelps approach, and (b) Lucas approach. The former relates growth to the stock ofhuman capital through two channels, i.e. directly through human capital’s effect on a country’sability to innovate (the domestic innovation component), and indirectly through its ability tofacilitate technology adoption, i.e. to foster technology ‘catch-up’ with the leading country (thetechnology diffusion component). The second approach, based on Lucas, but also shared by neo-classical growth accounting, assumes that growth is driven by the accumulation of humancapital. It treats human capital like an ordinary input in the production function. Changes ingrowth rates across countries are assumed to be primarily due to changes in the rates of humancapital accumulation.The empirical literature on testing the importance of human capital for economic growth hasproduced very mixed results. On the one hand, some influential studies find no relationshipbetween human capital and growth when the Lucas approach is tested for broad samples ofcountries. On the other hand, some studies are able to reconcile microeconometric estimates ofthe rate of return to years of schooling with macroeconometric estimates of the impact ofchanges in educational attainment on growth after accounting for measurement error.  Someeconomists emphasize the importance of accounting for labour force quality. They find a stronglink between direct quality measures (i.e. cognitive skills) and economic growth.  The empiricalresearch undertaken by some economists provide support for the Lucas approach that growth isdriven by the accumulation of human capital.Let me now conceptualise my thought process:Conventionally three factors of production viz., land, labour and capital have been recognized asthe sources of economic growth.  The pace of economic growth differs primarily on account ofcapital accumulation.  Nevertheless, the differences in the growth performance and livingstandards across countries can be attributed not only to the pace of growth of physical capital butalso the investment in human capital, which in turn, determines the quality of labour force andproductivity.  In fact, human resources in the growth process are as important as physical capital,technology and financial resources.Despite a great deal of discussion on critical role of human resource development, actualattention paid has been inadequate.  This is partly because the process of developing humanresource is extended over a long period of time.  Secondly, the return from accumulation ofhuman capital has a long gestation lag.  Thirdly, the resource requirement for developing humanresources is enormous.  However, it may be argued that on account of the long lead-timeinvolved, human resource development cannot be postponed and should be addressed with acoherent human resource policy.   Recognising this, in the recent times, the focus of attention inthe Government as well as in the private sector has been the efficient and effective use of humanresources.  A critical element in this process is the quality of governance, as it is increasinglybeen recognized to be one of the prime factors behind the most remarkable developmentsuccesses of human history.  Evidence suggests that good governance can help secure humanwell being and sustained development.  Similarly, poor governance would erode the individualcapabilities as well as institutional and community capacities to meet even the basic needs ofsustenance for large segment of the population.Human capital consists of the abilities, schemes and knowledge of particular workers. Thus, likeconventional economic goods, human capital is rival and excludable.  The literature suggests thatqualitative human resource is precondition for sustained human development and a sustainedhuman development is precondition for sustained economic growth.  The necessary condition forsustained human development is enhancement in per capita income.  The sufficient condition forsustained human development emphasizes three elements viz., (a) longevity (the ability to livelong and healthy life), (b) education (the ability to read and write and acquire knowledge) and (c)command over resources (ability to enjoy the decent standard of living which sociallymeaningful).  Technically, necessary and sufficient conditions discussed above, are referred to asHuman Development Index (HDI).  The growth analysis during the decade gone by and also atpresent emphasizes HDI as a critical indicator for assessing growth.  Evidence suggests thatlower growth results in lower HDI.  In developing and under developed countries, due toresource constraints, there is a tendency to cutback expenditure on human capital formation,particularly education and health.  This in turn leads to a vicious cycle of lower growth.  I wouldlike to put the above analysis in common parlance – if the machine is important the man behindthe machine is also important and the man should be healthy and skilled to operate the machineefficiently.Let me elaborate this point further in terms of educational and health attainments.As regards education, it is recognized that schooling or training raises productivity or thecapacity to earn and that a corresponding change in human-physical capital investment mixwould raise overall output.  Among various levels and types of schooling, primary educationappears to offer the highest rates of return especially in low-income countries. Returns tosecondary and tertiary education are also considerable but generally lower because of the highercosts involved.  Returns to vocational and technical schooling, on the other hand, are lower thangeneral education as unit costs are appreciably higher.  At higher levels of development,secondary and tertiary schooling become increasingly more important.Better health, also contributes directly to economic growth as it reduces production losses onaccount of illness of workers or, potentially, also in terms of higher work productivity for healthyworkers.  Thus, besides its intrinsic value, a healthy and long life has an instrumental value inattainment of other valued goals in enhancing personal and social well-being.Having conceptualised my thought process on human resource development and its growthimpact, let me now touch upon some cross-country experiences.  A study (covering 31 countries)2of United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) concluded that if a farmer had completedfour years of elementary education, the productivity is higher by 8.5 per cent than that of afarmer having no education.  Another study of UNDP (from a sample of 88 countries) observedthat an increase in literacy rate from 20 per cent to 30 per cent was associated with an increase ineconomic growth between 8 to 16 per cent.    Studies carried out by some economists for groupsof countries or for individual countries and over time consistently show that social returns toinvestment in education, for example, are high and oftentimes higher than returns to physicalcapital.Against the above backdrop, I would like to discuss the Indian experience.  Let me begin withthe economic growth process.  During the first three decades after independence, the Indianeconomy stagnated around the trend growth of 3.5 per cent.  The scenario changed during the1980s, the acceleration of growth during the eighties to 5.6 per cent put the Indian economy on ahigher growth path.  During the 1990s, the growth rate was more than 6 per cent.  In per capitaterms, the growth rate is substantially higher at about 4 per cent in recent years than that of about1 to 2 per cent during the earlier periods.  The higher per capita income growth indicatesstabilization of population, which is an essential requirement for promoting sustainabledevelopment and more equitable distribution of resources and opportunities in developingsociety characterized by range of scarcities and multiple constraints.  The improvement in percapita income as I have explained above, is a necessary condition for sustained development ofhuman capital.  This positive outcome has been reflected in the reduction in the poverty ratiofrom 45 per cent during early 1980s to 26 per cent in the beginning of the present decade.    Letme now touch upon the sufficient conditions viz., longevity (health) and literacy (education).Two critical indicators literacy rate and life expectancy has shown distinct improvement over theperiod.  Literacy rate has gone up to 65 per cent during the beginning of the present decade from44 per cent in 1981.  Similarly, life expectancy has gone up from about 30 years to above 60years.The sectoral decomposition of economic growth in recent years indicates a paradigm shifttowards services sector, which accounts for more than 50 per cent of gross domestic product (oneof the measures of economic growth).  Since the services sector is labour intensive, thisdevelopment reflects the higher content of human capital and skill in the growth process. Thereis a broad consensus that the current surge in services has been contributed, among others, by theskill intensive and higher productivity activities, such as information technology services whichhave emerged as one of the fastest growing segments in the 1990s.  The labour productivity insoftware services is estimated to be twice that of the manufacturing sector.  The emergence ofstrong international labour market and increasing demand for information and technology trainedmanpower has led to global mobility of qualified manpower as well as services generated bysuch pool of trained manpower.  It creates valuable network of finance, business and skillformation. Particularly in case of software industry, hubs located in India now provide real timesoftware support, data processing and customer services for clients all over the world. Thesoftware exports from India have witnessed growth from US $ 325 million in 1993-94 to US $9600 million in 2002-03. This huge surge in software exports essentially reflects on the skilledmanpower and the human capital accumulation in Indian context. The high content of skills inlabour supply from India is not only confined to software services, it also pervades toengineering, medical and other professional services. Apart from software, the reflection of thereturn of human capital formation is also visible in the robust growth in remittances to India bythe migrant workers working in various parts of the world.  India has emerged as the toprecipient country in respect of private remittances in the world and accounts for almost 3 to 4 percent of global remittances. The private transfers to India increased to US $ 14.8 billion in 2002-03 from US $ 2.1 billion in 1990-91.3There is a growing recognition that comparative advantage for achieving higher growth not onlylie in factor endowments that include the amount of capital or size of labour force but also inhuman capital on information technology, particularly in the context of a paradigm shift tothmarket oriented growth process. The 20 century’s unprecedented gains in advancing humandevelopment and eradicating poverty came largely from technological breakthroughs.  Therefore,currently, people all over the world have high hopes that new technologies will lead to healthierlife, greater social freedoms, increased knowledge and more productive livelihoods. The marketis recognised as a powerful means for technological progress but it is not powerful enough tocreate and diffuse the technology. The diffusion of technology depends on the educational levelsand skills available with a country to effectively use the technology. Technology is also unevenlydiffused within countries. India, home to a world-class technology hub in Bangalore ranks at thelowest end of the technology achievement index (TAI) of the United Nations DevelopmentProgramme (UNDP).Another important aspect of the technology diffusion linked to human capital resource is theadaptation of new technology to local requirements. This requires availability of professionallytrained researchers and technicians to customise standard technologies to suit the domesticenvironment. In the Indian context, the foreign collaboration and technological transfer in theindustry has been enabled by the presence of skilled human resources to adapt and utilize thenew technology to domestic requirements and production processes.The information and communications technology sector requires less initial investment in capitaland infrastructure than do more traditional sectors – which may explain why high-tech industriesin developing countries.  Moreover, such industries are labour intensive, providing new jobs andwages for educated workers.  Wages are high for Indian software professionals, but competitivein the global market.  The Human Development Report 2001 of UNDP states that India showswhy public policy is important.  By providing education for information technology – India’sEnglish-language technical colleges turn out more than 73,000 graduates a year – and investingin infrastructure (especially high-speed links and international gateways with sufficient band-width), the government has ensured India’s place in the new economy.  These efforts will deliverlong-term benefits for human development and equitable economic growth.An important challenge to the human resource development arises from the enormous demandon resources and sharing the financing burden of human capital formation. In India, the majorburden of human capital formation is on the Central and State Governments as universaleducation as well as tertiary and technical education, health care system, sanitation are sponsoredby the Governments. Within the Government sector, the social sector expenditures such asexpenditures on heads like education, vocational education, skill formation, primary health etc.have long term positive effects in terms of human capital accumulation and productivity growthof the workforce are mainly in the domain of the State Governments. The worsening fiscalsituation of States has, however, reduced the capacity of the States to release resources for suchactivities, which has impacted on the relative availability of such services and the quality ofdelivery of services has suffered. The social sector expenditure of States has marginally declinedto 5 per cent of GDP during the period 1990-91 to 2000-01 as against 5.1 per cent in the 1980s.This has happened despite the fact that there is greater demand on such services in anincreasingly more competitive environment. The extent to which social services can meet theirintended objectives of raising the quality of human resources depends on the efficiency withwhich such resources are used to deliver the social services. Expanding social expenditures,especially on education, skill formation, health services would require correction of fiscalimbalances so as to release larger resources for such activities.It is evident that the capacity of the Government in releasing resources for human resourcedevelopment is constrained due to severe resource constraint. In this context, the question arises4is what supportive/complementary role the private sector can play to meet the gap between therequirements of human capital formation and the actual achievements? The market response tohuman resource development/private sector participation is increasingly becoming important. Inthe post-liberalisation period in India, there has been proliferation of private initiative in researchand development and capacity building particularly in areas such as information technology,software, business and medical education. However, the level of private initiative has not beenadequate to cope up with the requirements of our society.  The increasing competitive pressureshave while forced private enterprises to constantly upgrade the skills of the workforce within theorganisation to cope with the increasing rate of obsoleteness of the technology and adapt neweravailable technologies, the role in supporting the basic institutions providing opportunities forskill formation to larger population is very limited. There is a need to develop greater synergiclinks between the public and the private sector in core areas of human resource developmentthrough suitable incentive framework.Contextually, I would flag the following agenda for fostering the growth of human capital inIndia:• In the context of stabilisation of population growth at 2 per cent per annum, there is aneed to achieve more than twice per capita GDP from the present level.• The issue of improving governance in the country has to be addressed as it hasimportant implications for maintaining the quality of institutions imparting basiccapabilities to the people. Effective governance requires greater transparency, moreeffective communication and high degree of professionalism.  The crucial aspect isthe upgradation of human resource management strategies with a view to enhancingthe level of knowledge, sharpening skills and also to instill the necessary attitudes andwork culture.• The orientation and content of education are as important as resource allocation.There is a need to not only invest in basic education but also a greater emphasis isrequired on a technology oriented curriculum at higher levels to have appropriatesupply response to market forces.• While the demand for social services has increased, the resources released by theGovernments for investment on such services have been inadequate. As theGovernment has to play an important role in ensuring primary education and healthcare as well as supporting secondary and tertiary education, there is a need toprioritise resources on these heads as these have strong externalities.• Keeping in view the burden of human resource development on the State and itsreduced capacity to generate required resources, there is greater need for public-private partnership in expanding the facilities for augmenting critical mass of skilledworkforce to respond to increasing demand to adapt to new technology in all areas ofproduction whether industry or agriculture.As the distinguished participants present here are aware that in the Reserve Bank of India (RBI)we have engaged ourselves in areas relating to monetary management, banking regulation andsupervision, technological advancements both within the Bank and the industry with a view tofacilitating economic growth with stability. The RBI has sound human resources practices aimedat building a competent and highly motivated human capital base. The selection and placementprocesses are aimed at identifying the right persons for right positions.  Officers are providedtraining opportunities after due assessment of their needs in the training institutions of the Bankas well as external ones.  While these measures have helped in selection and development ofquality human resources, the clean work ethos and the positive approach of the Bank’smanagement towards its people has really been responsible in building a workforce, which iscapable of adapting to changes and meeting challenges and of working as a cohesive group andteam.5We have attached high priority to the governance aspects to cope with the rapidly changingscenario. The quality of human resource indicates that the ability of RBI to deliver value tocustomers. As Governor RBI Dr. Bimal Jalan has mentioned in one of his speeches “capital andtechnology are replicable but not human capital which needs to be viewed as a valuable resourcefor the achievement of competitive advantage.” The introduction of computerisation paved wayfor the customers of the Bank and the public at large to receive better service from the Bank. It istruly a matter of pride for me to have been associated with the Reserve Bank of India and itscompetent, quality human resource.1 Address by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at a Meet at New Delhi on July 25,2003 organised by Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC) Centre of Relevance andExcellance (CORE).6
