Winning Strategies in Small and Medium Enterprises FinanceIt is a matter of great pleasure for me to be present on this occasion for the inauguraladdress and share some of my thoughts and experiences on the development of this vitalsector of economy.  The IFC and FICCI need to be congratulated for the thoughtfultheme selected for the symposium. The organisation of this symposium gains importancein the context of globalisation when the Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) facechallenges and take advantage of opportunities created.Importance of SSI SectorThe development of Small Scale Sector has been an important plank of India's industrialpolicy.  SSIs in India have been given a distinct identity and the Government hasaccorded high priority to this sector on account of the vital role it plays in balanced andsustainable economic growth.  It plays crucial role in the process of economicdevelopment by value addition, employment generation, equitable distribution of nationalincome, regional dispersal of industries, mobilisation of capital and entrepreneurial skillsand contribution to export earnings.At the end of March 2001 there were 3.37 million Small Scale Industrial units in thecountry.  During 2000-01 the value of production by these units aggregated Rs. 6503320million at current prices and they provided employment to 18.56 million persons. TheSector accounts for95% of the industrial units in the country, 40% of the value added inthe manufacturing sector, 34% of national export, 7% of Gross Domestic Product,production of over 7500 items in industrial sector and the product range varies fromsimple items produced with traditional technology to high-tech products produced withsophisticated state of the art technology.Credit Flow to the SectorCredit is critical input for SSI Sector.  Provision of timely and adequate finance to SSISector is central to the banking policy.  Nationalisation of major banks in 1969 signaledthe need for redefining lending priorities and it was mandated that 40% of loan should befor what is called priority sector which includes agriculture, SSI and individual serviceand business sectors.  There has been a steady increase in the flow of credit to SSI Sectorwhich has gone up considerably from Rs. 167830 million in March 1991 to Rs. 484450million in March 2001 constituting 14.2% of the net bank credit.The process of liberalisation of Indian economy since 1991 has created manyopportunities for growth as well as has thrown many challenges to the SSI Sector.    Inthe recent phase of globalisation each and every Sector of the Indian economy is in theprocess of being integrated in to the world market.    SSI Sector also has been exposed tothe challenges of opening of the economy.  The Sector could achieve greater sustainedgrowth by increasing technological capabilities and creating sustained competitiveadvantages in the environment of increased competition and rapid technological changes.In 1991 Government of India announced a separate industrial policy, which had measuresfor development of small, tiny and village enterprises as a sequel to the financial sectorreforms initiated in July 1991.  In the subsequent years many measures have been takenfor development of the sector viz. (i) Setting up of National renewal Fund to protect theworkers affected by technology up-gradation and modernisation (ii) promulgation of the'Interest on delayed payments to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial undertakings Act,1993 for mitigating the delayed payments problems of SSI, (iii) launching of IntegratedInfrastructure Development Scheme and the Single Window Scheme of SIDBI,  (iv)Setting up of Technology Development and Modernisation Fund in SIDBI and theEntrepreneurship Development Institute in some States, (v) Investment limit for tinysector has been raised to Rs. 2.5 million and to encourage the tiny sector,  larger share i.e.60%  of the total advance to SSI Sector to these units has been stipulated, (vi) raising ofthe composite loan limit to Rs. 2.5 million, (vii) raising of collateral free loan limit to Rs.0.5 million, launching  of the Credit Guarantee Fund Trust Scheme which coverscollateral free loans up to Rs. 2.5 million and setting up of a Technology Bureau for smallenterprises in SIDBI and raising the investment limit to Rs. 50 million in certain selectedsectors like garments, hosiery, hand tools etc. for enabling technology up-gradation tomake the units in these sectors competitive to face the challenges in the internationalmarkets.To provide more focused attention on the development of SSI, the Government of Indiacreated a new Ministry of Small Scale Industries and Agro & Rural Industries in October1999.  The Government came out with a comprehensive policy package for small scaleand tiny sector and the Hon'ble Prime Minister announced the same at the first everNational Conference on Small Scale Industries organized by the Ministry of SSI & ARIin New Delhi on 30 August 2000. The policy package included support on policy, fiscal,credit, infrastructural, technological and quality improvement and marketing andmeasures for streamlining inspections/rules and regulations, entrepreneurs developments,facilitation of prompt payment, rehabilitation of sick SSI units, promotion of ruralindustries and improving data base.During the last decade various committees viz. Nayak Committee, 1991, Abid HusainCommittee, 1997, S.L. Kapur Committee, 1998 and Dr. S.P. Gupta Committee, 1999have looked in to the problem of SSI Sector.  Majority of the recommendations of theseCommittees relating to opening of specialised SSI branches, simplification of loanapplication forms, computation of working capital on projected turnover method,launching of new credit Guarantee Scheme, delegation of adequate powers to branchmanagers for sanctioning ad hoc limits up to 20% of sanctioned loan limits, raising ofcomposite loan, conducting of third census of SSI, etc. have been accepted andimplemented.Apart from SSI sector, credit is being extended by all banks to small business, which hasbeen categorized under priority sector lending.  This includes individuals and firmsmanaging a business enterprise established mainly for providing any service other thanprofessional service, whose original price of the equipment used for the purpose ofbusiness does not exceed Rs.1 million with working capital limits of Rs.0.5 million orless.  The aggregate of term loan and working capital limit sanctioned to a small businessunit should not exceed Rs.1 million.   As at the end of March 2000, the credit to thissector from scheduled commercial banks amounted to Rs.55237 million on 2527 millionaccounts.Major problems/challenges faced by the SectorThe major problems faced by the SSI Sector relates to availability of loan withoutcollaterals, delay in getting the loan, high cost of funds, delayed payments, marketingproblems, WTO related issues, sickness etc.The limit for collateral free loans to tiny sector is Rs. 0.05 million and that for other SSIunits is Rs. 0.01 million.  This limit has since been raised to Rs. 0.05 million for otherSSI units also.  Many small-scale entrepreneurs are facing difficulties in providingcollateral security as per the requirements of the financing banks. The problem isaddressed to a certain extent with the introduction of the Credit Guarantee Fund TrustScheme under which collateral free loans up to a limit of Rs. 2.5 million are guaranteed.2The present guidelines provide for a time limit of a fortnight for disposal of loanapplications upto Rs. 0025 million and 8 to 9 weeks for amounts beyond that.  Furtherreduction in the time taken for disposal of application is under consideration.The high cost of borrowings was a major constraint affecting the growth of the sector.The Bank Rate changes by the RBI combined with CRR and repo rate charges haveemerged as signalling devices for interest rate changes.  The reduction in Bank rateannounced in the last Monetary and Credit Policy or outside the policy from time to timehas resulted in a consequential reduction in the lending rates.  Banks have now theflexibility to offer lending rates on a fixed rate or on a floating rate.  The reduction ininterest rates and the offer of floating rates will help the SSI units to procure funds atlower costs than what was prevailing in earlier years.Considerable delay in settlement of dues/payment of bills by the large-scale buyers to theSSI units adversely affected the recycling of funds and business operation of SSI units.Though the Government has enacted the Delayed Payments Act, many of the SSI unitsare reluctant to pursue cases against major buyers.  The Act since amended in 1998 hasmade it compulsory that the payment of SSI suppliers should be made within 120 days.Further the Department of Company Affairs have issued notification in February 1999amending schedule VI of the Companies Act, 1956, to make it obligatory on companiesto disclose in their Balance-Sheets the outstanding dues owed by them to SSIs for a sumof Rs. 0.01 million or more which are outstanding for more than 30 days.  To improve theplight of SSI entrepreneurs due to delayed payments, steps for strengthening andpopularizing factoring services, without recourse to the SSI suppliers may have to bethought of seriously.The banks have also been advised about sub-allotting overall limits to the large borrowersspecifically for meeting the payment obligations in respect of purchases from SSI.  It isexpected that these measures will improve the situation of delayed payments.Marketing remains the most problematic area for the SSI Sector as some of the units arevery small and so is their output individually.  Adopting consortium approach could bestsolve the marketing problems of the SSI sector.  Besides finance for marketing relatedactivities, dissemination of requisite information on demand pattern, futuristic trend, etc.could be made available by the Development Institutions/SSI Associations, etc.To face the challenges emanating from the WTO agreement, SSI units irrespective oftheir size need technology up-gradation and modernisation.  An awareness about theimplications of WTO agreement has to be created and SSI entrepreneurs to be educatedin this regard.  Technology is the key element contributing to productivity quality,competitiveness and market acceptability of products.  The preparation forcompetitiveness needs to be done by the Government as well as entrepreneurs and thecorporate.  The Government should provide good infrastructure and create level playingfield for the industry that, in turn, should respond by determination to succeed throughupgrading technology, skills, etc.  The skills and competence  upgradation can besuccessfully done through training of the workers, supervisors/managers and theentrepreneurs themselves.  Considering the fund constraints with SSI Sector Governmenthas introduced the credit linked capital subsidy scheme for Technology up gradation ofSmall Scale Industries under which 12% back ended capital subsidy would be admissibleon the loans advanced to the SSIs by the scheduled commercial banks/designated SFCsfor technology up gradation in certain select sectors.  The Study Group on developmentof Small Scale Enterprises made a number of recommendations like setting up of aTechnology Bank, providing of finance to units for entering into collaboration fortechnical know- how and technology upgradation with a view to enhance themarketability of their products concessional rate of customs duty for importing3equipment for technology up gradation, programme to modernise export orientedindustrial clusters, establishment of technology mission, quality assurance and TestingLaboratories, etc. for improving the present scenario.Growing incidence of sickness of SSIs is yet another area of concern.  When the sicknessprolongs it leads to the closure of units and unemployment.  Lately mortality of the SSIunits has been showing increasing trend. This has wider implications including locking offunds of the lending institutions, loss of scarce material resources and loss ofemployment.  The number of sick SSI units as a percentage to the total number of SSIunits is around 10.  The number of units identified as potentially viable as a percentage tototal sick SSI units is around 8.  The causes of sickness are both internal and external.The major causes are limited financial resources, lack of organisational, financial andmanagement skills and expertise, diversion of funds, diversification/expansion beforestabilisation, non-availability of power supply shortage of raw materials, marketingdifficulties, delayed and inadequate credit, globalistion and liberalisation of the economy,obsolete technology, inadequate infrastructure, etc.  With a view to ensuring thatpotentially viable sick SSI units are provided with the timely and adequate assistance byall agencies concerned, there are State Level Inter Institutional Committees (SLIIC)constituted in each state involving State Government, Financial institutions, commercialbanks and SIDBI.  SSI Associations are also invited to the meetings of this committee.  Asub-committee of SLIIC has also been set up in each state to examine the individual casesreferred to it for rehabilitation.To address the incidence of growing sickness in the sector RBI has recently issued acomplete set of revised guidelines drawn up on the basis of the recommendations of aWorking Group constituted by it for the purpose.  The major change from the earlierguidelines relates to revision in the definition of a sick SSI unit.  In the revised definitiona borrowers account which remained sub-standard for more than 6 months or erosion inits net worth due to accumulated cash losses to the extent of 50% during the previousaccounting year and where the unit is in commercial production for last two years iscategorised as a sick unit.  The guidelines also covers aspects relating to monitoring,viability, incipient sickness, relief and concessions that can be extended by banks to unitsunder nursing, time limit for implementing rehabilitation package etc.  These revisedguidelines will help in identifying the sick units in the early stages of their sickness andthe appropriate measure of rehabilitation dose is expected to bring the units back onhealthy tracks.In conclusion a number of steps have been initiated to promote the healthy growth of SSISector.  However, to ensure the prospects of these enterprises in the coming years, theywill have to gear up to face the challenges of liberalisation.  I am confident that given theinherent strength, the sector will develop a global vision, respond to more demandingstandards of the customers and adopt key strategies that could take them ahead incompetition.  Credit should not be a constraint for viable projects.* Inaugural address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Mumbaion February 11, 2002 at a Symposium on “Winning Strategies in SME Finance” organised by InternationalFinance Corporation and FICCI.4
