Recent Global Developments: Implications for Debt Management in1Emerging Markets and Developing CountriesA very good morning to all. A warm welcome to Governor, Central Bank ofAfghanistan, Deputy Governors of Bhutan and Nepal, officials from Government ofIndia, executives of SAARC Secretariat and member countries and my colleaguesfrom the Reserve Bank of India to the beautiful city of Jaipur. My special welcometo chairpersons and speakers for having accepted our invitation to share theirexpertise/knowledge on different areas of debt management with all of us.2. A little bit about the city of Jaipur. Jaipur is an important city of India with arich heritage and history. It is the capital of the state of Rajasthan and is fondlytermed as the Pink City. Jaipur has a timeless appeal in its colourful bazaars withdelightful handlooms and trinkets. Beautifully laid out gardens and parks, attractivemonuments and marvellous heritage hotels, once the residence of Maharajas, notto mention the ambling camels and cheerful people in multi-hued costumes makeJaipur a tourist's paradise as part of the Golden Triangle tourist circuit alongwithDelhi and Agra. You could explore and experience all these during the socialactivities and the city tour.3. Now coming to the event, which has brought the public debt managers andexperts from the SAARC countries under one roof to exchange knowledge withone another, I am sure it will be a memorable one for all the delegates. Sri Lankahas the distinction of being the first SAARC nation to organize the SAARC PublicDebt Manager’s meeting in Colombo last year and this being the second meetingof the forum. This Forum, as I recognize, brings together the senior debtmanagers from central banks and Ministries of Finance of all the SAARC countriesto discuss and deliberate on latest policy challenges, compare notes on best orleading practices and, more generally, to share experiences among practitioners.Looking at the theme of this conference, ‘Sovereign Debt Management inEmerging Markets’ and its detailed programme, I see that we intend to cover awide range of topics/issues which, inter alia, include the challenges posed byglobal developments for public debt management and its linkages withmacroeconomic stability and strategies thereof, lessons and outcomes of productinnovations as also market infrastructure for government bonds. Given the span ofissues intended to be covered during the conference, I would like to make a fewgeneral observations with focus on the challenges posed to policy making forEmerging Market and Developing Economies (EMDEs) in the area of debtmanagement in the context of recent developments in the global economy as wellas the way forward to manage the uncertainties which have become certainty inan interconnected world.Recent Global Developments: Risk and Challenges for EMDEs1 Based on the inaugural address delivered by Shri Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of Indiandat the 2 Meeting of SAARC Public Debt Managers’ Forum hosted by the Reserve Bank of India in Jaipur onDecember 6, 2013. The speaker acknowledges the contributions of Sunil Kumar of the Reserve Bank ofIndia.Page 1 of 84. The current Public Debt Management Forum takes place against thebackdrop of a still weak global economy, especially in Advanced Economies (AEs)where growth in some countries still remains weak. Indeed, the global financialcrisis has dramatically changed the policy environment. Risks - old and new -continue to dominate the outlook and new policy challenges are arising not only inmacroeconomic policy but also in debt management framework, both for EMDEsand also the AEs.5. Going a little in the past, we know the world economy was ambushed withfull blown financial crisis in 2008-09 and the growth in world economy had sloweddown markedly from 5.4 per cent in 2007 to 2.8 per cent in 2008 and further toaround half a per cent during 2009. The crisis  which erupted in the US and otherAEs with unravelling of sub-prime crisis  soon traversed to the EMDEs, reflectingelevated inter-connectedness among countries in the backdrop of increasingexternal openness and cross-border financial flows. The growth in EMDEs alsodeclined from 8.7 per cent in 2007 to 2.7 per cent during 2009. The governmentsacross large number of countries had undertaken fiscal stimulus measures inorder to contain the slowdown and revive growth, and this translated into steepincrease in the government market borrowing. It was really challenging for debtmanagers, especially in EMDEs to complete the increased market borrowing in anon-disruptive manner. Subsequently, the European sovereign debt crisisunfolded in which the elevated debt levels coupled with sub-optimal debt structurein some of the European countries (i.e. high share of short-term debt and greatershare of foreign investors’ holding) triggered a major rollover risk for thesecountries (Chart 1).Chart 1: Debt to GDP ratio in Select Euro Countries and EMDEs6. The contagion emanating from the European sovereign debt crisis coupledwith elevated market borrowing requirement amplified the challenges for debtmanagers in EMDEs, particularly for those who rely significantly on internationalcapital markets for their government market borrowing. The challenge for debtmanagers in many EMDEs was on two counts: first, heightened volatility anduncertainty in the domestic financial markets due to capital flow reversalstriggered by deleveraging of foreign investors; and second, increased exchangePage 2 of 8rate volatility mostly leading to sharp depreciation of the currency. The countries,which had scope to issue short-term debt due to elongated maturity structure and,at the same time, depended largely on domestic debt, could weather thesechallenges by issuing larger quantum of short-term debt domestically. On theother hand, the countries having short maturity debt structure were exposed togreater rollover risk. In the above backdrop, one could reasonably argue thatoptimal debt structure could help debt managers to meet challenges posed by thecontagion from the global financial turmoil with less pain. Therefore, the debtmanagers need to pursue the optimal debt structure instead of a sub-optimal debtstructure guided by the narrow and short-sighted objectives. I am sure thatdeliberations in the conference would focus in-depth on what should be theoptimal debt structure compatible with local conditions.7. The world economy bounced back from a contraction of around half a percent in 2009 to an expansion of 5.2 per cent in 2010. The global recovery wassupported by fiscal stimulus measures along with accommodative monetary policyoften backed by unconventional policy measures, pursued by various countries.As part of the unconventional measures, some of the countries, such as, the US,the UK and the European Union conducted large scale Assets PurchaseProgramme (APP) in order to bring normalcy in financial markets and improve thecredit flow to the real sectors. These measures resulted in capital flows back toEMDEs, as net financial flows (private), which had declined from US$ 698 billionin 2007 to US$ 282 billion during 2009, increased to US$ 572 billion in 2010.Although the US is still continuing with accommodative monetary policy, the netfinancial flows to EMDEs declined substantially to US$ 237 billion in 2012. Someof the AEs are expected to withdraw the accommodative monetary policy and theprolonged period of strong capital flows may come to an end and EMDEs mayface a transition to more volatile external conditions. An example of such volatileexternal conditions was experienced by EMDEs in the recent past following theannouncement by the chairman of the Federal Reserve in May 2013 about theexpected tapering of APP by year-end and complete exit by mid-next year. TheFederal Reserve, however, decided subsequently to continue with APP andpursue highly accommodative stance of monetary policy. But no country can becomplacent, as APP by the Federal Reserve is not perennial and it has to come toan end sooner or later depending on economic activity and labour marketconditions. In the meantime, debt managers in EMDEs should formulate strategyand develop buffers to deal with such an eventuality.8. The strong, yet volatile capital flows present central banks and debtmanagers in EMDEs with unusual challenges and also raises the threat of asudden drying-up of market liquidity in key segments. We are aware that largecapital inflows engender benefits as well as costs. The good news is that strongfundamentals in many EMDEs have reduced their vulnerability along with muchimproved external positions and the buffers provided by accumulated forexreserves all played a part in this outcome unlike the past experience. Although thepositive impact of capital flows and commodity prices are often quoted as catalystfor growth in EMDEs, it needs to be noted that there are many other drivers ofPage 3 of 8long-term growth in EMDEs which are domestic in nature, e.g., soundmacroeconomic fundamentals, demographic advantage, high savings, etc.External factors could support growth only in the short-term. Thus, the recentglobal developments have brought into sharp focus the key interconnectionsbetween the financial, economic and macroeconomic policy constraints. Sounddomestic macroeconomic fundamentals are essential and will become thedifferentiating criteria blurring the current distinction between the AEs and theEMDEs. In this context, the session on ‘Public Debt Management andMacroeconomic Stability’ will throw light on the new and complex interactionsbetween public debt management and macroeconomic policies. This kind ofinteraction provides an opportunity for mutual discussions in the interest offostering further market development.9. The resilience of EMDEs to date is a notable feature of the recent crisisunlike the past crises. This could be because the crisis did not emerge in EMDEs,and as also various initiatives in emerging economies have focused on the reformof debt management practices and the development of domestic debt marketssupported by sustained improvements in macroeconomic and financial sectorsover the past decade. Review of experiences with public debt management andhow debt managers coped with the impact of this global shock in the form ofvarious policy responses in primary and secondary markets would be informative.I think the session on ‘Global Developments and its Impact on Public DebtManagement of Small Emerging Market Economies’ would elaborate the impacton emerging economies more succinctly.10. Another challenge faced by EMDEs during the recent global crisis andsubsequent sovereign debt crisis was maintaining the fine balance between pricestability, debt sustainability, and financial stability. This has also been phrased as“New Trilemma” by our former Governor Dr. D. Subba Rao. Policies pursuingthese three objectives are intertwined in several ways and impact other objectivesoften in unintended manner. It may be underlined that interaction and impact ofthese policies, however, may be different during crisis periods from normalperiods. There could be two way impact of the policies pursuing these objectives,e.g., policy aimed at price stability may adversely impact financial stability anddebt sustainability and vice versa. To elaborate further, increase in interest ratesto bring down inflation and ensure price stability may impact debt sustainability/financial stability adversely. On the other hand, the policies pursued for debtsustainability, such as, monetisation by the central bank and write-offs, may bedetrimental to price/financial stability. Such potential conflict does not imply thatthese objectives cannot be balanced simultaneously. To add another dimension,policies pursuing the above three objectives may also impact the growth objectiveand interplay these objectives could be called as “New Q uadrilemma”. Forexample, the debt consolidation pursued during slowdown phase may turn fiscalpolicy pro-cyclical impacting growth adversely.  Hence, it is imperative that properbalance is struck among these objectives through optimal policy and institutionalchoices.Page 4 of 8The Indian Experience11. Coming specifically to the Indian context, I would like to mention that theimpact of the global financial crisis also traversed to India. Fiscal stimulusmeasures were undertaken to mitigate such impact and, accordingly, theGovernment market borrowing increased steeply (i.e. about 83 per cent highermarket borrowings over the budget estimates of 2008-09 and about 65 per centhigher in 2009-10 over the previous year). At the same time, the financial marketsbecame highly fragile and turbulent, reflecting an elevated interconnectednessand global integration. The liquidity in the system had dried up due to large capitalflow reversals on account of deleveraging by foreign investors from EMDEs andan environment of uncertainty and general risk aversion in financial marketsprevailed, posing a daunting challenge for the debt managers in the central bankto complete market borrowings in a non-disruptive manner. The elongatedaverage maturity to life (AML) of the debt, however, provided a reprieve and thedebt management strategy involved issuance of large short and medium-termdebt keeping in view the market conditions. In fact, India had one of the highestAML of the Central Government securities and, thus, there was ample scope tomanoeuver the maturity profile without compromising on the prudent degree ofrollover risk (Table).Table: Domestic Debt Securities – Average Maturity(in years)Country 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012Brazil 3.0 3.3 3.4 3.4 3.5 3.8China 7.9 7.6 7.2 7.6 8.2 8.8India 10.0 10.6 10.5 9.8 9.8 9.7Indonesia 8.2 8.2 7.9 8.6 9.2 10.1Malaysia 5.4 5.3 5.3 4.5 5.1 5.5South Africa 8.5 10.0 10.6 10.6 11.6 12.3United Kingdom 14.5 14.5 13.5 13.4 14.5 14.6United States 4.6 4.2 4.6 4.9 5.2 5.412. A combination of other measures, involving monetary easing and the use ofinnovative debt management tools, such as, synchronising the MarketStabilisation Scheme (MSS) buyback auctions and open market purchases withthe government’s normal market borrowings and desequestering of MSS balanceswere also undertaken. By appropriately timing the release of liquidity to thefinancial system to coincide with the auctions of government securities, theReserve Bank ensured a relatively normal liquidity conditions in the markets andin the process facilitated smooth conduct of the government’s market borrowingprogramme. This, in fact, underlines the importance of high level of co-ordinationbetween monetary policy and debt management policy for successful completionof market borrowings during volatile periods. During turbulent times, there remainsa strong possibility of agencies pursuing their narrow objectives and in the processundermine coordination. In India, there is inherent seamless coordination on thesepolicies by virtue of both policies being entrusted with the central bank. ReserveBank of India, in co-ordination with the fiscal policy makers in the Ministry ofFinance could manage the huge borrowing programme without unduly impactingPage 5 of 8the financial markets. Such monetary and fiscal co-ordination was at display notonly during the height of global crisis but throughout the recent period of marketturbulence.13. Post global crisis the debate has resurfaced about institutional location ofthe debt management functions; whether it should be with central bank or with adebt management office. In this regard, it may be pertinent to mention that onesize does not fit all. In India, although process of separating debt managementfrom the central bank is being discussed seriously, in the given circumstances oflarge size of market borrowings and the level of market development, it is felt thatsuch separation at the current juncture could be sub-optimal. Post-crisis learningdo suggest that to achieve public policy objective of ensuring growth, price stabilityand financial stability, co-ordination between monetary policy, fiscal policy andsovereign debt management is critical. There is inherent synergy of monetarypolicy and sovereign debt management strategy and if they operations remainwith the central bank. There is, thus, a strong view that the present arrangementsfor debt management by the central bank in co-ordination with the Governmentneed not be discontinued, especially when the fiscal deficit remains elevatedwarranting large market borrowings without disrupting financial market stability.14. The May 22, 2013 talk of tapering by the Federal Reserve had led toturbulence in the external conditions and it spilled into the domestic debt market.The Reserve Bank of India had to increase the short-term rates in order to containvolatility in the foreign exchange market. The overnight call rate increased from7.21 per cent on July 15, 2013 to 13.46 per cent on September 7, 2013. Thehardening of the short-term interest rates got transmitted to medium and long-termyields eventually. The 10 year G-Sec yield, for instance, increased from 7.60 percent as on July 15, 2013 to 9.27 per cent as on August 2013 (Chart 2).Page 6 of 8Chart 2: G-Sec Yields15. Besides steep rise in yields that was largely attributed to liquidity tightening,the volatility in bond yield market heightened and this led to reduced demand forG-Sec. Thus, heightened volatility became a worrisome factor for debt managerswho in such situations could be forced to issue debt which may not be inalignment with the optimal debt structure and thus, the same may aggravatevarious risk parameters. In this context, it may be pertinent to underline thatvolatility in G-Sec market has subsided significantly after the Reserve Bankannounced reversal of temporary policy measures starting September 20, 2013.Another positive development is that long term foreign investors’ confidence in theIndian currency appears to be increasing lately and this is likely to translate intoincreased demand for G-Sec. I am certain that discussion in the session of “DebtManagement Strategy” would throw more options for the debt managers to dealwith turbulent and fragile market conditions. Furthermore, the session on “SAARCCountry Experiences” would enable participants to know about each other’s debtmanagement practices and help in further improving their practices. Indianexperience shows robust state of the art financial market infrastructure could be asource of resilience to the government bond market. It is in this context, thesession on ‘Market Infrastructure in G-Sec’ which would closely look into theregulatory structure, developments in primary and secondary market infrastructureand would provide us useful lessons for building safe and efficient marketinfrastructure.16. The debt management strategy in India has been continuously striving toexpand the bouquet of instruments in order to broaden the investors’ base forachieving the debt management objectives. Though the extant bouquet ofinstruments includes fixed rate nominal bonds, zero coupon bonds, floating ratebonds (FRBs), and the proposed inflation indexed bonds, the share of linkers intotal issuances remained below five per cent. The debt management strategy hasbeen exploring the idea of issuing sovereign bonds in international capital marketsbut as risks associated outweigh the benefits and thus, no such issuance hasPage 7 of 8been contemplated. Some EMDEs which issued such bonds faced problemsduring the recent crisis period. The session on ‘Product Innovations-SovereignForeign Currency bonds, IIBs Lessons and Outcomes’ would be able to providefurther insights on the benefits vis-à-vis risks associated with new products,especially with respect to EMDEs.17. Some of the major take-away from the Indian experience with regard todebt management during the recent crisis period are:a. Elongation of maturity during normal times provides enough headroom tothe debt managers to deal with unprecedented volatile times like recentglobal crisis as debt managers can weather the turbulence by operating atthe short to medium term on the maturity curve;b. In an uncertain environment, the usage of combination of instruments, suchas, fixed rate bonds, T-Bills, FRBs, etc. catering to the demand of divergentmarket participants plays a paramount role in debt management strategy;c. Continuous dialogue/interactions with market participants to know the pulseof market are essential for formulating issuance strategy. In India, a bi-monthly meeting is convened with Primary Dealers (PDs) and other marketparticipants to gauge their demand for various instruments and seek theirfeedback on policy choices;d. Better communication of the debt management policy to market remainspivotal to avoid uncertainty in the minds of investors;e. Institutional arrangement for debt management need not follow “one-size-fits-all” approach and, infact, in countries having huge governmentborrowing requirements the deeper involvement of the central bank isimperative for maintain balance between different policy choices for pricestability, debt sustainability, financial stability and growth objective; andf. Government bond markets should be developed domestically in terms ofinvestor class, instruments, infrastructure, intermediaries and innovationsand may be opened up to foreign investors in a calibrated manner tobroaden the investors’ base without unduly exposing them to the risks ofsudden stops.Conclusion18. Going forward, the challenges faced by debt managers remain significantas greater integration of EMDEs in international capital markets would transmit thecontagion to the domestic debt markets very fast. Further, strong capital inflowsmay expand the demand for Government debt but such flows also pose suddenstop risks. I am sure this conference would provide a hands-on policy inputs to thedebt managers to help them minimise risks and design sound debt managementstrategies. I hope this one and half days conference will be eventful with manyideas and thoughts being deliberated with focus on practical suggestions forevolving sound public debt management policies & practices.19. Thank you for your attention.Page 8 of 8
