*Gold in the Indian Economic SystemY.V.ReddyI am delighted to be with you this morning and I thank the organisers for the opportunitygiven to me to address this conference At the outset, let me extend warm welcome to you anda special welcome to participants from foreign countries. I hope you will enjoy the pleasantweather and warm hospitality as much as you would enjoy the stimulating deliberations here.Much of the retail market for gold in our country is in jewellery shops and I trust that youwill visit them. Please see for yourself where the gold is put to maximum use in India – byattending one of the wedding ceremonies or receptions here.2. In the larger context of economic reform, we are examining a number of policiesand surely gold cannot escape serious attention. For my part, I intend to present both a of the policies and the emerging issues relating to gold, with special reference to the role ofthe Reserve Bank of India.3. I will start with a brief account of India’s position in the global gold economy andof the features of India’s gold economy. I would then present a review of the policy as well asthe ongoing debates. As a central banker, I would share with you the present position onreserves management, on the use of gold as a financial instrument of development and ongold markets in general. This presentation should lead one to flag the issues that are, and inany case, ought to be engaging our attention. At the same time, I trust that we will benefitimmensely from your rich international experiences and considered views in addressing theseissues.India and Global Gold Economy4. Our position in the global gold economy in terms of broad magnitudes can behighlighted with a few facts.First, the total gold stock in Ind ia is estimated at 9,016 tonnes as against the worldstocks of 1,28,800 tonnes in 1994 giving a share of 7.0 per cent to India. This should beviewed against our share in land area at 2.4 per cent, in population at 16.4 per cent and inGDP at 1.2 per cent.Second, mining and production of gold in India is negligible, now placed around 2tonnes as against a total world production Third, during 1990-95, our share in global gold demand is placed at about 402 (16.4 per cent) a year, including imports into India. This should be viewed against our shareof 0.6 per cent in world trade. On the other hand, India exported about 23 tonnes in 1995accounting for a negligible part of world trade – though there was a brief period of illegalexports in the early 'seventies and substantial legal exports in the pre-independence era.Fourth, it is pertinent to note that world gold trading is concentrated in the U.K.,Switzerland, Dubai, Fifth, facilities for refining, assaying, making them into standard bars in India, ascompared to the rest of the world, are insignificant, both qualitatively and quantitatively.Hongkong, etc. and India does not figure among them.tonnestonnes in 1995. of about 2,272 reviewSixth, of the total gold reserves estimated to be on the books of C entral Banks (subjectto some Banks not declaring them) of 28,225.4 tonnes, the holdings of Reserve Bank of Indiaare only a modest 397.5 tonnes. Government of India has in its possession some amount ofgold mainly out of confiscation of smuggled gold remaining after transferring it to theReserve Bank of India from time to time. Generally speaking RBI is neither a speakingpurchaser nor a seller of gold reserves, unlike many other countries including somedeveloping economies, especially in Asia. A part of gold was used by RBI (in parallel withgold with Government) for raising foreign currency resources during the balance of paymentscrisis in the early 'nineties. These overseas gold holdings are being used as part of reservemanagement to yield a return.Seventh, use of gold as a financial product is virtually non-existent in India except toa limited extent of issuing ‘Gold Bonds’ by Government of India from time to time coupledwith occasional tax amnesty. Commercial banks, however, accept gold as security, but noadvances are permitted for purchase of gold by their customers for Features of India’s Gold Economy5. India has been known to possess large stocks of gold and studies show that they aremostly accumulations from centuries of trading rather than result of production of her mines.What is of contemporary interest, however, relate to the demand, supply and price-movements and their link with policy. Some broad generalizations on these aspects would beFirst, on the demand side, while there are no authentic estimates, the availableindications are that about 80 per cent is for  fabrication (mainly of over 22 caratpurity) for domestic demand, 15 per cent is for investor-demand (which is relatively elastic togold-prices, real estate prices, financial markets, tax-policies, etc.) and barely 5 per cent is forindustrial uses. The demand for gold jewellery is rooted in the societal preference for avariety of reasons viz. Religious, ritualistic a preferred form of wealth for women and as ahedge against inflation. It will be difficult to prioritize them but it may be reasonable toconclude that it is a combined effect, and to treat any major part as exclusively a store ofvalue or hedging instrument would be unrealistic. Nor would it be realistic to assume that it isonly the affluent who create demand for gold. There is reason to believe that a part ofinvestment demand for gold assets is out of black money. The annual consumption of goldwhich was estimated at 65  in 1982 has increased to 505 tonnes in 1995. Although it islikely that with prosperity and enlightenment, there may be deceleration in demand,particularly in urban areas, it would be made good by growing demand on account ofprosperity in rural areas. In the near future, therefore, the annual demand will continue to behigh at around 400 to 500 Second, as the domestic production of gold is very limited, around 2 tonnes per year,and supply from fabricated old gold scraps estimated at around 62 tonnes per year being notadequate, the rising demand has to be sourced from outside the country. In the face of avirtual ban on official import of gold for domestic consumption till 1990, the rising demandwas met by illegal imports. During the period 1968 - 1995, smuggled gold into India varied inthe wide range of 10 – 217  per year with the sole exception of 1980 when 9 metrictonnes were reported to have been smuggled out of the country to take advantage of thesoaring gold prices in the international market. However, the situation changed drasticallytonnestonnes.tonnesjewelleryappropriate to review the policy and identify the issues.non productive use.during the ’nineties since the proportion of smuggled gold in our total supplies has gonedown substantially. While currently there are some efforts to promote gold miningdomestically, especially involving private sector, there are no indications that domesticsupply would increase in any perceptible manner.Third, the strong domestic demand for gold and the restrictive policy stance arereflected in the higher price of gold in the domestic market compared to that in theinternational market at the available exchange rate. During the 19-year period from 1977-78to 1995-96, the average spread between Mumbai and London market prices (Mumbai priceless London price in rupee terms) of gold has been positive except for a brief period during1980-81 when the international gold price zoomed briefly, following the oil crisis, thepersistent weakening of the US dollar resulting in flight of dollar resources into gold andaccelerating world-wide inflationary trends. The average spread was as high as 41.3 per centduring 1977- 79 which rose to 46.6 per cent during 1981-85 and further to 56.6 per centduring 1986-91. In the post- period, with changes in the exchange rate regimeand some relaxations on the import regime of gold, the average spread between domestic andinternational prices has come down from 53.1 per cent in 1991 to 20.6 per cent in 1993, 20.1per cent in 1994, 19.9 per cent in 1995 and further to 17.5 per cent in 1996 (up to October). Inthe absence of open import, the domestic gold prices relative to international prices appear tohave been governed by two factors: ( i) the spread between the official and market exchangerate of the rupee and (ii) the customs duty, transportation cost, storage cost, risk Fourth, the value of gold imports through official channels increased from $ 1.25billion in 1992 to $ 3.4 billion in 1995 while that of smuggled gold was in the range of $ 1.2to $ 1.7 billion. Viewed from any angle, gold import has emerged, in terms of importance inFifth, as the policy-debates would show, the management of demand and supply ofgold has important policy implications for fiscal policy and exchange rate management, andin the recent times, use of gold as a financial instrument, especially mobilisation of domesticREVIEW OF POLICY6. The evolution of the gold control policy since independence was centred around five mainobjectives viz. (a) to wean people away from gold, (b) to regulate supply of gold, (c) toreduce smuggling, (d) to reduce the demand for gold and (e) to reduce the domestic price ofgold. It would be interesting to briefly recall the policy measures since our independence.(a) Bullion imports and exports were banned under the Foreign Exchange RegulationAct, 1947. Control over gold production was assumed by the  Government inNovember 1956. The official gold stocks of the RBI were revalued in the same year. Theproportional reserve system was replaced by the minimum reserve system, for purposes ofnote issue.(b) In a major effort to mobilise the vast gold reserves in the country, an issue of 15-yearGold Bonds at 6.5 per cent was made in November 1962. The bonds were issued in exchangefor gold, gold coin, and gold ornaments. Subscriptions to these bonds totaled 16.30 tonnes.The issue of gold bonds was accompanied by exhortations to the public to refrain frombuying gold and to surrender their holdings to the Government. The RBI advised commercialour foreign trade, only second to that of oil.Mysoregold has attracted attention.premia, etc.liberalisationbanks to consider recalling loans made against the security of gold. Forward trading in goldwas banned in November 1962.(c)  The diversion of savings into the bullion market was sought to be controlled by thepromulgation of the Gold Control Rules in January 1963. The Rules prohibitedmanufacturing of gold ornaments of more than 14 carat purity. Individual gold holdings hadto be declared. In July 1963, refineries were prohibited from manufacturing gold of more than14 carat purity. Control over internal trade and distribution of gold by the Government wasfully established in 1964.(d) A second attempt to garner gold was made in March, 1965 when a new series of 7 percent Gold Bonds 1980 was issued. Opportunity was given to holders of unaccounted moneyto convert them into these bonds. The quantity raised was 6.1 tonnes.(e) A third series of gold bonds designated as National Defence Gold Bonds, 1980 at 6.5per cent was issued in October 1965. Unlike the earlier two issues, which were repayable inRupees (the value of gold being calculated at international prices) these bonds wereredeemable in gold of standard purity at maturity. The quantity raised was 13.7 tonnes.(f) Strict gold control remained in force till November 1966, when the rules wereamended, lifting the ban on the manufacture of ornaments of more than 14 carat purity. Theamendments also placed ceilings on individual holdings and extended control over refineriesand dealers. In September 1968, the Gold (Control) Act 1968, was passed establishing thescheme of gold control on a permanent statutory footing. Except for some minormodifications incorporated in the Act in 1969, 1972 and 1973, the structure of the Act did notundergo any change.(g) The Voluntary Disclosure of Income and Wealth (Amendment) Ordinance, 1975granted immunity from confiscation, penalty and prosecution under the Gold Control Act,1968, to all disclosures of wealth and income in the form of gold within the stipulated period.(h) There was a major shift in policy by the Central Government as reflected in the 1978-79 budget which strongly disapproved of smuggling operations, considered to be aconsequence of the differential between the domestic and international gold prices. TheGovernment that year undertook gold auctions, which was construed as an anti-inflationarymeasure of raising resources to bridge the budget deficit which then was around Rs.1crore. It was also felt that sale of gold from stocks held by the Government would curbsmuggling to some extent. The Reserve Bank of India was chosen as the Government’s agentin the sales operation. However, these auctions came in for criticism as it was concluded thatthis was not a practical proposition to either check smuggling or contain domestic prices. TheGovernment thus discontinued the official auctions in October 1978.(i) Liberalisation brought with it major changes in the regulations governing the purchaseand ownership of gold. Prior to 1991, gold was allowed to be held only in the form ofjewellery. This has been repealed and holding of gold bars and coins has since beenpermitted. Under the NRI baggage rules, an NRI is entitled to bring in 5 Kgs. of gold everysix months by paying a nominal duty of Rs.220 per 10 gms. Import of plain gold is nowallowed on Special Import Licences for sale to the domestic market. The Special ImportLicense Scheme also allows a category of exporters to repatriate their overseas earnings byimporting goods which had previously been banned including gold bullion. The scheme wassubsequently relaxed, allowing imports of gold jewellery and coins in addition to bullion.(j) Incidentally, the Maharashtra government’s new tax of two per cent on the value ofgold processed was revoked. Further, a civic tax in Mumbai (an entry tax into the municipallimits) City, the main gold hub, has been reduced from 2 per cent to just half per cent asstas 1 April 1996.Policy Debatesrecently ,0507. A number of issues relating to gold policy are reviewed by the Reserve Bank ofIndia from time to time. In 1978, in the context of gold auctions, there were consultations bythe Reserve Bank of India and the issues posed related to measures to reduce the demand forgold, the stance on import of gold and related matters. It is interesting to recall the principalflavour of our mind-set at that time.((a) Fixation of quantitative ceiling on holdings per family/per individual; (b) Reduction of thegold content of  to say 14 . purity; (c) Creation of alternative assets with attractiveyields and the introduction of gold bond scheme/gold securities; (d) Imposition of a tax onthe jewellery component of wealth at a higher rate; and (e) Administrative measuresincluding very strong and quickly effective penal measures for tax evasion where such)  As regards import of gold, five options were considered (a) Import of gold as a feasiblesocio-economic policy measure; (b) Import of gold on a limited scale to meet specificpurposes; (c) Import of gold as a last resort; (d) Import of gold as a necessary evil; and (e) Noimport of gold.(iii) On the level of gold prices and related issue of gold auctions by Government also, therewere interesting observations. One view was that to a majority of the people, gold prices donot matter at all. The national economy is, however, affected because they generate blackincomes. they provide a means for holding black wealth and thus increase the propensity togo in for illegal operations and they invite smuggled imports and unaccounted use ofresources for payment abroad. If the price of gold goes on rising, gold provides not only asafe means of holding illegal gains, but also makes such holdings highly profitable. Anotherview was that gold should not be regarded as a basic consumption of the poor. Therefore,there is no point in reducing the price of gold. A more neutral view was that the Governmentneed not pursue an active gold policy. The price of gold should not be a matter of concern tothe Government since it does not enter the cost of living of the industrial and agriculturalworkers of the country. About the system of auctions as a step to reduce smuggling orbringing about a reduction in price, there were universal apprehensions.8. In 1978, a Committee to review the gold policy of the Government was appointed underthe Chairmanship of Dr.I.G.Patel, Governor, Reserve Bank of India. The Committee’s termsof reference were to review the Government’s gold policy in all its aspects and to makesuitable recommendations to Government. The Committee in its report suggested thereintroduction of 18 or 14 carat gold jewellery by stages; but the process should be soregulated as not to have any adverse effects on small goldsmiths and artisans. It alsorecommended that the banking system should devise an effective scheme to provide financialassistance to goldsmiths at concessional rates of interest. They also desired that limit on thejewellery be restricted to 2 kgs and the family holding to 4 kgs.In view of the strain in the balance of payments at that time, the report did not findenough justification to suggest import of gold nor did they favour resuming gold auctions,though it was in favour of the Reserve Bank of India accumulating gold to add to officialreserves rather than let it be exported. The question of issuing gold bonds was examined butnot favoured since this would in effect amount to indexing the value of the savings of thosewho want gold as a hedge against inflation as compared to the savers who are willing to holdindividual holding of (iievasion exceeds a specified penal limit.cts jewelleryi) To reduce the demand for gold suggestions made weresuggestions considered at that time to get a other financial assets. A higher sales tax on jewellery was preferred on the count that it mightA Working Group to Review Gold Policy in its aspects was appointed by theGovernment in 1986 under the Chairmanship of Dr.C.Rangarajan following the FinanceMinister’s assurance to the Parliament, on a `second look' at the Gold Control Act. Some ofthe specific aspects that the Group studied related to import of gold, separate treatment forimport of gold by NRIs, bringing gold into the country as part of personal baggage, and non-utility of the Gold Control Act as an anti-smuggling measure. The Committee felt that importof gold against free foreign exchange could not be permitted but saw merit in a scheme toattract NRI funds on a non-repatriation basis through 7-year deposits denominated in foreigncurrency. In the view of the Committee, the proposal to allow all returning Indians to bringprimary gold as a part of the baggage allowance would lead to a very large substitution ofnormal foreign exchange flows apart from unmanageable problems of enforcement. TheCommittee was also in favour of enhancing the ceiling on the value of gold imported under the transfer of residence rules and the Customs Baggage Rules. Finally, theCommittee recommended drastic modification of the Gold Control Act.As would be evident, substantial elements of these recommendations were acted upon9. In recognition of the importance of gold in the changed circumstances, the Reserve Bankcame out with a discussion paper in 1992, underscoring its bearing on external debt.Considering the complex interactions of both demand and supply forces, an institutionalmechanism called ‘Gold Management Corporation’ (GMC) was suggested. The GMC guidedby the ‘Gold Policy Board’ was to be developed into a mechanism that can evolve andcontinuously evaluate the required schemes for gold mobilisation as also its utilisation in theevent of external constraints. The policy towards gold import was to be essentially based onthe effectiveness of gold mobilisation and utilisation. If the response to gold scheme ensures the funneling of imported gold into the gold reserve, thus providingflexibility to the RBI in its reserve management, a considerably liberal import policy could bethought of. In the long-run, however, the strategy recommended was to induce the householdsIn 1992, a proposal was actively consideredto set up a Gold Bank with the objectives of  domestic non-official gold holdings, them into a  pool over a period of time and to deploy them in aproductive manner in the interest of growth and development of the country. However, thisproposal was not accepted, and instead the Gold Bond Scheme 1993 was launched, whichgarnered 41 10. Almost concurrently, a Committee within the RBI has made a comprehensive set ofrecommendations for an integrated national gold policy. The highlights of therecommendations made in the report are : (a) There is a need for an integrated national policyon gold, covering trading, import, jewellery export, investment, refining, etc., even thoughguidelines exist for a few sub-sectors. (b) Import policy for gold and silver should be furtherliberalised to put an end to smuggling and hawala activities. Select Bullion Associations incanalising agency like the State Bank of India or MMTC may be allowedto import gold and silver subject to some annual ceiling that could be prescribed. (c) It isdesirable to regulate the bullion market and introduce uniform trading practices all over thecountry in view of the high turnover in the bullion trade and the country’s potential tobecome an international centre for bullion trading. (d) Certain deficiencies are seen in thethe country or some channelisetonnes of gold.centralisedmobilisingto treat gold on par with any other financial asset. mobilisationby the Government.jewelleryact as a better disincentive to wealth tax.trading practices in the Mumbai market which could be prevalent in other centres as well.Standardisation of market practices would lead to transparency in dealings, investorprotection and market efficiency and could be prescribed for wholesale trade in bullion. (e) Itis desirable to introduce forward trading in gold as a price hedging mechanism after furtherliberalisation in the gold import policy of the Government. (f) Institutional arrangements needto be made for regulation and standardisation of bullion trade practices and for co-ordinationwith other agencies. (g) A separate statutory body called the ‘Gold Management Board’should be set up with statutory powers to oversee wholesale bullion operations and providefocus to the trade. (h) The Board should examine and take steps to upgrade the standard andquality of the refineries in the country. Hallmarking of gold jewellery should be introduced inthe country at the earliest as a measure of consumer protection. (I) The granting of permissionfor the participation of commercial banks in bullion trading may be deferred till the import ofgold is more freely allowed. (j) The implementation of any future schemes for mobilizationof gold from the public should be entrusted to agencies like mutual funds, which have greaterflexibility in their operations. The mobilized gold could be offered to jewellers for meetingtheir inventory needs in order to make the scheme viable. (k) Gold-price-linked instrumentsmay be made available in the market as an investment avenue to wean the public away from11. It may not be appropriate to conclude from the studies in the Reserve Bank of India thatthere is a consensus on gold policy in India. Major criticisms of liberalisation of gold policyFirst, we have been the largest consumer of gold in the world. The total quantities of goldimported, legally and otherwise, have risen sharply after liberalisation, particularly in theSecond, the liberalised policy of allowing official imports through NRI-route and SIL-routehas not had the desired impact on smuggling. In fact, it made little difference to the quantitiesThird, the so-called NRI imports are actually funded by “hawala” market, and professionalNRI couriers are used for importing gold through this route. Hence, the objective of reducinghawala market has been defeated. Also, much of the movement of this gold is not easilytraceable within India since some of it is not traded in legal channel.Fourth, recent increases in gold smuggling are attributable to increased narcotics trade andpolicy-tightening or loosening would be of no use.Fifth, the real issue in so far as hawala market financing is concerned relates to theinefficiency and high cost of banking services in handling NRI remittances from the Gulfregion and not in export under-invoicing and import over-invoicing in as much as the goldsmuggling activity is Gulf- centred12. However, there are others who advocate further reforms and come up with their ownFirst, to the extent hawala margins have come down, and the spurt in gold demand reflectsincreased genuine demand for gold jewellery, there is a need to further liberalise gold importsand improve market efficiency. Clearly, the larger imports (official as well as illegal) haverecent past. This has been a ‘drain on savings’.arguments and proposals. Briefly, they are: and not in other major markets.any change in of gold imported illegally.have been on five grounds. These are:physical gold.not adversely impacted either the balance of payments, or the exchange rate and have, in fact,provided revenues to governments as well as incentives to exporters. Further, would in fact reduced transaction costs and the role of unsocial elements. It will open upprospects for more aggressive export trade and help the economy. There could be fiscal gainsalso through import and export taxes.Second, it is better that the Central Bank and/or public sector institutions take some sort ofmonopoly over imports as in the case of many other countries. In other words, Third, while launching a programme for encouraging the public to use gold as a financialasset, the Reserve Bank of India and the Government of India should use their own goldFourth, efforts to mobilise domestic gold or permit their use as a financial asset in theFifth, though the current proposals to liberalise forward trading exclude gold, it would benecessary to permit forward trading soon.nagement of Gold Reserves13. The stance of central banks like the Federal Reserve, the Bundesbank, the Banque deFrance and the Swiss National Bank, which together account for the largest quantum ofofficial gold is not to be active in the gold market. However, a good number of central banksare now active, in varying degrees. One could distinguish three categories of central banks inFirst, the central banks of producing countries many of whom act as the sole marketing agentfor the production of their countries. These central banks are involved in the spot. Forward aswell as the swap market in gold. Their activities are aimed at selling their product at the bestpossible price.The second category comprises those central banks of non-mining countries which havemoderate to large gold holding. They seek to add value to or defray cost by employing a partThe third group, comprising central banks of both mining and non-mining countries whichuse both the cash and derivative markets for actively enhancing return on their gold holding.The position of the Reserve Bank of India with regard to its activities in the gold marketplaces it in the second category of central banks mentioned. The Reserve Bank of India has amodest holding of about 13 million ounces or about 397.5 tonnes. It still has the largestholdings in the developing world in 1995 as per International Financial statistics, 1996.Traditionally, we have been holding gold as an idle asset. The dormant reserves were,however, activated in the critical periods of the foreign exchange crisis in 1991. Thisprovided a clear signal to the world that we were taking serious action. This also showed tothe nation that gold held in the Central Bank provides a bedrock of the foreign exchangereserves of the country. Currently, a part i.e, about 15 per cent of the gold holding of theor whole of their holding in the spot, forward or swap and lease markets.this regard:Mabanking sector require institutional development.stocks more dynamically and earn income.should go hand in hand with a transparent regulatory mechanism.liberalisationliberalisationBank is located offshore, which is now being deployed in short-term interest-bearing depositsin terms of the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act.Upgrading the gold stock to LGDB standard as also locating them at an offshore involve cost but it can also be argued that from the perspective of acquiring flexibility to beable to raise resources against gold, the scheme could be cost effective. It is possible to take aview that taking gold to an offshore location does not compromise, in any manner , theownership and possession over the stock.In this regard, the recommendation of the Rangarajan Committee on Balance of Payments in1993 appears very relevant. The Committee had expressed that it would be advantageous tolocate about one-fourth of the gold holding of the Reserve Bank of India at an offshore so that the same could be utilised in times of need.Gold as a Financial Product14. With the reform of the financial sector and development of the financial markets in termsof width, depth and liquidity in our country, it is possible that demand for physical gold as aform of insurance-cum-investment would reduce. In any case, development of gold as aFirst, the availability of financial instr uments in the non-government financial sector,could help in mobilising idle gold with households. However, it may not be appropriate totreat all gold Secondly, the ban on forward t rading may have to be lifted so that the hoardingdemand would come down and help in bringing the idle gold into the market/official pool.Thirdly, if the import of gold is to be liberalised, it would be necessary to evolve aframework for regulating the import, trading and market making in gold and gold relatedproducts.Fourthly, the issue of development of financial market in gold is linked to the issue ofA brief look at the legal position reveals that in terms of S ection 6 of the BankingRegulations Act, 1949, banks can buy, sell and deal in bullion and specie and the prohibitionon trading in Section 8 does not apply to bullion and specie. However, in view of the goldcontrol in force till 1990 and the provisions of FERA 1947 which impose certain capitalcontrols, active development of financial market in gold and involvement of banks indeveloping and marketing financial products denominated in gold will have to await otheractions in the  process.Gold Markets15. The Reserve Bank of India has not been an active participant in the gold market. Theauthorities of different countries, have on the other hand, played significant roles infurthering the development of gold markets. Here one could see three patterns:liberalisationcapital account convertibility.jewellery as an idle asset since it is also used as a consumer durable.financial product raises some issues.centrecentre(a) Producer nations like South Africa, Australia and Brazil have shown keen interest inthe development of spot and forward market in their respective countries mainly with theintention of providing financial products to the producers. Also, since a liquid forward marketin gold (for enabling the producers to sell their product forward) presupposes the existence of(b) Financial centers like the U.K., the USA, Switzerland, Hong Kong and Singaporehave actively promoted gold related products to be traded at these Centers. While in the UKand the USA, the market is designed to be used by residents and non-residents alike the focusin Singapore is on providing service to off-shore entities in Singapore and non-residents.There are direct benefits to the countries concerned in the form of value-addition in the(c) In Turkey, the gold market has recently been liberalised. Turkey has quite a fewparallels with India in respect of gold i.e. no significant domestic output ; and large privatesector holding. In Turkey, the private sector holding is estimated at 5,000 tones, while inIndia the same is placed at 7,500-10,000 tonnes. Further, like India, Turkey seems to havehigh income elasticity of demand for gold. In early 1995, Turkey liberalised its gold controlregime by throwing open imports. The Istanbul Gold Exchange was set up in July 1995 tohelp bring into the economic mainstream the huge quantity of gold held by the private sector.Gold-based paper is sought to be introduced there as also the setting up of a gold refinerywith international accreditation for providing refining services to the gold producingcountries in Central Asia.16. While, prima facie, the Reserve Bank of India and the Government of India could play anactive role in developing gold market domestically on sound lines and linking such marketswith the financial sector, it is difficult to design such a role till the general stance of goldpolicy in the country is more positive and more liberal.Issues17. To sum up, there are a number of issues that we have to address. I am sure yourdeliberations, especially your experiences, would be of great interest to us. For convenience, Iwill flag them here, especially, in the form of a set of questions.(a) Is there a need to review our current overall policy stance to gold?(b) If so, should the direction of change be in terms of imposing more restrictions ondomestic demand? What are the instruments and their possible effectiveness in restrictingsuch domestic use – both in terms of quality and the end use?(c) From the supply side, is it possible to encourage domestic production and if so, whatwould be the relative roles of public, private and foreign investment?(d) How should trade policy be re-oriented to the new policy? Is the existing system ofimports through individuals and exporters by payment of foreign currency adequate? If not`,should there be a more liberal approach in allowing all individuals to import gold againstrupee payment?(e) Are there advantages in managing gold imports, if such imports are restricted to selectbanks or corporates that satisfy well defined criteria?(f) From the angle of the external sector, what would be the impact of more liberalimports on balance of payments and exchange rate? Would such a liberalisation help increaseexports of gold jewellery?(g) Is it advantagenous to mobilise idle gold assets lying with households and bring theminto the official pool to provide support for the external resources?products, employment etc.a leasing market, these authorities have promoted this market also.(h) Is it possible to build fiscal gains by adequately taxing imports of gold and would thisbe more effective if import is effected through institutions?(i) What would be the role of the Reserve Bank of India in managing gold imports?(j) Is there an advantage in allowing the use of gold by the Reserve Bank of India in amore dynamic way – both in terms of purchase and sale of gold to keep the reserves in theform of gold?(k) Is there are advantage in permitting a more active role for banks in the gold market? Ifso, what should be regulatory framework to be considered by the Reserve Bank of India?(l) How should the policy stance of gold as a commodity and financial instrument bedifferentiated? In such a scenario, who would be the regulator? What would be the sequencing of any change in the context of liberalisation of theeconomy and globalisation of the economy? Is it appropriate to initially concentrate on tradepolicy liberalisation and subsequently arrange for enabling forward market provisionsfollowed by use of gold as a financial instrument?(n) Finally, how should the policy towards gold be integrated with financial sector reformand in the final analysis, what would be its link with currency convertibility on capitalaccount? Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor at the Gold Economic Conference organised by the World GoldCouncil at New Delhi on November 28, 1996.*(m)
