Globalisation and Challenges for South Asia *At the outset, I would like to pay homage to the memory of late Prasad Koirala who dedicated his life to the cause of democracy, liberty, social justiceand human rights.  His distinguished contemporaries respectfully but affectionatelydescribed him as “BP” and as Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao, one of our Prime Ministersmentioned : “BP belonged, in the truest sense, to both our peoples of India as well as ofNepal”.  Another Prime Minister of India, Mr. Gujral acknowledged his stature in theAsian context while delivering a BPKF talk on “South Asia : The Coming Decade” inDecember 1999, at Kathmandu.  I am honoured by your kind invitation to me to deliverthe BPKF lecture this year.  In fact, it is not often that central bankers are invited todeliver such lectures involving intense diplomatic skills.  I am grateful to the Foundation,and in particular my dear friend, H.E. Mr. Deb Mukherjee for giving me this opportunityto focus on a complex subject of contemporary and mutual interest viz., It is possible to question the appropriateness of the subject of globalisation toSouth Asia since it is admittedly one of the least globalised.  Precisely because it is notglobalised so far, there is a need to understand the implications of the process and exploreways of continuing or otherwise with the current policies and meeting the challenges ofglobalisation as they evolve.  The address is mainly oriented to analysing in detail,economic aspects of globalisation and identifying challenges for public policy, essentiallyWhile the term globalisation has been fashionable in the past two decades, theprocess is neither new nor anywhere near being complete. It would, therefore, be usefulto appreciate, as a first step, the concept or features, the historical as well as the economiccontext, and the current concerns regarding this complex process. The second part gives aprofile of South Asian Region in comparison with others, covering macroeconomic,infrastructural, social and institutional indicators.  The third part focuses on thecharacteristics of countries within South Asia with reference to similar indicators.Detailed data along with sources will certainly be shared so that different inferences asappropriate can be drawn by various analysts. The fourth part devotes itself to selectaspects of South Asia critical to the current process of globalisation.  In the light of theabove, the fifth and concluding part highlights some of the issues concerning actions atglobalisation.The term ‘ globalisation’ is widely used but seldom defined in precise terms, andin any case, there is no agreed definition.  At the same time, it has acquired considerableemotive force, perhaps because different people use the word to mean different aspects orcauses or consequences of globalisation. In fact, antagonists of globalisation tend toprotest against different aspects viz., market integration, consumer culture, unfair trade,environmental impact of modernisation, dehumanisation due to technology, effect ofmass-media, dominance of markets, etc.  In brief, globalisation is a process with severaldimensions such as social, political, economic, environmental, cultural and religious allof which affect each of us in some way or the other.1Globalisationnational and regional levels to meet the challenges of at the national and to some extent the regional levels in South Asia.challenges for South Asia. globalisation andBishweshwarMr. Chairman and friends,globalisation, in the sense in which it is used now, can be traced tothe phenomenon of nation-states.  In the distant past, there were just human communities.For long, most people remained confined to their communities or villages or local areas.With developments in communication and economic activity, it has gradually becomeeasier to move from local to regional and then regional to national, and finally acrossnations also.  Conceptually, therefore, there are two extremes of connectivity amongpeople.  One is a small tribal unit where everyone knew everyone else for lifetime and itdid not aspire to interact with people in other units or groups.  Second is an integratedglobalised existence or a global village where everyone can aspire to interact with anyoneelse in the globe.  Globalisation is a historical process of moving from the tribal unit butit is a process that is palpably incomplete. Clearly, it is a phenomenon enabled bydevelopments in technology related to transport and communications among people aswell as over geographical distances. Of course, it will be inappropriate to ignore thehuman element while considering the role of technology in the process.  For example,technology opens the prospect of making available a commodity (say a meat burger orchicken tikka or a healthy apple) in a remote corner but the spread of the commodity orservice (say classical music or Beatles  music) will depend on tastes of  people. Perhaps,it is a process that has been, in some senses, constrained by the authority of nation-states,It may be useful to elaborate the role of public policy in the context of the conceptof globalisation.  After the emergence of nation-states, citizens of each nation-stateperceived that it is in their collective self-interest to promote or restrict their involvementwith citizens of other nation-states.  In fact, till the early part of twentieth century, therewas no need for a passport or visa to move from one country to another, and there wereno restrictions on currency conversions since gold was the universally accepted medium.Thus, while developments in technology enabled and accelerated movement of goods,people and services, policies of many nations tended to impose restrictions.  Currentlythere are some voluntary efforts among some countries to liberalise such restrictionsamong select countries such as European Union or ASEAN or even SAARC.  In someinstances, as in Europe, referendum among the citizens of select countries enabled,delayed or stopped greater integration with some other countries.  Similarly, there havebeen multilateral initiatives to ease restrictions imposed on economic integration, while atthe same time, some initiatives are taken to enable technological cooperation, say inbroadcasting or telecommunications or air travel.  A serious problem arises when there isa perception of persuasion or coercion by some nation-states on others to ease somerestrictions, either directly or through what are called multilateral initiatives.  In brief, at aconceptual level, a distinction can be made between technology enabled or inducedAs explained earlier, a nation-state is presumed to put restrictions on its citizens intheir involvement with other nation-states only in collective self-interest of its citizens.However, it is not easy to define what is in collective self-interest of all its citizens.  Forexample, restrictions on imports may benefit a few businessmen while prima facierestricting the freedom of many consumers.  More important, there is an issue of valuefor freedom of any citizen to interact with the rest of humanity in terms of exchange of2globalisation and public policy induced restrictions or easing of restrictions.particularly in the twentieth century.The concept of Globalisation Process and Policy of goods, services, ideas, or even physical movement.  No doubt, such freedom across theborders of nation-states gets exercised only when the concerned citizens agreevoluntarily.  Yet, the basic freedom of a citizen to involve with others should perhaps beconstrained only, and only on grounds of overall collective self-interest of all concerned.Hence, in the context of public policy relating to globalisation, a critical issue is thetrade-off between individual freedom and collective self-interest as also where the burdenIt is obvious that the process of globalisation relates to connectivity amongindividuals and such connectivity in cross-border terms is subject to public policy ofnation-states. Thus, globalisation has several dimensions arising out of what may becalled enhanced connectivity among people across the borders.  While such enhancedconnectivity is determined by three fundamental factors viz., technology, tastes andpublic policy, the cross-border integration can have several aspects; cultural, social,political and economic.  However, for purposes of this analysis, only economicintegration is considered.  Broadly speaking, economic integration occurs through threechannels viz., movement of people, movements of goods and services, and movements inFirst, on movement of people, it is now widely accepted that all modern humansare descendents of ancestors living in Africa roughly one million years ago.  Till a fewyears ago, all movement of people from one place to another was predominantly by foot.Later it must have been with the help of cattle or horses, or by boats and so on.  Morerecently, travel by air has become quite affordable.  In other words, along withopportunities for gainful economic activity, technology encompassing cost, time, comfortetc ., plays a dominant part in the movement of people and connectivity among them.Some people prefer movement more than others and different people have differentpreferences.  Thus, a second factor is tastes or cultural preferences coupled witheconomic opportunities.  The third factor relates to public policy, which may facilitate orinhibit movement across the borders.  In understanding movement of people, a distinctionshould be made between globalisation by means of slave trade or sword and voluntarymovement of people in search of better opportunities.  The most notable achievement ofrecent globalisation is the freedom granted to many, if not all, from the tyranny of beingrooted to a place and opportunity to move and connect freely.  At the same time, inreality, there are several non-economic but cultural or emotional reasons for people notSecondly, in regard to trade in or movement of goods and services across theborders of countries, there are two types of barriers, viz., what are described as naturaland artificial.  Natural barriers relate to various costs involved in transportation andinformation over distances.  For instance, development of ocean-going vessels made ofsteel, railways, automobile, telecommunication, internet etc., represent significantmilestones in enhancing connectivity and enabling cross-border trade in goods andservices.  Artificial barriers are those that are related to public policy, such as importrestrictions by way of tariff or non-tariff barriers, which are justified on grounds ofgenerating revenue or protecting domestic industry apart from national security,environment, etc.  More recently, multilateral agreements are encouraging reduction in3globalising but being local or national.capital and financial services.Economic Integrationof proof lies, namely, with the individual or the national authorities.such artificial barriers, while developments in technology are making it difficult fornational authorities to enforce artificial barriers. In brief, in any debate relating to publicglobalisation and publicpolicy induced globalisation that is either voluntary or perceived to have been underoutside pressure.  The pace and nature of globalisation will depend on the combinedThe third set of factors relates to capital movements.  In regard to capitalmovement also, the interplay between technology and public policy becomes relevant.There are, however, some special characteristics of capital flows in recent years.  In thepast, a large part of capital flows were in the nature of direct investments, though debtflows were not uncommon particularly in Europe and America.  In the post-second warperiod of the 20 century, capital flows on government account played an important role.However, technological, demographic and some economic factors led to changing thenature of such flows by the 1980s and especially the 1990s.  New financial instrumentswere developed and portfolio flows enlarged.  The linkages between different capitalflows have been strengthened, and they can now take place in large quantifies and withgreat speed in view of enabling technology and huge drop in transaction costs. Thesecharacteristics have highlighted the issue of what is described as contagion , namely, acountry is affected by developments totally outside of its policy though domestic policymay to some extent influence the degree of vulnerability to the contagion. In any case,the cross-border flows of capital have wider macro-economic implications, particularly interms of exchange rate that directly affects the costs of movement of people as well asgoods and services; of conduct of monetary policy and the efficiency as well as stabilityof financial system. Further, capital flows by definition involve future liabilities or assetsIt must be recognised that developments in technology and innovation in financialservices impact both domestic and cross border transactions.  The implications for publicpolicy of such developments in domestic area are different in as much as domesticfinancial markets are in some ways subject to governmental regulation by nationalauthorities while cross border flows are not susceptible to governmental regulation.Finally, in the context of cross-border capital flows, in the absence of procedures forinternational bankruptcy and facilities of lender of last resort, the liabilities incurred onprivate account can devolve on public account.  In brief, at this juncture, in respect ofglobal economic integration through movement of capital ,  several risks devolve onFor analytical purposes, it is possible to take a slightly more disaggregated viewof the nature of economic integration.  Thus, movement of people can be classified astemporary and permanent. Similarly, movement of goods may be differentiated physical goods and services (though in some cases they are integrated). Movement ofmoney may take different forms, such as capital movements, or to meet transactionneeds, long or short-term movement of debt capital, and non-debt movement of financelinked to goods and services as distinct from pure finance capitalism. There may also bespread of technology or media with or without accompanying movement of goods orcapital.  Such a disaggregated approach to economic integration could be of use in4appreciating public policies.betweendomestic public authorities, especially in the case of developing countries.and could involve intergenerational equity issues.theffect of technology and public policy, both at the national and the international levels.policy, a distinction should be made between technology induced Current ContextIt is necessary to appreciate the difference between economic integration as itexisted in the past, and more recently, say in the current context. It had been explainedthat the globe was far more integrated at the beginning of the nineteenth century than it isa century later, now, in the sense that people, goods and capital could move withoutpublic policy restrictions i.e., those imposed by nation-states on economic integration.  Inreality, however, there is significantly more interaction now than a century ago, in thesense that technological developments have made movement of people, goods and capitalSecondly, the trade across countries in the past was usually in generic productsviz., export wheat and import cloth or export steel and import spice.  Currently, there issignificant intra-industry trade.  Often, there are both export and import of a commodity,say garments or computers.  Trade in what are called intermediate goods is significantlyhigher than before.  This implies more intensive global competition now than earlier.  AsMichael Mussa, the well known economist said: “surprisingly, however, the extent ofglobal integration through international trade today, is by some key measures, not muchgreater than it was a century ago”.Thirdly, though the share of services in world output has increased noticeably, apredominant part of the services sector still remains non- tradeable across the borders.Information Technology has made some services more tradeable on a cross border basisbut it is still a very small part.Fourthly, nineteenth century witnessed large mobility of capital, but it alsowitnessed an equally large mobility of labour.  In other words, the international factormobility was much more symmetric a century ago when one did not even need a passportto go from one country to another.Finally, even today, citizens of most countries, and even in the most advancedcountries like the United States, invest overwhelming proportions of their savings withintheir own country.  The qualitative difference, however, lies in the processes that governinternational capital flows or to put it differently the cross-border movement of what hasbeen described as pure finance capital in an international environment that is totallyunregulated in contrast with domestic financial markets generally subject to regulation.The international portfolio capital flows are far larger in size now and infinitely mobile,often governed by what has been described as animal spirits of the markets and highlySeveral features of the current status of  as a process of economicintegration among countries must also be recognised.  First, though a large number ofcountries are part of the process, they are at different stages or degrees of integration.Second, economic integration may also vary as between some countries compared to therest.  In fact, there can be more of bilateral economic integration between two countriescompared with the rest.  Third, integration among countries also varies as betweendifferent markets, namely, products, capital, labour etc.  Fourth, impact of varies as between countries depending on its geography, demography, stage ofdevelopment, size, etc.  In fact, impact of globalisation may vary significantly amongdifferent parts of a country.  Thus, it is very clear that case for or against process of5globalisationglobalisationsusceptible to herd mentality.far more widespread, frequent, deeper and speedier.globalisation is contextual and complex even in the limited arena of economicThere are several concerns regarding the process of globalisation and it is difficultto capture all of them comprehensively in this presentation.  An attempt is made here tohighlight major ones related to economic integration, and merely for convenience ofexplanation, these are divided into peoples’ concerns and policy concerns.  The peoples’First, the benefits and burdens of globalisation are uneven.  For example, whilehighly skilled persons like computer professionals may get better wages, others intraditional occupations are likely to lose their livelihood.  Likewise, while women insome countries may get better employment opportunities through garment factories forexport, women employed in subsistence agriculture may be adversely affected due tocommercialisation of agriculture.  Even in the developed countries, there is a perceptionthat inexpensive imports from developing countries are hurting wage levels and resultingSecond, there is also a perception that the overall levels of unemployment,particularly among unskilled or blue-collar workers are increasing due to globalThird, empirical evidence shows that there is greater income inequality as a resultof globalisation, both in developed and developing countries. The evidence also indicatesthat globally while the rich are getting far richer, the poor either remain poor or at bestbecome less poor.  The serious issue of growing inequalities due to brought to the fore recently by Robert Hunter Wade (The Economist, 28 April 2001) whoincidentally lived for sometime in Karimuddulla village of Rayalaseema region to whichFourth, there is perceptible increase in job insecurity sin ce competition oftenresults in downsizing, closures, etc.  In most developing countries, there are or indeed no social welfare systems or income security, which result in human suffering.Even where some unemployment benefits are provided, they are painful substitutes forFifth, the patent rights regime is resulting in exorbitant prices for somecommodities like medicinal drugs, particularly unaffordable in developing countries andstandardisation of values and culture resulting in loss of identity formany communities.  This is a result of combined onslaught of market and media withSeventh, global competition is driving enterp rises to be insensitive toenvironmental concerns, which are intensely harmful to the poorer and more vulnerablesections of the population. Such environmental deregulation is noticeable in developing6countries where public policies are either not very sensitive or not very effective.global presence on local communities and traditional culture.Sixth, there is among poorer sections.job security.inadequate,I belong. I am not elaborating this aspect now since it is being currently debated widely.globalisation has beencompetition in many countries, and in some cases, for prolonged periods.in unemployment of some people.summarised as follows: concerns can be Current Concernsintegration.Many of the policy concerns are in many ways related to peoples’ concerns.Policy makers do discharge several responsibilities in macroeconomic management andespecially maintaining social order. Sound public policies are perceived to be severelyconstrained by the process of globalisation, and some of the specific concerns expressedFirst, any process of globalisation introduces constraints on the conduct ofdomestic policy and to this extent, there is a loss of national sovereignty.  Of operationalsignificance for policy makers is the fact that while gains of globalisation may be enjoyedby some in any country, the adverse social consequences have to be managed by thegovernments.  For example, trade liberalisation does threaten many domestic activities,though some consumers and some more competitive activities may prosper.  The veryprocess of globalisation reduces fiscal, financial and some other discretions available togovernment, thus reducing the effectiveness of governance in managing disruptive ordownside risks of Secondly, exchange rates or interest rates get influenced by volatile capital flowsand these are not conducive to long-term development in developing countries.Furthermore, when such volatile capital flows on private account affect the economyseriously, the governments in developing countries are forced to take actions withimplications for the public sector.There are occasions when volatility is transmitted to a country for reasons that areentirely outside the domain of domestic policy, and yet, the governments concerned haveto face the consequences.  In other words, the gains from perceived efficiency on accountof freer cross-border capital-flows often do not match the costs of increased volatilitycoupled with erosion in autonomy in domestic economic policy making.  This isThirdly, the foreign direct investment often treats the recipient country concernedas a base for exports thereby reducing the citizens to being mere employees, especiallywhen there are little spillover benefits to domestic firms or activity.  The spread of ideas,technology, and management techniques may not always take place and there may evenbe cases of outdated technology being used in developing countries.  Therefore, thebeneficial consequences of foreign direct investment should be demonstrable, especiallyFourthly, it is noticed that developed countries resort to protectionism, especiallyin areas such as textiles, and subsidise agriculture, thus making the process ofglobalisation one sided.  In reality, the poor in most parts of the globe are deniedopportunities to participate and benefit from the process of  trade preciselybecause of these actions of developed countries which benefit a few - very few - of theircitizens at the expense of millions of poor citizens of other countries.  Similarly, some ofthe provisions of Intellectual Property Rights tend to operate for the benefit of a few inthe richer nations at the expense of many in poorer countries with no demonstrableFifthly, the international arrangements and multilateral bodies are not adequatelyrepresentative of or reasonably accountable to or even sufficiently sensitive to theproblems of the poor and vulnerable people.  In other words, briefly stated, while nation-7overall gains at all.liberalisedincentives or subsidies are extended by governments concerned. if particularly noticeable in regard to portfolio flows and to some extent debt flows.liberalisation of trade and services.predominantly though not solely by developing countries are summarized below.states have representative and accountable institutions in the concerned government,there is no corresponding global institution or global government.  In the absence of aglobal government and global governance, many nation-states argue that viable andFinally, process of globalisation is inextricably linked with marketisation anddominance of markets. In the ultimate analysis, markets, however efficient, are notdemocratic institutions in the strictest sense, since customer’s vote is proportionate tohis/her purchasing power. Furthermore, capital can withhold if he/she thinks that the return is not adequate while labour cannotwithhold because it will then not be able to survive. She or he has to work to live. Thepoor can give according to their ability but if such abilities cease to have markets, theycannot get what they need even if the need is minimal. Pro-poor oriented growth is thuspossible when intellectual community and policy makers  view the markets with thesuspicion that they deserve and the poor with the respect that they need. The question is:how to build arrangements that integrate state or governments, corporates or markets, andvoluntary organizations or concerned citizens in the fight against poverty whilerecognizing contribution of globalisation, technological progress and marketisation toIn the light of the current context and concerns of the process of globalisation,five important issues arise.  How genuine are the concerns?  Should public policy resistthe process?  To what extent can policy succeed in resisting it?  To what extent should itbe managed?  If so, how should the public policy attempt to manage the process tomaximise the gains and Undeniably, the peoples’ concerns expressed are in varying extents genuine.  It is,however, possible to argue that almost all the concerns are valid with any intensificationof competition, technological progress and consequent rapid changes in economic as wellas institutional set up, irrespective of whether these are induced by intensely domesticprocess or by global process.  The policy concerns, on the other hand, arise out of theresponsibilities imposed on the governments, especially though not exclusively ofdeveloping countries in coping with peoples’ concerns. The policy autonomy available togovernments is getting eroded by the combined effects of technologically induced andmultilateral policy induced process of globalisation.  It is perhaps this inadequacy ofgovernments as institutional mechanisms to address peoples’ concerns in all the countriesthat has led to widespread demonstrations in Seattle and justifiably increased the clout ofYet, the case for policy intervention to significantly resist the process ofglobalisation does not seem to be very persuasive.  For people, connectivity is by andlarge a source of freedom and generally desired rather than spurred.  Again, the empiricalevidence available so far in regard to countries which had prospered as well as thosewhich have succeeded in reducing poverty does not favour isolationism.  Moreover, it istrue that inequality has increased during the recent bouts of globalisation but it hasincreased most in rural parts of China, India and Africa where there is less of connectivityof people to global developments.  It must be noted that these parts of the world suffer8non-governmental but global initiatives in highlighting peoples’ concerns.minimise the costs?Opportunities and Challengesprosperity.labour is different from capital since the owner ofglobalisation is not feasible. universally beneficial process of from structural forms of acute poverty which is most challenging and enduring thanpoverty due to business cycles or volatility or contagion as in the case of East Asiancrises or Latin America.  It is also instructive that countries which have been relativelyclosed are seeking to join the mainstreams as illustrated by the case of China’s entry intothe World Trade Finally, the growth of output a ll over the world is occurring mainly in the servicessector and connectivity of people both in terms of physical and technological termsappears critical for sharing in the output and employment in the services sector.  Nodoubt, public policy could avoid downside risks involved in the process but resisting theEven assuming that it is desirable for public policy to pursue a degree ofeconomic isolationism in preference to opening up the economies, the effectiveness ofsuch policy options need to be assessed in relation to the benefits.  For example, potentialfor smuggling of goods, especially of high value but non-bulk items, limits the scope forartificial barriers to trade. Capital flight through unaccounted channels is not an entirelyunknown phenomenon.  Above all, technological progress and ease of movement ofpeople across the borders makes for easy connectivity, at least for those who can afford.It is technically possible to erect barriers on all channels of connectivity, but if theare  out of alignment with global factors, be it taxes orprices, it becomes difficult to enforce the barriers.  In brief ,  in the present day world,there is only limited room for public policy to erect barriers  against connectivity ofpeople and goods.To the extent a significant part of activity in a country tends to be affected byglobalisation, and increasingly so over a period, and to the extent limited room isavailable for public policy to operate artificial  barriers to connectivity, it stands to reasonthat the process should be so managed as to minimise the risks.The process of management obviously has three participants, viz. citizens concerned,national governments and supranational, but regional or global institutions as well asFinally, it should be obvious that national governments cannot manage theprocess without reference to actions of other governments, in view of theinterdependence.  At the same time, each country has some freedom to manage theprocess in ways that it considers best.  A few examples may illustrate the point.  Duringthe Asian crisis, Malaysia decided to manage the crisis by opting out of the mainstreamInternational Monetary Fund’s prescriptions and has by and large succeeded.  China andIndia have been managing capital flows in their own unique way.   Countries in NorthernEurope have a larger share of their national output from public sector thus illustratingdominance of State over market relative to most other countries.  The cross bordermovement of people is managed by different countries very differently, be it the UnitedStates of America or Europe or the Gulf region.  It is reported that some countries areimporting English teachers on a large scale to equip their citizens for handling business ininformation technology, thus illustrating methods by which public policy can strengthencitizens capabilities to benefit from opportunities provided by globalisation.  In brief, thechallenges to globalisation have to be met on several fronts, managing the process is a9alliances.maximise the benefits and domestic policies and environment process on a long-term basis does not seem advisable.Organisation.critical responsibility of public policy of national governments; and the process has to beSouth Asia as a It is not surprising to note that South Asia is defined differently by variousagencies. The South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) definesSouth Asia as Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Onthe other hand, the World Bank definition of South Asia includes the seven SAARCcountries and Afghanistan. The United Nations Development Progamme (UNDP)definition of South Asia is even broader and includes Iran. In this analysis, thecomposition of South Asia has to be interpreted depending on the source. Thus, in thenarrative of inter-regional comparison, there is some unscientific element involved, butthis gets explained in the details given in the Annexures and  tables where specificFor East Asia also, there is the some element of uncertainty due to its differentinterpretations by the above agencies.  In the World Bank’s classification, East Asia andPacific, comprising of countries east of South Asia and the Pacific islands includingUNDP’s classification ,  EastFor purposes of regional comparison with South Asia, among the various regionalgroups, the East Asia, Latin America and Caribbean, the Sub-Saharan Africa and thegroup of Low and Middle-income countries are of particular interest. However, Annexure 1, further details on regional classification such as, South Asia, excludingIndia, East Asia excluding China, South Asia and the Pacific, the Arab States, Europe andIn Appendix 1 and  Annexures 1 and 3, a comparison of South Asia as a regionwith others is made  in terms of economic indicators, infrastructure facilities, socialindicators and institutional factors.In brief, the region translated itself from a position of slowest growing during the‘sixties and the ‘seventies to one of the fastest growing regions in the world since the‘eighties. Also, in terms of inflation, South Asia performed the best among all theregional groupings within the developing countries. Yet, even at the end of the ‘nineties,it remained one of the poorest in terms of per capita income, besides being the mostdensely populated region. Exports of goods and services have been one of the fastest inrecent times, but the region’s reliance on external trade, a measure of degree ofintegration to the global economy, continues to be the least. It must be recognised thatthese low positions inspite of recent impressive performance are due to the very low basefrom where the region began  its commendable achievement in economic growth sinceIn particular, the financial imbalances of the government in the region  were andcontinue to be among the worst among all regions.  The additional problem besides thelarge size of fiscal deficit was the revenue deficit that reduced the public sector savings.That the region recorded one of the lowest rate of  saving is often a reflection of thisdissaving of the government revenue account. The banking presence in terms of bank10the ‘eighties.CIS countries, the High Income countries are also given.inAsia  consists of only China, Hong Kong, South Korea and Mongolia.Japan, Australia and New Zealand, form one group, while in definitions are given.Region : A Profilegoverned by the country context and to some extent the regional context.credit to GDP ratio in the region is also one of the lowest. The region is one of the leastindebted region in the world in terms of external debt, but in view of its low base ofexport of goods and services the debt service ratio is not as comfortable. The officialdevelopment assistance in the region has been declining despite it already being one ofthe least recipient regions. The long-term private capital and FDI inflows have beenFurthermore, the region has significantly lagged behind in the field ofinfrastructure, social provisions and working of the institutional set-up. And this does notaugur well for  the medium and long-term growth prospects of the region. The provisionof infrastructure facilities, including access to information flows is one of the least, if notthe least. Similar is the situation in the literacy and education, health and nutrition of thepeople. Compounding the above are the institutional problems of lower level ofgovernance. Thus, all the socio-economic indices place the region at the lower spectrumof the rankings. The higher ranking in terms of current growth prospects than futuregrowth prospects appears to be reflective of shortcomings in infrastructure, social andinstitutional set ups.South Asian It would also be useful to compare some critical economic and social indicatorswithin the region. Although the World Bank definition of South Asia is adopted,Afghanistan is excluded due to paucity of data, and only the performance of Bangladesh,Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka is compared in this section.These countries diverge significantly in terms of population and geographical size andlevel of income. Population in 1998 ranged from 0.3 million (Maldives) to 982 million(India), while land area for countries other than Bhutan and Maldives, ranged from 66thousand sq. km. (Sri Lanka) to 3,288 thousand sq. km. (India).  Population density forlarger countries was much above the world average (46 people per sq. km.), Bangladeshbeing the highest with 981 people per sq. km. in 1999 to Nepal having the lowest (164persons). The per capita GNP in 1998 in US $ ranged from 210 (Nepal) to 1,130(Maldives), and in PPP terms, from  US $ 1,157   (Nepal) to US $ 4,083 (Maldives).Therefore, average characteristics of the region may not reflect individual countries,except the large ones. Keeping these in view ,  Annexure II and Appendix II provideIt may be seen that the region is characterized by large diversity of theconstituting countries in terms of population size, income and in the provisions that are in general low. The most common elements are the higher growthperformance generally associated with growing external trade, a reasonable rate ofinflation and high fiscal imbalance of  the government. However, there are largedifferences in the saving and investment capacity and on dependence on external trade ofthe economy. The inflow of private capital in the region is mainly accounted for by fewlarger countries. There is also significant heterogeneity even in the generally low level ofprovision of infrastructure, health, education and nutrition facilities among thesecountries. That the countries individually, and as a regional group, continue to lag behindother regions reflect the enormity of challenges ahead of all the countries in the South11Asian region to catch up with most of the other regions.socio-economicdetailed account of profiles of each country in South Asia.Countries : A Profilegrowing at a relatively slow rate and continue to be the least among the regions.Critical Aspects of Economic Integration in South AsiaIt would be useful to compare the extent of economic integration of each countryin the South Asian region with the rest of the world as also a comparison of the extent ofintra-regional integration. The most common measures of economic integration comprisethree aspects: trade integration, financial integration and labour migration betweenThe simplest measure of trade integration uses the actual trade flows such as theshare of trade (exports plus imports) in GDP. In 1990, the trade to GDP ratio for SouthAsia stood at 24.8 percent, which improved to 28.4 percent in 1998. In both the years,however, South Asia recorded the lowest among all regional groups. In general, trade toGDP ratio has an inverse relation with the size of an economy. Consequently, there arelarge divergences in the extent of trade integration among the South Asian countries.Smaller economies like Bhutan, Nepal and Sri Lanka had a much higher percentage,ranging between 57.6 percent (Nepal) to 78.4 percent (Sri Lanka) in 1998. Sri Lanka hada historically high ratio due to the importance of plantation crops such as tea, coffee andrubber in its economy. The trade to GDP ratio of Maldives, another small  economy,  wasas high as 130.5 percent in 1990. Besides the overall trade, the share of technologyrelated exports in the total exports also indicates trade integration as it reflects on howmuch a country is moving away from its traditional products. High technology exports aspercent of manufacturing exports in South Asia in 1998 was only 4.0 percent, by far thelowest of all the regions. And, even this low percentage was significantly accounted forAnother aspect of the trade integration could be that of intra-regional trade flows.The percentage of intra-regional exports to total exports of South Asia, which rangedfrom 3.59 percent to 4.41 percent during 1991- 97 was the lowest among all the regions.Middle east with a range from 5.4 percent to 7.7 percent had the second lowest regional exports. Africa had a range from 7.3 percent to 10.4 percent, as against 36.0percent to 40.7 percent for Asia and 37.1 percent to 43.5 percent for developingcountries. In terms of intra-regional imports also, South Asia with a range of 2.57 percentto 4.12 percent during 1991 to 1997 recorded the lowest share of all groups. In otherregions, it ranged from 6.3 percent to 8.3 percent (Middle East), 7.4 percent to 10.8percent (Africa), 33.4 percent to 36.7 percent (Asia) and 35.9 percent to 42.0 percentThe second measure of economic integration, which is financial integration, isoften captured by the private capital flows. These include  foreign direct investment(FDI) and equity and portfolio investment, and the extent of access to internationalcapital markets. First, the long-term private capital inflows in South Asia during the‘eighties was on an average US $ 3 billion, the lowest among all the regions. This inflowimproved to an average of US $ 5 billion during the 1990-96, higher than only ArabStates and Sub-Saharan Africa region among the developing countries. As a percentageto the total inflow to developing countries during 1990-96, it declined from 8.0 to 4.012percent during the same period, higher than only the two regions mentioned above.Financial Integration(Developing Countries).intra-by India.Trade Integrationcountries.Second, FDI inflows increased from US $ 351 million during 1987-92 to US $2873 million during 1993-98, again the lowest of all groups. Even the FDI inflows toSub-Saharan Africa during the corresponding periods were US $ 1,797 million and US $3,638 million, while other regions were far ahead. Major chunk of the inflows during1993-97 was accounted by India, followed by Pakistan and Sri Lanka in that order. Asalready indicated earlier, FDI inflows as percentage of gross capital formation among theSouth Asian countries ranged from a negligible level to 3.3 percent during 1987- 92  andfrom 0.78 to 6.32 percent during 1993-97, also lower than all the regional groups. Thestock of FDI inflows as a ratio to GDP which ranged from negligible level to 8.5 percentin 1985 and from 1.0 to 12.7 percent in 1997 among the South Asian countries was alsoThird, FDI outflows are equally important as measures of financial integration,though for developing countries with scarce resources, inflows are expected to be thepredominant form of FDI flows. The FDI outflows from South Asia, which was mostlyaccounted for  by India, increased from an average of US $ 20 million during 1987-92 toUS $ 99 million during 1993-98. Even the outflows  from Sub-Saharan Africa during1993-98 were US $ 496 million, while the same from other regions were far ahead. Thus,FDI outflows from South Asia, whether as a percentage of gross fixed capital formationFourth, portfolio investment also measures the extent of financial integration.Such flows increased manifold in South Asia between 1990 to 1998, from US $ 252million to US $ 4,536 million. However, the flows were almost wholly accounted for byFifth, credit ratings suggest the access to international capital and thus indicatefinancial integration. The composite International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) risk ratingwhich was alluded to earlier is an overall index of investment risk in a country. In thisSouth Asia had a score of 61.3 in 2000, with a range of 54.3 (Pakistan) to 64.3 (India).This rating was  lower (signifying higher risk) than the average of Low and MiddleIncome countries (62.9), and was only better than the rating of Sub-Saharan Africa of58.9 among the regional groups. The second rating is the institutional investor creditrating  which indicates the probability of a country’s default. Rating below 20 indicateslow integration, above 50 indicates high integration and between 20 and 50 indicatesmedium integration. In 2000, South Asia  had a rating of 26.1, higher than only Sub-Saharan Africa with rating of 18.7. Among the South Asian countries, the ratings rangedfrom 18.8 (Pakistan) to 45.3 (India).The third aspect of economic integration is the labour migration. Owing topaucity of data, this aspect is proxied by the worker’s remittances flowing in the SouthAsian region.  The worker’s remittances as ratios to exports of goods and services and  toGDP for five South Asian countries viz., Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and SriLanka, is compared with Philippines which is known for her large share of migrants inthe labour force. During 1991 to 1998, the average ratios to export ranged from 5.4percent (Nepal) to 31.0 percent (Bangladesh), and to GDP they ranged from 1.3 percent13MigrationIndia, and among the major regions were higher than Sub-Saharan Africa only.or its stock as a ratio to GDP, were the lowest of all the regions.significantly lower than the average of all the other regions.(Nepal) to 5.9 percent (Sri Lanka). Even Nepal, with the least in both the ratios, stood farhigher than Philippines. One must, however, take note of the special arrangementbetween India and Nepal on the movement of labour from the latter to the former. Mostof the remittances with the possible exception of Nepal appear to be from the Gulf andSouth-East Asia, indicating a weak intra-regional remittance flows in South Asia.However, the data on worker’s remittances needs to be interpreted with some caution asit may not fully capture According to International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) publication on ExchangeArrangements and Exchange Restrictions (2000) Bangladesh and Maldives peg theircurrencies to a trade-weighted basket of currencies. In Maldives, however, the currencyhas remained stable vis-à- vis   US dollar since October 1994. Pakistan pegs its currencyto the US dollar. On the other hand, Sri Lanka follows a system of crawling peg againstthe US dollar within a band of 2.0 percent.  In respect of India, however, exchange rate isdetermined by demand and supply conditions in the market. The currencies of Nepal andIt is useful to analyse the movement in the quarterly average exchange rates perUS dollar of these countries during 1991 to 2000. The movements in the exchange ratesare similar to a large extent, except perhaps Maldives that follows a relatively fixed rateto US dollar (Graph). The correlation coefficients between the quarterly averageexchange rate per US dollar of Indian Rupee and the corresponding exchange rates ofother six South Asian countries for the period is estimated to range from 0.95(Bangladesh) to 1.0 (Bhutan and Nepal), barring 0.79 with Maldives (See Table-1). Inother words, the movements in the exchange rates of South Asian countries vis-à-vis USGraph : Quarterly Average Exchange Rates of SAARC Countries (per US Dollar)90807060504030201001991Q1 1992Q1 1993Q1 1994Q1 1995Q1 1996Q1 1997Q1 1998Q1 1999Q1 2000Q11991.Q1  to 2000.Q4BANGLADESH BHUTAN INDIA MALDIVESNEPAL PAKISTAN SRI LANKACurrencies per US Dollar14dollar are noticeably similar.Bhutan are pegged to the Indian Rupee.Exchange Rate Arrangements and Movementsintra-regional flows.In terms of current account, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lankahave adopted Article VIII of the IMF while Bhutan and Maldives are still classified underArticle XIV. Basically, a member country embracing Article VIII undertakes to avoidrestrictions on current payments and discriminatory currency practices. Article XIVfacilitates countries to avail of transitional arrangements that permit them to imposerestrictions on the current account. Bangladesh and Bhutan, however, still have someAs regards receipts from exports as well as invisible transactions, Bangladesh,Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan have repatriation requirements (which refers toobligation of exporters to bring back into the country export proceeds) while onlyBangladesh, Bhutan and India of these countries have imposed surrender requirements(refers to regulation requiring recipient of repatriated export proceeds to sell the foreignexchange proceeds to central bank or commercial bank or  Dealers as the casemay be).The IMF publication also defines capital transactions as capital and money marketinstruments, derivatives and other instruments, credit operations, direct investment,personal capital movements, transactions specific to commercial banks and other creditinstitutions, and transactions specific to institutional investors. According to the IMF, allthe South Asian countries have controls on the above categories  in some form or theother.Thus, it may be observed from the above analysis that South Asia as a region isone of the least   in the world in terms of trade and  financial integration.  Theintra-regional integration is also very weak. In terms of worker’s remittances, thesubstitute measure for labour migration, it is indicated that the region is perhaps wellintegrated to the global economy.  Here too, the intra-regional integration appears to beIn trade, however, smaller economies (Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal and Sri Lanka)are globally much more integrated than the larger economies. In fact, South Asia’s lowlevel of trade integration is a reflection of India’s relatively lower dependence on tradeflows. With regard to financial integration ,  Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka areglobally more integrated as the FDI inflows in these three countries form quite asignificant proportion of their economies, though in volume terms India is the largest.All the South Asian countries are characterised by large inflow of worker’s remittancesrelative to the size of their economy. Though this remittance relative to exports is thehighest in Bangladesh, in terms of GDP, it is most significant in Sri Lanka. Thus, by allthe three aspects of economic integration, Sri Lanka, and perhaps Maldives as all theinformation available for this country indicate, are the most globalised South Asiancountries. In the rest, some or most of the critical aspects of economic integration are not15strong enough.lacking.globalisedOverall  AssessmentAuthorisedbilateral payments arrangements.Current and Capital Account ConvertibilityThe World Bank has projected the growth in regional per capita GDP during2000-10.  The projections indicate that while growth in per capita GDP of South Asia isexpected to be higher than all the regions except East Asia and Pacific, and EasternEurope and CIS, the low base of South Asia ensures that the difference in per capita GDPin US dollar terms will widen in comparison with all the regions, except sub-SaharanAfrica.  South Asia’s per capita GDP would continue to be about one-tenth of the worldaverage and about one-third of the average of Low and Middle Income group countrieseven at the end of this decade (Table 2).  Briefly stated, South Asia will have to performfar better than what the world  currently expects if it has to make a significant dent onlarge scale poverty prevalent in the region and try to catch up with the rest of the world.The forces of globalisation provide both opportunities and challenges which have to beSouth Asia has improved from being slowest growing till three decades ago toone of the fastest growing economies and there is evidence of noticeable reduction inincidence of poverty too.  By and large, the region has displayed economic stability andno serious crisis visited the region during the turbulent nineties.  In this sense, theglobalisation pressures seem to have been met satisfactorily by the region.  Yet, to facegrowing global competition, the major policy issues in most parts of the region relate toimprovements in physical infrastructure especially in the area of transport andcommunications; social infrastructure in the area of education and health; andinstitutional infrastructure.  All these are pre-requisites to improve the capacity of peopleto connect with others productively and public policy has to focus on these aspects.  Thestandards of public administration and economic creativity should help the process whilefiscal management appears to constrain the process.  These issues are almost entirelywithin the ambit of national policy and need to be addressed as such keeping in view thefact that trade integration is growing but is still in many parts low and capital flows asThe region is characterised by large diversity in terms of saving and investmentcapacity, dependence on external trade, inflow of capital and social infrastructure.Common factors are the high growth in recent years, growing external trade, reasonablerate of inflation and high fiscal deficit.  Hence, public policies need to assess bothcommon features and unique features of each country to continue and intensify theTrade integration shows a remarkable diversity, reflecting inter alia , the varyingsize and degree of openness of different countries, but the region as a whole is one of theleast globalised in terms of trade integration.  Intra-regional trade has also beenSimilarly, there is a large diversity in regard to financial integration but the regionas a whole is still one of the least integrated in financial terms.  No doubt, one couldjustifiably attribute some degree of macroeconomic stability of the region to this lowThe maximum economic integration with the rest of the world in respect of SouthAsia is in terms of movement of people, i.e., workers remittances which is a substitute16level of financial integration.conspicuous by its relatively low level.minimising the risks. process of benefiting from global trends while well as external debt, by and large, are sustainable.significantly managed by public policy.Issuesmeasure for labour migration.  Undoubtedly this mode of global integration has benefitedthe region and its people. By all accounts, the potential for greater benefits through thismode exists.Finally, an interesting fe ature observed relates to movements in foreign exchangerates of the national currencies of the region.  Except Maldives, the movement in theexchange rates of all the countries in South Asia seems to be synchronized to a largeextent.  This is an important pointer to the need for further study and policy coordinationin South Asia in the context of globalisation.  For a central banker, this is an importantarea for exploring the depth and dimensions of economic integration among economies ofTo conclude, globalisation is a complex phenomenon and a process that canperhaps be managed by public policies.  In managing the process, developing countriesface challenges from a world order that is particularly burdensome on them.  Yet, asmany other developing countries demonstrated, it is possible for public policy to managethe process with a view to maximising benefits to its citizens while minimising risks.The nature of optimal integration, however, is highly country specific and contextual.  Onbalance, there appears to be greater advantage in well managed and appropriateintegration into the global process, which would imply more effective interventions bygovernments.  In fact, markets do not and cannot exist in a vacuum, i.e., without externally imposed rules and such order is a product of public policy.  The challenges ofglobalisation, particularly for poorer countries like South Asia are in essence at nationale poor, the vulnerable and the underprivileged will continue to be theresponsibility of national governments and hence of public policy. Unfortunately,globalisation does not appear to strengthen national governments in discharging thisworthy cause.  Yet, sound public policies at the national level in South Asia are verycritical in the current context of levels of development, extent of globalisation, anddegree of regional integration. There is a potential for benefit for all concerned, if theglobal challenges are met primarily at national level without losing sight of benefits ofThank you.* B.P. Koirala India-Nepal Foundation lecture delivered by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, DeputyGovernor, Reserve Bank of India on May 19, 2001 at Kathmandu, Nepal. Dr. Reddy isthankful to Jeevan   for his assistance.17Khundrakpam Shri bilateral as well as regional cooperation among the countries in South Asia.Thlevel, at the level of sound public policies by governments.someConclusionSouth Asia.
