Banking in Future : Flexibility, Autonomyand Regulatory Refocus*At the outset, I am thankful to the Institute for giving me an opportunity to be hereprepared valedictory address; and I deliberately decided not to have one, so that I can sharewith you my perception of what happened in this Conference and incidentally make a fewnot a Machiavellian comment where “gratitude is only hope of benefits to come”. It is aThe background papers have been excellent, and they really provide an overview ofFor convenience, in this valedictory address, I will go session by session. Mr. Bhide, in hisbroad overview, referred to the Bhagwad Geeta and how Arjuna was confused and soughtKrishna’s advice. Perhaps Krishna is the most ancient consultant that we have. He neverfought a war, but he always advised. In fact, he offered his advice to both the parties and assome say, even managed to see that they quarrel. Anyway, certainly, the type of problemsthat we have, are complicated, and it does require substantial input of expertise andinternational experience to solve them. From the Reserve Bank of India, we are also in asimilar search as Arjuna, and I can almost visualise that Arjuna who fought the war musthave known how difficult it is to operationalise an advice. That there could be problems inactual implementation was evident from the response of the Chairmen present here, toDr. Ganti Subrahmanyam noted that this conference is being held after 10 years. As you areaware, substantial reform has occurred in the financial sector in the last 9 to 10 years.Obviously we have had to undertake a lot of day to day fire-fighting as we moved ahead inDr. Jalan, in his inaugural address, put forward three important issues. Firstly, he said thatbanks are one part of the financial sector and, therein lies a hint of the hard days ahead forbanks. He hinted that financial stability requires multiple financial intermediaries and notmerely banks. He also indicated that the development of financial markets is an extremelyimportant element and that the focus on development of debt markets will continue. Thisimplies that many of the corporates who approach banks now for loans, may directly go tothe debt market more than ever before. Consequently, banks will have to contend with non-banks as well as developments in financial markets, apart from competition among banksThe second message, which Dr. Jalan gave, is that the supervisory/regulatory aspects are nolonger matters of domestic interest alone since they are now evaluated internationally. Thismeans that our supervisory and regulatory standards will have to get aligned to globalstandards. This again is not a very soft message from the Governor to the banking1community.themselves.carefully.the reform process. Perhaps now, it is about time we really looked at the reform process morevarious ideas.Inaugural Sessionboth the theory and practice, as of today.pretty straightforward and genuine comment.here. But, by and large, the press has been fair and, I, therefore, continue to trust them. This iscomments. This is a somewhat risky path for a central banker, especially with the press beingand share the experiences and be a witness to the variety of sentiments and ideas. There is noThe third message, which was more in the nature of a clarification, was that this new realitywould require banks to pay enormous attention to their internal management. And in internalresources. Thus, as it became evident in the discussion here with the Chairmen also, the cruxof the problem and indeed the crux of the solution, boils down to human resources coupledBasically my submission is that, in the Governor’s statement, behind his very pleasant,smiling and affectionate appearance, you could see that there are three hard messages whichIn the first session, the eminent scientist, Dr. Vijay Bhatkar talked about the impact ofdigitalisation. Normally, we have to have three sets of action plans; immediate or short term,five years, and long term perspective planning meant 10-15 years. But after listening to Dr.Bhatkar, the feeling is that short-term is one year or less, medium term is one-and-half yearsThe other critical point in the session that Mr. Narayana Murthy of INFOSYS made is thattechnology people in India, are already prepared for the change. He made a point that“hardware, yes; software, yes; we are available for both; we are already supplying these tothe rest of the world”. All it means is that our financial sector should learn how to use it, anduse it sooner than later for its own survival. Another important point that came out was thatthe technology is not anti-poor. Technology is at best neutral and more probably pro-poor.Mr. Narayana Murthy has said, is that we in the RBI are getting ready with technology and,we are already going ahead with computerisation of Public Debt Office. In about 18 months,we will be ready with a Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS). Thus, the central bankis providing whatever technological infrastructure is required, particularly in terms ofexternalities for banks, and so the ball will squarely be in the court of the commercialIn the second session, Dr. Sushil Chandra, a management expert, made an excellentpresentation. Among the most important points he made are, that trade unions are lessaggressive now and that changes should be consensus oriented. In my view, consensus willwhere we want to go and second, those who are involved have reasonable symmetry in theirnegotiating strengths. So if there is an asymmetry and one party has no stake in consensus,and, in fact, has a stake in status quo than in change, then it is very difficult to achieve aconsensus. A situation may, therefore, have to be created where every party crucial forconsensus suffers losses if consensus is not arrived at. Two, in this context, it becomesnecessary to address some of the basic issues, basic building blocks of an environment,2whether they are legal or attitudinal, that would facilitate consensus building.be productive under two conditions. One, when we share a common perception with regard toHuman Resourcesbanking sector.guise of assisting the poor. From the Reserve Bank of India, what I would like to add to whathave to be a lot more oriented to customer needs and not just paternalistic in behaviour, in theThough unsaid, what came out from Mr. Murthy’s exposition is that, the banks in future maytime to change is the major message that we should take from the discussions in the session.the way things have happened, and the speed with which change is occurring, compression ofand long-term is two to two-and-a-half years. And this is not said in a flippant sense, becausemedium term and long term. Traditionally for us, short term meant one year, medium term atTechnologyought to be noted by the banking community.with technology.management, he did recognise that an important input that banks really have is that of humanthe conduct of the Government will play an important part in these changes. Second, andmore important, the type of signals that are required to build a consensus with the tradeunions will arise out of public policy in general and public policy not necessarily restrictedonly to banks. In this context, how the public policy aligns itself towards efficiency andincentive/disincentive measures becomes relevant. There is a need for a clear signal fromin banking, especially restricted to a few banks, in an isolated manner may limit or evenA reference was also made by Dr. Sushil Chandra to work practices. Once we accept thework force that they should simply “go home”. I strongly believe that the quality of humanwhich is so highly involved in retail banking and which has such high quality manpower asthe Indian public sector banks. In a way, the tragedy is that the work atmosphere especiallywork-practices, have not been very conducive to efficiency. Between reduction in manpowerand expansion of business, the latter is a better option; and banks have to create anenvironment in which they will be able to ensure expansion of business through moreredeployment, more training and better incentives. If labour force is given, there is animperative need to find business to afford their wages, and so public sector banks may haveto diversify, namely, sell insurance policy, or sell private mutual fund certificates or do anypermissible non-fund based business. Since banks have the manpower, they have to learn totreat it as a resource and, ensure that it pays for itself. The whole issue again reverts to workpractices and unless restrictive practices are addressed to impart flexibility to enable rapidThe flexibility and autonomy for each bank to find unique solutions is important, becauseis developing fast, and in fact, this could be an extremely important strength for the Calcuttabased banks. These banks have both the manpower and the branch network. In fact, there arevery few organisations in the country which have the reach or the presence in rural India andIn the third session on rural banking, several important issues came up. One, that ruralbanking is actually more than credit to agriculture; second, there was a consensus that theIn my view, it may not be appropriate to state that directed lending in terms of a particularsector or in terms of a particular area would necessarily be harmful to the banking sector.There are many countries and there are many systems where directed lending is found to bepossible and useful. But here, perhaps we are doing what we cannot afford to, which is, tosubsidise on a large scale. Further, we cannot afford to separate the origination, assessmentand recovery aspects since these are integrated functions of a banker and need to be fullyexercised by bankers even in directed lending. One could readily agree with the unanimous3by and large, has not been effective in its present form.approach to subsidy to weaker sections has been expensive; and third, priority sector lending,Rural-bankingautonomy that is required in managing the banks and in managing the change.agriculture comparable to public sector banks. So one goes back to the issue of flexibility andare opportunities for increased deposit mobilisation activities in East India, where agriculturethere is no “fixed solution” for all institutions and all problems. For instance, I hear that thereexpansion of business through diversification, there may be a threat of decay.resource is very high in public sector banks. There is hardly any banking system in the world,work force as “given” in Indian conditions, I do not see a very practical way of telling a largejeopardise the extent to which we can move forward in the future.we will be in a position to fix things in an isolated manner for too long. In a way fixing thingspublic policy and we have to actively seek such an appropriate policy. We must not hope thatIn this regard, there are some broader public policy aspects. One is that as a dominant owner,demand in this Conference to make the priority sector lending more sustainable, moreBut, in addition I would like to reiterate the point I made recently in my lecture on Future ofRural Banking. Banks have great advantage in delivering or handling financial services andso in future we do not necessarily look at somehow delivering credit to a rural area but reallylook at providing financial services to a rural area. This could be big business for banks;business, in which banks have comparative advantage, and business that will make publicsector banking sustainable, since many rural areas are ready for it. It is quite possible that, insome areas, banks may have to reach through NBFCs and reach input suppliers who givecredit for commercial agriculture and also output purchasers financing commercialagriculture. There are also districts which are prosperous and where the agricultural labourmay require consumption credit for four months when it gets into a seasonal unemploymentsituation. There is no reason why banks should not provide such credit to creditworthyvillages are growing into semi-urban centres. Many studies have shown that the semi-urbanareas are full of commercial potential. One has to recognise the increasing rural-urbancontinuum rather than persist with the old rural-urban divide and accordingly reorient theOn the next theme of regulation and supervision, my colleague, Mr. Muniappan hadapparently very frank discussions. I would like to comment briefly on the issue of size anddiversification. The worldwide trends are clearly towards large size but overall, it isextremely contextual, especially in our country. It really depends on how a bank is able totransform the advantage or disadvantage of size. In an economy which is aiming a 7 percentgrowth rate in GDP, there is enough room and enough maneuverability for all institutionsincluding banking institutions to reposition themselves. So again, it goes back to the issue ofthe type of flexibility and autonomy that is accorded to the various players in the financialsystem including the banks, not only in operation but also in structural or organisationalIn the session on Corporate Governance, Dr. Y.R.K. Reddy, an invited expert covered aThere is only one basic issue I would refer to : Is there a separate pattern of corporatethere should be a separate corporate governance approach according to types of financialinstitutions or merely adaptation of general principles to specific types would suffice. Nodoubt, the Bank for International Settlement has recently come out with a paper on corporateIn my view, however, there is a more serious issue, and that is, whether the existing legalinstitutional framework in respect of our public sector banks is consistent with the acceptedgenuinely board-run-companies so that the corporate governance related to the constitutionand conduct of the board. The alignment of the existing institutional and legal structures andpractices with good corporate governance, especially in the public sector, should really be an4area of attention. This may warrant radical legislative changes.principles of good corporate governance. Mr. Narasimham wanted that public sector banks begovernance in banks.governance for banks compared to non-banks in the financial sector? One is not sure whethernumber of very important issues in the backdrop of both international and Indian experiences.Corporate Governancetransformation.Regulation and Supervisionwhole banking strategy.agricultural labour if it can be done to credit card holders. With agricultural prosperity, manyMr. Guptaji, my predecessor, eloquently presented.responsive, more efficient and more cost effective. That's the message we got and that is whatinto the future. Unlike Thailand or Korea, our bank restructuring will be a lot moredomestically led and the enabling environment will have to be created by the Governmentand the RBI. In the presentation on bank restructuring in India in terms of tables and graphs,one finds both banks and financial institutions participating together. In other words, whenwe talk of restructuring in the banking system, perhaps it is necessary to focus onrestructuring in the financial sector and the financial system as a whole and not look at thebanking industry alone internally. Almost all the illustrations, which have been presented,except the two cases of mergers, have such a mix and in future perhaps the coverage wouldvery openly and one more not so openly. One, there was virtual unanimity on the need forflexibility in dealing with the staff, in dealing with issues, in dealing with operationalprocedures such as signing of drafts, etc. The second theme was on the need for autonomy,especially in areas such as recruitment of personnel. The most critical issue obviously is toensure the necessary operational flexibility and autonomy, which are imperative if banks areto be in a position to face the future confidently. More importantly, the implied suggestionwas that in a very broad sense, both, the Government and the RBI as regulators, shouldattempt some sort of regulatory refocusing in the direction of greater flexibility andI will conclude by commenting a little more on these three aspects, namely, flexibility,autonomy and regulatory refocus. As you have discussed, be it the use of IT or HR, bankmanagements require flexibility. The more one listens to the various discussions, the moreSecond, is the autonomy; and, one question here is how does a business executive operatewith a small degree of autonomy and compete with others in the non-public sector. This isboard-run companies. The other question, and a more important one, relates to autonomy tocooperatives, RRBs and local players results in avoidable duplication. In my view, thesechanges should be allowed to evolve rather than prescribed from a centralised governmentalor RBI decisions. From being instruments of planning, if we have to transform them intobusiness entities, necessary maneuverability with regard to the ownership and theaccountability will have to be allowed. In this framework, the rehabilitation or restructuringshould evolve with initiatives at the Board level and not done with a preconceived notion bythe bureaucracy. It needs to be recognised that there are basic structural impediments inpublic sector banks and RRBs in exercising flexibility and autonomy in bringing aboutrehabilitation or restructuring. And these impediments will have to be sooner or later5removed.For instance, there was a hint in the discussion that in rural areas, existence of bank branches,ensure some organisational transformations.operational autonomy, which could be accorded by making the public sector banks genuinelyone is convinced that most of the suggestions fall under the category of flexibility.Concluding Remarksautonomy.During the session, discussion of the Chairmen of banks, two major points or themes came upChairmen’s Sessioninclude insurance sector also to which a reference was indeed made.This morning we had a very interesting session with Mr. Leo Puri, who gave us a sort of peepRestructuringfrom time to time, the direction of regulation in that its basic long term purpose is only toprotect depositors interest and ward-off systemic threats; though in the interest ofdevelopment, the RBI has accepted responsibility for provision of necessary infrastructure inthe financial sector, both technological and institutional. As Governor Jalan mentioned, theWe welcome specific suggestions indicating that a particular framework of regulation isIn the context of the future of the financial system, several issues have been raised in thedocument on universal banking, which had been circulated to you. These relate to ownershipand clear demarcation of regulation vis-à-vis ownership. A view on these will have to betaken soon without which possibly further progress in restructuring of the financial systemThere has been a demand that there is a need to revisit policies such as the priority sectorlending. Given the objectives, say of priority sector, the issue is with regard to theinstruments that we have been using so far and the achievements. It is quite possible that theachievements did not entirely correspond with what were intended. Since the totalsocioeconomic and financial environment has changed while the objectives of priority sectorhave not changed thorough re-examination of policies relating to priority sector lendingwould be worthwhile. Earlier, the deposit mobilisation function was virtually a monopoly ofbanks, while allocation of resources was through an administered regime. Today the banksare being asked to evaluate risk and price their product. It means that the allocation functionhas been shifted from the government to the banks. Now we have to see how we can createan environment, which will give incentive for banks to maximise the allocative efficiencywhile ensuring that some of the social objectives continue to be served. This is a complexarea and it will be better for people who are in the field to suggest an operationally feasibleframework to us. That is what Mr. Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor was hinting at when hesought your views on subsidy. On all these aspects, some more concrete thinking isbe met, that there is a new paradigm and that, it is necessary to redesign the instruments toBefore concluding, I would like to mention an aspect relating to privatisation of the publicsector banks. I will only repeat what I had said in another gathering last year. The idea thatprivatize and then the whole world is happy”, is somewhat simplistic, because the health ofthe banking system is critical for both macro-economic and fiscal stability. If the bankingsystem, public or private is unhealthy and weak, the hit is on the fisc since the bail out has tobe publicly funded. We have seen it in East Asia, we have seen it in many other countries,and, therefore, the contention that merely shifting of the ownership from the public sector tothe private sector will immunize the possible impact on the fisc is not correct. Irrespective ofthe ownership, public authorities and the society at large have a stake in ensuring that wehave a very healthy financial system and in particular banking system. As Governor Jalanmentioned, banking system collects non-collaterilized deposits, is highly leveraged and isPerhaps I have made all this sound more complicated than necessary, but thank you very6much for your patient hearing.very critical for payment systems.“there is a possible fiscal demand on the government to recapitalise banks and, therefore, youmeet such objectives in a changed situation.necessary, and in any case it is necessary to accept that there are some objectives which mustwill be rather difficult.justifiable or another one is not justifiable.Regulatory Review Authority is reviewing on a “zero regulation” basis like “zero budgeting”.I will now move on quickly to the regulatory refocus issue. We have, from the RBI, indicatedof Banks at NIBM, Pune, on January 7, 2000. He is thankful to Ms Alpana Killawala and Dr. A. Prasad for*7editing the transcript meticulously. Valedictory Address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Conference of Chairmen
