Mr. Chairman , Mr.  and friends.I am happy to be here among bank economists to deliver the customary valedictoryaddress of the Bank Economists Conference.  I find that the subject chosen for this year is verybroad and relates to the whole of the banking sector.  I carefully read the papers presented at theConference and I find the coverage to be comprehensive and analysis insightful as usual.  Thecurrent year's Conference also had the benefit of special presentations by eminent persons,which added to the breadth of understanding.  Governor Dr. Bimal Jalan in his inauguraladdress gave an outstanding overview of the problems and prospects and highlighted the role ofbank economists.  In this background, I am not sure whether there would be much that I can addby way of value to the deliberations.  Hence, I will briefly respond to the rapporteur’s reports oftechnical sessions and then speak on  "central banking in the new Millennium".  I am aware thatthe commercial banks preceded central banks in the world.  In fact, commercial banking has ahoary past in India while central banking, as we know now is essentially a product of 20thcentury.  Yet, central banks are playing an important role in the economies and a discussionabout banking now may be complete in all respects if the subject of central banking is alsocovered.Bank Research in India:Dr. Chakravarthi in his presentation displayed both his scholarship and conviction inanalysing the role of bank research in the new millennium.  In particular, the call forsynchronizing bank research with corporate goals is note worthy.  The research on businessprospects of clients, particularly large corporate clients with reference to sensitivity to industryrisks is also important.  Above all, the importance of managing change and approaches toFrom the point of view of the Reserve Bank of India, there are three aspects of researchFirst, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is reviewing the research programme of its ownresearch departments.  Reserve Bank has sought inputs from its operating departments tothat need to be noted by this gathering.managing change have been very well articulated.Narang KohliBanking in the New Millennium* Central suggest areas for research.  Effort is being made to attain greater interaction between researchand operating departments, particularly in ensuring inputs from research to operatingSecondly, we are also reviewing the working of financial support of Reserve Bank ofIndia to the research programmes including the financing of the endowment chairs.  Theintention is to ensure fee-based approach instead of cost based approach and the feasibility ofcapital grant rather than incurring of recurring liabilities.  Furthermore, greater academicfreedom is sought to be ensured while effective contribution to the research efforts of theReserve Bank is necessary.  The concept of Memorandum of Understanding and time boundsupport is yet another possible alternative.  The Reserve Bank has sought advice from selectexperts on the issues of financial support from Reserve Bank of India to research and training.A letter has been addressed to select eminent academics on January 8, 2001 and response isThirdly, there has been inadequate interaction or linkage between commercial bankeconomists and professionals of the economic and statistical departments of Reserve Bank.  TheReserve Bank would welcome suggestions from the economists assembled here so that thereBanking Operations:Dr. Shetty has summed up the complex issues covered in the deliberations on bankingoperations with his characteristic clarity and analytical rigor.   A number of issues on a verywide range of subjects have been covered, and most of them are of contemporary significance.In this address, the response will be confined only to those issues that are relevant to monetaryFirst, a suggestion has been made that the Cash Reserve Ratio should be reduced to 3per cent.  As already mentioned on previous occasions, the Reserve Bank is committed to areduction in the reserve ratios.  But, the pace of reduction depends on the progress in fiscaladjustment and development of financial markets.  The developments in international marketswould also be relevant.  In fact, Reserve Bank has proposed amendment to the existinglegislation which prescribes the minimum ratio of 3 per cent so that Cash Reserve Ratio can bereduced even below that level.  Consequent upon Finance Minister's assurances in the lastBudget to accord greater flexibility to the Reserve Bank of India, we have proposed2awaited.and credit policies.can be greater interaction for mutual benefit.departments and obtaining feedback from the latter on the relevance of the research findings.amendments to remove the statutory prescription of a Cash Reserve Ratio of 3 per cent andStatutory Liquidity Ratio of 25 per cent.  This would give the Reserve Bank necessarymaneuverability and flexibility to change the ratios.  Significant reductions in reserve ratiosfrom the present levels would also be necessary to speed up the process of movement towardsuniversal banking.  The real issue, therefore, is not one of commitment of Reserve Bank, butone of objective conditions that would facilitate such reductions in the reserve ratios as soon asSecond, there is a reference in the presentation to the open market operations and theBank Rate.  It may be appreciated that with the introduction of liquidity adjustment facility(LAF), the role of Bank Rate changes.  Once the medium term objective of eliminatingrefinance by the Reserve Bank is achieved, it would lead to greater reliance on open marketoperations including the LAF.  This would take the Reserve Bank further towards the objectiveThird, the presentation has suggested that tightening of prudential regulations should be"slow" so that the banking system is in a position to cope up and comply.  The Reserve Bankwould prefer the prudential regulations to be introduced at an appropriate pace in order to reachthe objective of meeting the financial standards as soon as feasible and not at a slow pace.  It isalso recognized that the prudential regulations have a tendency to be pro-cyclical as mentionedin my Valedictory address in the previous Bank Economists Conference at Bangalore.  Hence,the timing and the extent of progress in tightening would take into account the cyclical factorsin the economy.  Further, adequate notice has been and will continue to be given to the marketparticipants to enable them to be fully prepared to meet the changing prescriptions in regard toprudential regulations. Finally, there is a very intense consultation process in detailing theapplication of prudential regulations.  This is also undertaken with a view to facilitating theThere are three more observations that need to be made to this gathering in the overallcontext of the banking operations in the new millennium.  First, a number of suggestions havebeen made to improve the borrowers' accountability in the banking operations.  There is,however, little or no mention by way of lenders' liability that has been spelt out in variousdiscussions.  It has been argued by several borrowers’ associations that honest borrowers do notget adequate notice or details of various monetary demands on them.  It has also been argued3market participants to effectively meet international standards.of greater reliance on indirect instruments of monetary policy.possible.that business values have not been adequately appreciated in the banking operations.  Thus, thesuggestion made by Dr. Mitra of National Institute of Law for a legislation prescribing lenders'Secondly, while some suggestions have been made in the discussions relating to DebtRecovery Tribunals, institution-specific recovery position may not be useful in the longer run asfinancial markets develop, a variety of institutions participate in them and corporates takerecourse to multiple sources of funding.  It is essential to have comprehensive bankruptcy lawsand procedures. An Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Procedures in India in the Context ofInternational Sandards has already given its views, which have been put on the RBI Comments are most welcome on the subject.Thirdly, Reserve Bank has been seeking an interactive mode from the bankingcommunity in regard to evolving systems, procedures and standards. For instance, Bank forInternational Settlements (BIS) has issued new prudential guidelines a couple of days ago.Reserve Bank has been involved in evolving these standards and the opinion of the bankingcommunity in India has been sought on the subject.  Similarly, BIS had recently brought out adraft document on Role of External Auditors in Regulation of Financial Sector.  More recently,BIS has also forwarded a report on Payments Systems, while Reserve Bank on its website hasput up reports of its own advisory groups on Payments Systems and on Banking. There is needfor the Bank economists to respond with their suggestions whenever such consultationadvices.The future vision strategies for better banking have been brought out in an outstandingfashion by Dr.  Jain.  There are, however, some areas on which special focus would beadvisable.  These are - how will the banks be positioned in the future vis-à-vis non-banks? Inwhat way should the banks change their scope and operations in order to survive?  In otherwords, what should be the type of mutation for survival in the fast changing evolution of thefinancial sector?  Finally, what would be the type of considerations that determine the relativeemphasis between domestic and global presence for Indian banks?  The Committee on FinancialSystem (Chairman Shri.M.Narasimham) in its Report some years ago had touched on thesubject and indicated the need for regional, national and international banks in the Indian4banking system.JayantilalStrategies for Better Bankingdocuments are put up and RBI would welcome and value their website.liability is worth exploring.The Chairman Mr. Kohli had referred to two important aspects, namely, the role ofinvestments and the importance of long term paper in the bond market.  The Reserve Bank hasalready recognized the importance of investment in the operations of commercial banks and istrying to ensure that the valuation and regulatory regime are appropriate.  RBI is addressingthese issues comprehensively to include investments in Union Government Securities, StateGovernment Securities, Government guaranteed bonds, corporate bonds etc. As regards theintroduction of long term paper, recent operations in the Government securities market, clearlyshow the distinct preference for elongation of maturity of government securities, but the searchAs mentioned in the beginning of this address, compared to commercial banks, centralbanking is a later phenomenon and is in fact essentially a 20th century phenomenon, thoughBank of England can trace its origin back to over 300 years, while Bank of France over 200years.  In 1900, there were only 18 central banks whereas now there are 172.  No doubt, theLeague of Nations in the inter-war period encouraged the establishment of central banks.  By60s and 70s, however, central banks became national symbols like national airlines and evolvedIn our country, the debate on central banking is considered to be one of the oldest in theworld traceable to Sir James Steuart in 18th century.  Lord Keynes was involved in therecommendations relating to central banking in India, which ultimately led in the establishmentof Imperial Bank/State Bank of India.   RBI itself took a long time to come to fruition andContrary to popular impression, not all central banks were publicly owned.  Both Bankof England and Reserve Bank of India were originally privately owned banks and both werenationalized in the late 1940s.In fact, in terms of ownership, scope, nature of functioning and their importance, centralbanking has been changing from time to time.  Though there have been advocates of freebanking such as , and some others who felt that there was no need for a central bank butexpected a continued existence for central banks such as Milton Friedman, the fact remains that5Hayekperhaps the longest incubation period for any central bank in the world!at the rate of one and only one per country.Central Bankingfor optimal maturity is still continuing.Chairman’s Commentsthe central banks continued to grow in importance in most parts of the world in the latter half ofBy now, the central banks are considered as bastions of professionalism and centres ofstability in macro-economic policy.  They have projected a tradition of avoiding partisanshipwith the ability to command public support.Of course, there are detractors of central banks.  A former Prime Minister of a centralEuropean country quipped  "when prices rise, governments are blamed; when prices are stableBy and large, there is a consensus that a central banker's dream is growth withoutBut quite often a question is asked : who is a central banker? It has been remarked in asomewhat semi-serious fashion, that the central banker is “neither a fish nor fowl; neitherIndia has been no exception in terms of recognizing the importance of central banks as alsothe criticality of price stability as one of the basic objectives of the functioning of central banks.The credibility and reputation of RBI in public arena, intellectual circles, financial markets, andmultinational institutions are admittedly high.  Therefore, any discussion about the future ofbanking in the new millennium will be incomplete without a discussion on the future of central      Information Technology (IT) has certainly introduced significant structural changes inall economies though in varying degrees.  Information Technology affects productivity indifferent sectors very rapidly and influences price levels also.  It becomes very difficult forcentral banks to capture these rapid developments in terms of data.  There is also increased6Wiluncertainty.  In this situation, the conduct of monetary policy becomes more complex.What Happens to Central Banks in New Economy?l there be central banks at all in future?How central will a central bank be?How national will a central bank be?How much of banking will central banks deal with?What happens to central banks in the new economy?A useful way of approaching this issue would be to address five interrelated questions, viz.,banking in general and a specific reference to India.academic nor a banker”.inflation, while the nightmare is inflation without growth.central banks take credit.  How can central banks ever be wrong?"twentieth century, attaining preponderant status since a couple of decades.It is argued that it is possible, just possible, in future, that the new economy canintroduce final settlements on real time basis by private sector without use of central bankmoney, using digital or electronic money. All transactions including those of financial assetscan be "priced" in terms of that  unit of account. This can in a sense easily become internationalthrough internet and if the creditworthiness of participants is verifiable straightaway, the finalsettlement can occur in real time with finality. Money in any form is a unit of account. Inpricing, while relative prices will represent the reciprocal or economic value, the absolute levelof prices will still be influenced by total quantity of money in existence. Asset pricing has anadded dimension of interest rates and inflation rates. Pricing of foreign currencies has one moredimension of cross country interest/inflation rates. Therefore, technology cannot change thebasic functions of money in an exchange economy, viz., unit of account, medium of exchangeAt a more practical level, the question is whether the age of digital money has set in.Digital money is generally defined as the monetary value of government or privately issuedcurrency units stored in electronic form in an electronic device.  Currently, the credit cardsutilising the unit of currency issued by government are used on Internet.  The credit card is,however, inferior to cash in terms of cost, convenience and, most important anonymity.   Thedigital money needs a device on the part of the two counterparties, while in the case of cash, itis the cash itself that is the device and two hands are enough to complete the transactions.  Thus,cash is unaccountable since it freely moves, while the digital money will have to be designed tobe unaccountable. In an accountable system, every transaction between a payee and payer isaccountable to a third party, irrespective of the timing of accountability and a tracing of the twoparties to the transaction.  Non-accountable systems should allow for use of free movement ofvalue, just like physical cash. In discussing the digital money, it is useful to make a distinctionbetween on-line digital money and off-line digital money.  On-line digital money requiressimultaneous verification, while off-line does not.   A distinction is also made between tokenbased money and ledger based money.  Token based systems exchange value through adenominated electronic token, which is in the nature of note or coin consisting of serial numberand denomination of value in electronic form.  Ledger based systems involve a balance ledger7which can be increased or decreased as transactions are made.and a store of value.Technology may be available for digital money and according to Research Study 24 ofWorld Gold Council (Nov.2000) , a beginning is already made by what is known as Payment System, Millicent and Mondex. For wider acceptance it may require an underwriterThere are also issues relating to problems of money laundering and intellectual propertyrights, which complicates the large scale introduction of digital money which would replacecentral bank money. The main problem would be one of widespread access to the devices thatwould enable large-scale use of digital money for a long time to come.   It may also require atrustee to hold the reserves. The IMF and Bank for International Settlements are working onOn the whole, it appears that the digital money off-shoot of Information Technology willmake the tasks of central banks more complex, but is unlikely to totally replace or supplantcentral bank money. In brief, the digital money may be close to free banking but it may be wildMore generally, new economy can impact on the leverage of the central bank.  Centralbanks’ main importance is as a supplier of base money, constituting cash and bank reserves.Cash being the ultimate medium of exchange and commercial settlement, central banks have aleverage hugely disproportionate to their balance sheets.  Even credit cards and smart cardscould operate as money substitutes, but as long as the ultimate settlement is through centralbank money, there may be some erosion, but no serious undermining of the  importance ofIn India, digital money issues and even of money substitutes will have to be address ed indue course.  In any case, complexities in conduct of monetary policy arising out of I.T.economy will have to be addressed simultaneously with immediate challenges related tostructural transformation and reforms in financial sector.Deal With?There are several banking related aspects that a typical central bank deals with currently.As issuer of currency, the central bank's role in future could be made complicated if not8redundant by evolution of money substitute or digital money.It will be useful to review them to explore the possibilities of changes.How Much of Banking will Central Banks central banks.to suggest that it would totally supplant central bank over a period of time.various aspects of digital money.who issues digital money or a digital bearer certificate.PaypalWhether the national currency itself will continue to be as important as it is now, isanother issue, which will be dealt with at greater length a little later.As banker to government, the central bank usually operates more as a legal agent thanactually performing the functions.  To the extent a central bank provides overdrafts, or credit togovernment, it is in a way going beyond the mere commercial banking functions.  The thrust ofreforms has been to distance the commercial banks from the government in terms of providingwhat may be termed as accommodation finance.  In brief, the role of a central bank as a bankerto government may not change and in any case may diminish rather than increase withThe role as a banker to banks is admittedly an important role.  In this regard, there areseveral aspects of the relationship between central bank and a commercial bank viz. the holdingof reserves, provision of liquidity facilities etc.   It is widely recognised that the role of banks infinancial intermediation is becoming less and less important.   To that extent, the role of centralbanks would diminish but the management of overall liquidity in the system may have tocontinue to be critical for the economy and hence the continued significance of central banksAs regards regulation of banks, there are divergent views.  While a case has been madeout that supervisory functions over banks should be removed from a central bank to ensure theindependence of central banks, it is argued that the intimate knowledge that is required of acentral bank to be the lender of last resort is lost.  Thus, it is argued that the central bank'scapacity to ensure financial stability may be undermined if regulation of banks is taken out ofThe critical role of a central bank in payment system is well recognised. The Bank forInternational Settlement has circulated a discussion paper a couple of days ago on the Paymentsand Settlement systems which inter alia focuses on the importance of payments system andneed for coordination between securities regulators and regulators of payments system.Whether payment system should be owned and operated by a central bank is a matter of disputebut that banks are the backbone of payments system and that a central bank has a critical role inIn the area of maintaining price stability, the role of a central bank is undisputed thoughseveral issues continue to remain unresolved viz., whether price stability should be the sole or9a reliable, efficient and safe payments system is undeniable. regulating and ensuring their jurisdiction.  There is no final view that has as yet emerged.and its operations through banks.redefined and somewhat reduced role of government in the economy.one of the objectives; what is appropriate rate/range of inflation; what is a dependable measureof inflation and the role of asset prices; the relative importance of rules and discretion; trade offbetween employment and output; increasing asymmetry between market perceptions ofeconomic fundamentals and that of public authorities, especially central banks; and above allindependence versus accountability of central banks.  What is strikingly new, however, is theincreasing preoccupation of central banks in recent years with maintenance of overall financialglobalisation of financial flows and threat of contagion.On the issue of role of a central bank as manager of public debt, there is an increasingrecognition of the need to contain public debt.  Furthermore, there is a consensus on the need todivest the central bank of such functions to avoid conflict with monetary policy objectives.  Themagnitude of public debt operations relative to the size of economic activity is progressivelycoming down and even if the obsession with regard to reducing the fiscal deficit is contained,the magnitudes of fiscal deficit may not increase in future.  In any case, central bank is unlikelyto continue to be vested with public debt functions in the long run.  Incidentally, it may beworth noting that elimination of fiscal deficit and generation of fiscal surpluses is posing aIn brief, the traditional roles of banker to government, banker to banker, may continuealbeit with less significance while the role of regulator of banks could, in some cases be off.  The preoccupation with prices is the   of a central bank though more emphasismay be warranted in future on growth objectives or anticyclical policies. What is new, in thenew millennium, would certainly be a shift in focus to maintenance of financial stability and acorresponding concern with macro economic management.  A greater attention to globaldimension for a central bank seems to be inevitable, and thus dealings with banking will claimIn the Indian situation, it is clear that banks will continue to play a unique role, as in thecase of many large sized developing economies, and hence the continued role of the ReserveBank.  No doubt, with spread of universal banking, other regulators will also have significantdealings with banks.  Moreover, in its relationship with commercial banks, the major role willhave to be in the context of the payments system.  As a regulator, it is well known that over thelast few years, the supervisory functions over banks have been brought under a separate Boardfor Financial Supervision (BFS), a somewhat independent unit within the aegis of Reserve10proportionately less resources of a central bank.d’être raisonhivedproblem to central banks in regard to availability of instruments for open market operations.stability – in the face of increasing Bank.   In fact, Dr. recognised the principle behind hivingoff.   As expressed by Dr. C.  (1994) in The Future of Central Banking – TheTercentenary Symposium of Bank of England 1694-1994 - “therefore, I feel that theresponsibility of banking supervision being carried on to the central bank might make it moreIt is not clear whether total separation of supervisory functions and its merger with amega-regulator is warranted at this stage but, greater autonomy to supervisory functions vis-à- monetary policy functions is clearly desirable in India also.  As regards the role as a debtmanager to government, there is an overwhelming view in favour of separating out, not in themedium term but in the long run and the necessary enabling legislative amendments have beenproposed by the RBI.The role of the RBI in the development of financial markets, especially overseeingpayments and related settlement systems, regulation of money markets, government securitiesmarkets and forex markets etc. is gaining in importance.  Given the inexorable process ofintegration of financial markets and linkages with global markets, RBI’s attention will beincreasingly towards financial markets and financial stability.  In brief, Reserve Bank’s focus,relative to the past will have to be more on the stability in financial markets/system and pricestability, while emphasising credit delivery for financing growth and somewhat less on bankingper se .How National Will a Central Bank Be?There is currently a widespread respect for independent central banks and a strongconsensus in favour of granting of autonomy to central banks.  Clearly, the independence isfrom government’s influence and case for autonomy is also in a similar context.  However, it isinteresting to observe that with increasing  of financial flows and prospects ofcontagion threatening the financial stability of a country for actions or  of central banksin other countries, there is increasing emphasis on coordination among central banks, inparticular in regard to standards relevant to financial sector such as regulation, accounting andgovernance.  There is an issue that could justifiably be raised in this context.  Is it possible thatcentral banks would become more and more autonomous  other national authorities, butat the same time more and more aligned with international standards?  In other words, as a11vis-a-visinactionsglobalisationoperations visdifficult in my opinion to gain the kind of independence that we are talking”.RangarajanRangarajan who spearheaded the BFS consequence of these developments, are central banks likely to become less national and moreYet another question is : Will there be in future, a national currency for all the countriesthat have one now?  Euro has certainly heralded the era of regional currencies.  There areseveral reasons why regional currencies may become more common. Given the recentexperiences in volatility in exchange rates, there may be greater preference to avoid adverseimpact of such volatility through regional arrangements.  There is also the ease of undertakingof e-commerce in any currency at any time with any counter-party that could add to theattractiveness of a regional currency.  It is useful to recall what Prof. Goodhart (2000) saidMumbai.“A combination of continuing volatility in real exchange rates, combined with a growingease of undertaking e-commerce in any currency at any time with any counter-party, could leadto a growing pressure for the greater use of a regional currency. South America, as well asNorth, may become even more explicitly a dollar area, while Europe and Africa adopt the Euro.Asia presents more of a problem in this respect.  One, super-power temporarily fallen on hardtimes, and two emerging giants, can neither fall in behind a single hegemony, as in theAmericans, nor benefit from a rapprochement, such as achieved by France and Germany.  Thefuture of international monetary policy in Asia banks, looks at least from a distance, particularlyopaque”Of course, one could move into realm of speculation and pose a question : Will Chinaand India follow the example of France and Germany and have a currency, in true Shanti’ or “ Asio”.  Is it conceivable that a large and continental economy like IndiaOften, being truly national is equated with being total ly owned by the nationalgovernment.  It is useful to note that many central banks were not government owned till theywere nationalised about a half a century ago. The  Bank of Canada, the Bank of France andBank of England were nationalised in 1938, 1945 and 1946, respectively while Reserve Bank ofIndia became totally government owned in 1949.  In fact, there are some central banks, whicheven as of today, are not fully owned by the respective national governments.  There are a fewwho have majority or controlling ownership of their respective governments, while there are afew in which there is no ownership stake for the national government.  While in Japan and12 in terms of its national currency? status quo or China would opt for any change in the tradition of ‘buddhistabout this in international or global?Mexico, Government owned 55 per cent and 51 per cent, respectively, in Austria and Belgium itwas just one-half.  In Italy, the central bank is owned by other public companies, in U.S.A. bymember Banks of the Reserve System and in Switzerland, cantons and private shareholders arethe owners.  Though the organisational form could be Joint Stock Company or under a specialstatute, the latter is more prevalent. In almost all the cases, there are special restrictions onpayout.It is possible to argue that in respect of developing countries there is a need for stpresence of public sector and that private ownership ought not to be considered.  However, Dr.Anand Chandavarkar (1996), an eminent economist and a respected former RBI official hasexpressed himself in favour of serious consideration of some diversification of ownership,“A crucial but little discussed element in the professionalism of central banks in developingcountries is the weakness of hands-on market contacts and the tendency to equate expertise toouncritically with academic credentials and analytic skills to the neglect of market-basedjudgmental skills, insights, and on-the-job experience.  The market orientation and marketdiscipline of central banks in developing countries would only be enhanced if they were to bepartially privatized and listed on the stock exchange, an overlooked option which merits seriousHow Central Will a Central Bank Be?There is universal recognition of the central role played by a central bank in theeconomies, and particularly economic policies, though as already mentioned it is a relativelyOn the basis of conventional wisdom, one can say that it would depend on howoperationally independent it is from Government; how proficient it is in forecasting andIn terms of specifics, it would depend on several factors, many of which have been dealt13Thirdly, would a central bank still be a debt manager?Secondly, what happens to the role of a central bank’s currency?First, how much of ‘banking’ will it be involved in?with in this address already.judging; and how credible are its actions.will it last? recent phenomenon.  How long consideration”particularly in developing countries.rongeligibility for ownership and dividend Fourthly, what would be its role in the management of foreign exchange rate? –especially, if there were acceptance of appropriateness of only corner solutions in the context ofFifthly, what would be a central bank’s role in overall macro-economic management,Sixthly, to what extent will it have formal or informal role in advocating andmaintaining overall financial stability?  If it were not to be that of the central bank, which other several additional factors would be relevant to aFirst, what role should a central bank play in nurturing and influencing reform in thefinancial sector in the interests of enhancing efficiency and promoting stability of financialSecond, what would be the developmental role in the context of development ofThird, who takes the responsibility for ensuring credit delivery if it were not the centralbank?  Such credit delivery may have a developmental dimension or cyclical dimension orIt is perhaps obvious that answers will depend upon the country and the evolvingcircumstances, and clearly the centrality of a central bank is unlikely to be common to allTo illustrate it in the Indian context, the current focus of the central bank ondevelopment and regulation of financial markets would not have been envisaged a decade ago.Exchange control has yielded place to exchange management.  Initiatives have been taken bythe Reserve Bank to establish a Clearing Corporation in the context of infrastructure for markets, money markets and government securities market.  Regulation and supervision of notonly banks but non-bank financial companies and financial institutions have become majorThe change that has recently occurred in Reserve Bank’s operational orientationmentioned above is reflective of fundamental changes in policy, especially in monetary andcredit policy, involving a movement away from direct instruments and administered interest14preoccupations of the central bank.forexcountries.socio-economic dimension, such as linkages of formal finance with informal finance.themselves? financial markets sector?discussion on future role of central banks.In the context of developing economies,institution could play the role?especially in terms of research, analysis, communication, opinion-making etc.?possible emergence of three dominant currencies.rates to indirect instruments, appropriate incentive framework, transparency and But, the fundamental changes in policy are in many ways evolved and refined as muchout of RBI’s research and analysis as out of its experience and also of compulsions ofdevelopments in the external sector.  Indeed, like close links between academic and knowledgebased industry which  the success of information technology, close interactionbetween research and policy in RBI has, on all accounts, led to enhancement in quality ofdecision making and hopefully to the need for caution and humility in approaching policychanges or meeting crises or increasing uncertainties.  The policy makers do need theory sinceindeed there are no facts without theory for even in noticing facts , there is an unstated orunconscious theory.  There is evidence to show that academia also benefits from interactionwith policy makers since the institutional dynamics and social dimensions are more acutely feltby hands-on experience of policy makers.  All these thoughts lead one to concede that centralbanks may not be central in the way they used to be but they would still be very central for ourAs mentioned before, the twentieth century saw really the birth of central banks, as theyare known today, and grew in numbers and in eminence by the beginning of the newmillennium.  However, explorations into the current developments in this address seem toprovide some pointers, albeitFirst, it is not easy to rule out a reduction in number of central banks in future.seignoreage revenue to governments.Third, new economy will make the tasks of central banks far more complex than before.If digital money really takes over, and this is a very distant possibility, central banks may haveto explore new role say, coordination among central banks or multilateral legal framework fordigital money etc. or even being a regulator of production and distribution of private moneyinstead of being supplier of money.  In the past twenty years, many of what wereunquestioningly accepted as public goods have been proven to be commercial goods.Furthermore, what were considered public monopolies have been subjected to unbundling,competition, privatisation and regulation on account of advances in technology . So is15Second, central banks will also be less of providers of  tentative to the survival or otherwise of central banks.There be a Central Bank At All? Will lifetime, at least in countries like India.characterisedapproaches.participativeproduction of ‘money’ necessarily immune from the impact of changes in public policies inTo conclude, the perennial question for central banks, which have always beentroublesome are what is money, how to measure it and does it really matter?  In the newmillennium, central banks face the same questions but the answers seem to be changing too16rapidly  for us to fully comprehend!Conclusionsregard to production of other goods and services?1. Capie, F., C. Schnadt (1994): "Banking - The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England2. Chandavarkar, Anand (1996): " ", St.Martin's Press, Inc., New York.3. Deane, M. and R. ", Viking, New York.4. A.E. (2000): " ", Eleventh C. D.5. ", Simon & Schuster Inc., New York.6. , No. 97, 7. , No. 89, October 19, 2000.8. ", , No. 96,October 31, 2000.9. Jalan, Banking and Finance in the New Millennium10. Mervyn (1999): "11. Lastra, Rosa Maria (1996): " Central Banking and Banking RegulationMarkets Group, London School of Economics, London.12. Marsh, David (1992): " The 13. ) Indian , UBS17King, The Central BanksPublishers, New Delhi.Economy : Essays on Money and Finance Rangarajan C (1998 London.", Heinemann, Bundesbank - The Bank that Rules Europe ", Financial bank of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming.Symposium on 'New Challenges for Monetary Policy', sponsored by Federal Reserve", the Challenges for Monetary policy: New and Old Economists' Conference, New Delhi.", Fifteenth Bank Bimal (2001): "BIS Review Otmar (2000): "Should we have Faith in Central Banks? Issing, BIS ReviewHessius, Kerstin (2000): "The New Economy seen from a Central Bank Perspective",November 3, 2000. Review", BIS Grenville, Stephen (2000): "Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging MarketsCountrySecrets of the Temple - How the Federal reserve Runs the Greider, William (1987): "Deshmukh Memorial Lecture, Reserve Bank of India.? Whither Central Banking Goodhart, Charles Pringle (1994): "Central Banking in Developing CountriesUniversity Press, Cambridge.", CambridgeThe Future of Central Goodhart, S. Fischer and N. References:14. Rahn, Richard W., B. R. ", World Gold Council,* Valedictory address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy at the Bank Economists’ Conference organised by Oriental Bank of18Commerce at New Delhi on January 17, 2001.London.impact on Gold: Technical, Legal and Economic IssuesDigital Money and its MacQueen and M. L. Rogers (2000): " 
