Legal Aspects of International FinancialStandards : National Law Perspective *Professor Giovanoli and friends,I am thankful to the Bank for International Settlements for giving meopportunity to make this presentation on the national law perspective, though a largenumber of presentations in the Seminar relate to international law.  The presentation isbased on Indian approach and Indian experience and focus is on processes and currentstatus of various legislative changes that evolve in the consideration of internationalstandards and codes.  Some generalisations are attempted on the link betweendomestic law and international law.  The first section captures general observations inregard to international financial standards and codes with particular reference toIndian approach.  The second section attempts some generalisations on the domesticlegal framework in this regard.  The third section describes the processes ofconsideration in India while the fourth narrates the changes in legal and policyframework that are addressed in the processes.  The daunting agenda for legal reformarising out of the process is covered in the fifth section.  The penultimate section dealswith the current legislative processes and responsibilities for implementation.  Thefinal section attempts some generalisations on national law perspective andinternational law.Indian Approach to InternationalFinancial Standards and CodesThe development of international standards and codes in the current contexthas five important features, viz., it is part of the reform of the international financialarchitecture; it represents a consolidated view of several interrelated standards andcodes; it is a collaborative effort involving different groups of countries, markets andinternational financial institutions and standard setting agencies and bodies; it haselements of both external and internal assessments of degree of compliance; and,finally there is an assumption of linkage between the implementation of standards andcodes and financial stability.2There are several reasons for the widespread interest in international financialstandards and codes. Among them, the most notable are the increasing cross-borderflows; improvements in technology making such capital flows faster therebyenhancing both efficiency and hard behaviour; large private corporate entitiesoperating significant resources, particularly, highly leveraged institutions impactingon both efficiency and stability, and the large institutional funds such as pension fundsand mutual funds replacing to some extent the severely supervised banks’ dominancein the financial intermediation in a relatively closed economy.  In such a situation,public policy has every reason to minimise systemic risks by encouraging, to theextent desirable, transparency of operations and uniformity in definitions to minimiserisks of misunderstandings among the participants.The extent of relevance of international financial standards and codes, the taskof implementation and the legal as well as other processes by which these standardsare implemented would necessarily depend on the country concerned.  For example,in India, the major challenge in designing and implementing the standards has been tochart a course of financial sector related reform in the domestic arena, which ties upclosely with the overall economic reform. At the same time, the need for gradualharmonising with international standards has to be kept in view.  Further, in taking aglobal view and charting domestic reforms, there is need for built-in flexibility.  Theimplementation of international standards involves a virtual paradigm shift say, froma strong centralised planning system (where the objectives are pre-determined andFabian socialism dominated along with suspicion of markets) to a system wherecontracts, prices and well defined inter-institutional relationships work. The legalframework built on the socialist principles is being reformed and standards and codesbecome a part of such changes.While there is a strong case for considering international best practices, to theextent they exist and are perceivable, there are several reasons to be circumspectabout the role of standards and codes as primary instruments of enhancinginternational financial stability. The recent efforts have focussed on measures mainlydesigned to discipline debtor countries.  While it is conceded that all the reforms thatare being prescribed have their merits, there is an overriding presumption in theprescriptions that the causes of the crisis rests primarily with policy and institutional3weaknesses in the debtor countries and hence place the onus of responsibility ofreform on the debtors.   The obligations contained in the standards and codes seem toreflect the view that the main flaws in the system for international capital movementsare to be found in recipient countries which should thus bear the burden of adjustmentneeded to prevent or contain financial crisis.  The UNCTAD Report (2001) states:“the reform process rather than focussing on international action to address systemicinstability and risks has placed emphasis on what should be done by nationalinstitutions and mechanisms.  Even in this regard, it has failed to adopt an even-handed approach between debtors and creditors.  Thus, it seems as if standards andcodes are being pressed upon developing countries to improve transparency anddisclosure without corresponding obligations for disclosure by financial institutionsand hedge funds”.The link between implementation of standards and codes and financialstability by itself is neither theoretically established nor backed by sufficient empiricalevidence though on the basis of first principles and judgement, the linkage betweenthe two elements is apparent.  Despite the apparent emphasis on their voluntaryadoption, there is a danger that incentives and sanctions linked to standard setting willbecome features of IMF surveillance and conditionality.  In such a scenario,publication of information on the compliance status, particularly the informationpresented in the ROSC reports, is fraught with the danger of classifying the countriesinto performers and non-performers.  Even when the international agencies associatedwith the work on standards and codes may not intend so, once the information isdisseminated, it is possible that credit rating agencies may assign country ratings onthe basis of the levels of achievement of standards.Briefly stated, the recent international initiatives in regard to standards andcodes provide at best a partial solution to the problems of existing internationalfinancial architecture. Furthermore, in the context of a crisis, they provide solutions atdomestic level for issues that may often originate outside the country.  Finally, theydo not assure international financial stability although they may contribute to it. Yet,there are several reasons why public policy and national authorities need to focus onthe international standards and codes and these reasons centre around both efficiencyand stability of financial sector in the country.  In this context, a desirable approach to4the consideration of international standards and codes can be explored in nationalinterest.Although the standards have evolved in the context of international stability,they have enormous efficiency-enhancing value by themselves.  Standards bythemselves may be presumed to be, prima facie, desirable, and it is, therefore, in thenational interest to develop institutional mechanisms for consideration of internationalstandards.  Thus, the implementation of standards needs to be given a domestic focuswith the objectives of market development and enhancing market efficiency.  Often,there are significant differences among the standards adopted, as in the case ofaccounting, and in any case, mere existence of a set of codes does not guarantee eithertransparency or integrity of the institutions concerned and transactions - a matteramply illustrated by the recent events involving Enron and Arthur Anderson. Manystandards keep evolving and it is important to keep a close track of development inthese areas.  It also needs to be recognised that the process is evolutionary and saytwo years down the line, present standards themselves can change, in degree anddetail though not in kind.Role of Domestic Legal FrameworkIt may be possible to classify the standards in a conceptual framework underthree broad elements, viz., technical, policy and socio-cultural.  Standards like SDDS,accounting and auditing, and supervision may be classified as purely technical and,therefore, easily amenable to implementation.  Standards on monetary and financialpolicies, fiscal transparency and securities regulation have certain policy implicationsand would form an integral part of the economic reform process in many developingcountries.  The changes in these areas depend on timing, sequencing andcomplementarity in related areas and availability of institutional, technological andlegal infrastructure.  Nevertheless, while it is desirable to adopt these standards assoon as possible, it actually boils down to an issue of managing policy reforms in anon-disruptive fashion.  Finally, standards in the areas of corporate governance,insurance and to a certain extent, insolvency and bankruptcy practices take a socio-cultural dimension and pose challenges of design, adoption and implementation.5It would thus follow that the scope and need for reviewing legal frameworkwill vary depending on whether it is technical, policy- oriented or socio-cultural.  Intechnical issues, legal framework should not be prohibiting appropriate standards,while policy should enable, and procedures ensure their adaptation. The policy-oriented standards have significant link with conduct of policy and legal frameworkmay either enable or even assure policies that are consistent with internationalstandard.  Those with predominant socio-cultural dimension would need significantlegal backing, policy and procedural elements.  In other words, legal framework is ofsignificance in varying degrees among different standards and codes.It is also possible to attempt a construct of the link between transparency andmacroeconomic policy.  Good macroeconomic policy and good standards is perhapsan ideal situation for a country.  Good macroeconomic policy and poor transparencythough not ideal is perhaps not risky by itself.  Bad macroeconomic policy and goodtransparency has large elements of risk and warrants change in policy beforelaunching into transparency.  The most risky combination perhaps is badmacroeconomic policy and bad standards.  In a more dynamic sense, it can be arguedthat transparency provides incentives to adopt good macroeconomic policies.In this background, it is necessary to make it clear that a legal framework canaddress the issue of transparency, and for that matter codes, in a variety of ways.First, it may be possible to ensure adoption of such standards and codes within theexisting legal framework.  The issue would be whether such compliance be mademandatory by law or the disclosure of the extent and nature of compliance bemandated by law.  Second, legal framework may have to be put in place to enablecompliance as and when considered appropriate.  Third, legal framework couldmandate compliance but from a date to be specified.  In fact, role of delegatedlegislation in the legal framework needs to be explored in the context of standards andcodes that keep evolving and need adoption.  Fourth, legal framework could providefor institutional arrangements that would assure a continuous basis for compliance.Finally, legal framework may enable or mandate independent regulatory bodies thathappen to be relevant for the purpose to ensure compliance.While transparency and financial stability appear fundamentallycomplementary, there could be a trade-off at some point.  Therefore, codes should be6treated as milestones and the exact manner and timing of dissemination of informationincluding the structure of reporting should depend not only on constitutional, legaland institutional mechanisms but also the likely impact of dissemination on thefinancial sector soundness and stability in a given context.Many codes emphasise legislative provisions in a concrete manner andlegislation provides the shield or back up for such actions.  The emphasis should be topromote a general effort to improve legislative provisions and it is necessary torecognise that the process of legislation is time consuming and complex.  While it isessential to recognise the importance of legislation, given its complexity, it is essentialto appreciate that sound practices also could be as satisfactory.  For example, in India,several regulatory prescriptions in respect of banks' investment in Commercial Paperbrought about changes in the money market though legal framework did not providefor mandating such prescriptions on all the participants.  Broadly speaking, the legalframework is one element of set of actions that should be considered in regard topublic policy on the issues of adoption of transparency and codes.  The others relate toactual conduct of policy and detailed procedures.  In fact, apart from critical roles fordifferent regulations, there is a significant role for self-regulatory bodies in mattersrelating to documentation, common procedures and promoting market discipline infavour of best practices.  In brief, the need for, scope of, and limits to the legalframework should be explicitly and continuously appreciated.The emphasis on the implementation of standards and codes andaccountability thereof is still heavily concentrated in the official sector.  An optimalbalance between regulation and competitive efficiency in the financial system andmarkets can be achieved only with equal emphasis on responsibility andaccountability of the private sector.  The focus of IMF is also with regard to codesmostly in respect of regulators and not so much with private sector.  Internationalaccounting standards and standards set by securities market associations are, nodoubt, expected to cover issues relating to private sector market participants.  Everyeffort should be made to recognise and correct the asymmetry in considering legalframework.7ProcessesInspired by own reflection on the subject and the likely gains fromimplementation of international financial standards, the Reserve Bank, in consultationwith the Government, constituted a high level Standing Committee on InternationalFinancial Standards and Codes in December 1999.  The terms of reference of theCommittee entrusted it with the task of monitoring developments in global standardsand codes and assessing aspects of their applicability to the Indian financial system.The Committee was, inter alia, required to reach out its Reports to a wide range ofaudience including relevant public and financial sector organisations and institutionsto sensitise public opinion and create awareness in different subject areas.  Theapproach of the Committee, therefore, was unique as it recognised public consensusand concord as essential precursors to facilitate a voluntary adoption rather thanmerely mechanical compliance.The Standing Committee formed Advisory Groups in ten different subjectareas in the financial system by drawing intellectual resources in the form ofgroupings of eminent non-official experts.  The Advisory Groups were entrusted withthe task of studying, in detail, (a) the present status of applicability, relevance andcompliance of standards and codes, (b) reviewing the feasibility of compliance andthe time-frame over which it could be achieved, given the prevailing legal andinstitutional practices, comparing levels of adherence in India, vis-à-vis in industrialcountries and emerging economies, and (c) to chalk out a course of action forachieving the best practices.The ten different core subjects areas identified by the Standing Committeecorresponds to the official list of codes suggested by the Financial Stability Forum(FSF) for implementation.  These were : Transparency in Monetary and FinancialPolicies, Data Dissemination, Payments and Settlement Systems, BankingSupervision, Securities Market Regulation, Accounting and Auditing, FiscalTransparency, Insurance Regulation, Bankruptcy Laws and Corporate Governance.At this juncture, the Committee, however, did not consider the set of codes on marketintegrity as fortified in the 40 recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force8(FATF), though a technical report commissioned on the subject has been finalisedpresently.All Advisory Groups of experts had the option of interacting amongstthemselves on matters of overlapping or common concerns to evolve a consensusapproach.  The Advisory Groups also had the option to include officials fromregulatory and Government organisations as special invitees to discuss and understandthe prevailing position in the relevant standards and codes, for bringing improvementsin the existing practices. They also had the benefit of deliberations with marketparticipants, members from professional bodies as well academics.  The arrangementafforded the Advisory Groups an independent or impartial status and prompted acritical evaluation of the relevance and compliance with each of the aforesaidstandards and codes.  The work of the Advisory Groups in some cases happened tocontinue alongside similar subjects addressed by groups constituted by theGovernment or other regulatory bodies.  In any case, the work of the Advisory Groupswas considered unprejudiced and non-intrusive to any such official or non-officialinitiatives taken by others.  The Advisory Groups were requested to take cognisanceof these parallel efforts and to provide inputs, wherever necessary.  All ten AdvisoryGroups have already submitted their reports to the Standing Committee.  TheStanding Committee has made efforts to disseminate these Reports as widely aspossible including their expeditious posting to the Reserve Bank website.  TheCommittee has also requested the Advisory Groups to organise seminars for creatingawareness and concretising views on recommendations.  The Committee would alsotake up regular annual review of the status and progress regarding compliance with,and implementation of standards and codes and submit it to the Ministry of Finance.Changes in Legal and Policy FrameworkThe implementation of the recommendations of Advisory Groups in relevantsectors would require a co-ordinated approach based on elements of consensus,incentives, technical support, resources and encouragement to concerned institutionsand regulatory bodies. Broadly speaking, the recommendations of Advisory Groupscan be categorised into three levels, viz., requiring (a) constitutional, (b) legislativeand (c) procedural and policy changes.  Quite a number of recommendations require9new legislative enactments or amendments to existing laws, while several otherscould be implemented by making appropriate changes in the existing policy andprocedures under the powers vested to relevant bodies under the law. A fewrecommendations could also require changes in the Constitution of India.  Some ofthe issues pertaining to the financial system are also being addressed by the NationalCommission to Review the Constitution.  Of these changes, amendments to the legalframework of the country assume utmost importance as they institutionalise changesas formal laws with parliamentary endorsement and, therefore, provide clear-cutmechanisms for enforcement.There are several overlaps in the recommendations of Advisory Groups withconcomitant relevance for legislative changes keeping in view such overlaps.  Someof the notable overlaps are between (a) Monetary and Financial Policies and Fiscaltransparency; (b) Corporate Governance and Banking Supervision; (c) Payment andSettlement System and Securities Market Regulation; (d) Accounting and Auditingand Banking Supervision.  The issues of regulatory overlap were highlighted byseveral Advisory Groups which has a bearing on the policy and procedures though noton legal framework as such.Daunting Agenda for Legal ReformThe Reports of Advisory Groups have identified several areas requiringlegislative actions to ensure enhancement in standards and codes relating to financialsector.  The agenda arising out of the reports is daunting as will be clear from thedescription below.First, the improvements suggested by the Advisory Group on Payment andSettlement System would necessitate amendments to Reserve Bank of India Act andBanking Regulation Act.  While a new enactment viz. The Payment SystemsRegulation Act may also be needed, the implementation of the rest of therecommendations would require notification of Regulations under all the aboveenactments as well as in the Information Technology Act and the Indian Contract Act.Second, on matters covered by the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision,amendments and appropriate notifications under Reserve Bank of India Act andBanking Regulation Act would suffice.10Third, in respect of Securities Market Regulation, amendments are needed inrespect of Securities Exchange Board of India Act; Unit Trust of India Act, and TheCompanies Act.  It may also be desirable to consider a new enactment to deal withfinancial frauds.  Several policy and procedural changes would, no doubt, be neededby the Securities Regulator. The self-regulatory bodies are also required to enunciateCode of Conduct and best practices in securities transactions.Fourth, in respect of the Report of Advisory Group on Transparency inMonetary and Financial Policies, a possible amendment to Constitution of India wasexpressed in the context of an ongoing review by a National Commission.  Moreimportant, several amendments to Reserve Bank of India Act and Banking RegulationAct supplemented by policy and procedural changes on the part of RBI andGovernment of India would be essential.Fifth, the Report of Advisory Group on Corporate Governance covers a widespectrum of institutions and practices warranting actions in three broad areas.Amendments in Companies Act accompanied by stipulations in regard to listingagreements of Stock Exchanges by securities regulators would address the set ofissues governing private shareholders in corporates in general.  Amendments inBanking Regulation Act and other statutorily established but Government-ownedfinancial intermediaries, especially public sector banks would be needed to bringentities in financial sector under the overall best practices for corporate governance,especially in financial sector.  In regard to several other government ownedenterprises also, there may be need for amendments in Memorandum and Articles ofAssociation, and in some cases the special laws that may govern their establishmentand functioning.  In any case, substantial changes would also be needed in themanagement practices and relationship between Government and the entitiesconcerned where both Government and private shareholders co-exist.Sixth, the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency took account of theongoing efforts to enact a Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, andexpressed that such an enactment would fulfil most of the requirements oftransparency, when supplemented by appropriate rules and regulations, under theproposed legislation.  There is also a reference to proposed amendments to Reserve11Bank of India Act and Banking Regulations Act, which would, inter alia, address theissue of quasi-fiscal deficits.Seventh, in regard to insurance, the Advisory Group found the legalframework to be upto international standards though a couple of amendments aresuggested.  However, several of the recommendations relate to the issuance ofregulations by the Insurance Regulatory Authority.Eighth, on issues relating to auditing, amendments are needed in respect ofCompanies Act, Income-tax Act and Chartered Accountants Act.Ninth, the compliance with the Report on Data Dissemination needs nolegislative change.Finally, in regard to Bankruptcy Law, a new legislation on a comprehensivebankruptcy code is advocated.  In addition, repeal of Sick Industries Companies Act,substitution of the institution of official liquidator with professional trustees, creationof dedicated bench of High Court etc. have been recommended.  A special chapter oncross-border insolvency in line with the UNCITRAL model law has also beensuggested.  Similarly, in respect of market integrity, a new legislation relating toterrorism is under consideration while legislation to prevent money laundering is at anadvanced stage of consideration.  Procedural actions by Reserve Bank of India inregard to strengthening of Know-Your-Customer are also contemplated.Amendments to Banking Regulation Act are also expected to enhance the powersavailable to Reserve Bank in this regard.Current Legislative Process and ResponsibilitiesIt must be recognised that the legislative process is complex, particularly in ademocratic polity.  Many of the proposals are at different stages of processing.  Thus,while Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill and Prevention of MoneyLaundering Bill have been returned to Government with opinion of ParliamentaryStanding Committee, the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance is likely to be re-promulgated in a modified form.  Proposals for amendment of Reserve Bank of IndiaAct; Banking Regulations Act are already at final stages of consideration inGovernment.  Matters relating to amendments to Indian Contract Act are still in thedrafting stage.  Some of the amendments to Companies Act are being processed in the12Government, though some of them are not strictly in consonance with therecommendations of the Advisory Groups on Bankruptcy and Corporate Governance.Independent of this process, the Government had also created a Committee on lawrelating to insolvency and winding up of Companies, and based on the Committee'srecommendations, the Government has introduced amendments to the CompaniesAct.  On others, particularly in regard to Income Tax Act, action has not beeninitiated. On several aspects such as separation of debt management from monetarypolicy, policy decisions have been taken but the legislative process is yet to becommenced. There are several recommendations relating to transparency of monetarypolicy and publicly owned entities where consensus is yet to emerge.It is interesting to note that the Reports on the Observance of Standards andCodes (ROSC) BY IMF, World Bank etc. draw heavily from the work of theAdvisory Groups.  These include fiscal transparency, monetary and financial policytransparency, banking supervision, securities market regulation, payments system andcorporate governance.On the whole, much of the responsibility of implementing the standards andcodes falls on authorities charged with the responsibility of regulating various areas ofthe financial system such as the Department of Company Affairs (DCA) of theMinistry of Finance, Reserve Bank, Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)and Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA).  A large number ofrecommendations could be implemented by self regulatory organisations specific tomarket segments such as the Indian Banks' Association (IBA), Fixed Income MoneyMarket and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA), Association of MerchantBankers (AMBI), Association of Mutual Funds of India (AMFI), Foreign ExchangeDealers' Association of India (FEDAI), Primary Dealers' Association of India (PDAI),and stock exchanges among others.National Law Perspective and InternationalLaw on Standards and CodesThe contribution of Professor Mario Giovanoli is pioneering and unique to thelegal aspects of international financial standard setting.  As mentioned by him, thestandards currently monitored by Financial Stability Forum, by and large, belong tothe category of rules which it has become customary to designate as "soft law".  In13this context, the three criteria suggested for positioning the standards in the gradationbetween "soft law" and "hard law" are very valid.  These relate to degrees ofobligation, precision and delegation.On a very judgmental basis, most of the current processes relating tointernational financial standards (described in this paper in the Indian context) appearto be at the soft law end of the spectrum.  The recent suggestion floated by Ms AnnKreuger, First Deputy Managing Director of IMF, on new approach to SovereignDebt restructuring, however, appears to be closest to the 'hard law' end of thespectrum.  After describing the four key features of the proposed formal sovereigndebt restructuring mechanism, the question of legal basis for such a mechanism israised and answered in the following words. "If we are to restrict the ability ofcreditors to enforce their claims in national courts, then the mechanism must have theforce of law in those countries where enforcement might be sought.  It would not beenough to pass laws in a few leading countries.  In practice, the mechanism must havethe force of law universally.  Otherwise, creditors will deliberately seek out thejurisdictions in which they have the best chance of enforcing their claims".  While it isnot appropriate to comment on this proposal which is still evolving, it is proposed tomake some very general statements on the issue of national law in the overall settingof international law, based on the current approach and experience of India in regardto standards considered by Financial Stability Forum.The approaches and processes in India clearly bring out the challenges beingfaced even in regard to the domestic legislative processes in India at this stage ofnational development and global integration.  Further, there is clearly a significant'soft law' element within the national legal framework for financial architecture, andmuch of the legal framework, if not the whole of it, is enabling rather than binding,thus circumscribing the scope for moving towards hard law in the foreseeable future.Moreover, the regulatory bodies have significant role in the implementation of manystandards, thus imparting some discretion or considerable flexibility in regard toapplication of general principles. In particular, the inevitable role of self-regulatorybodies in regard to many of the standards makes it difficult to impact large elementsof hardness to their soft law nature.14However, there are several ways in which greater harmonisation could beencouraged.  For example, model legislations like the one by CommonwealthSecretariat on money laundering will help both expeditious processing and relativeclarity of concepts as well as definitions.  This approach is of particular significancedue to the predominant cross-border nature of money laundering operations.Similarly, there can be a special chapter in bankruptcy law only in so far ascross-border insolvency issues are involved.  Such an approach could be considered,keeping in view the UNCITRAL model law.  For example, the Report of the AdvisoryGroup on Bankruptcy Laws enunciates the scope of the special Chapter on cross-border insolvency.  The Chapter applies where assistance is sought in India by aforeign court or a foreign representative in connection with foreign proceedings; orassistance is sought in a foreign State in connection with proceedings under the lawsof India relating to insolvency; or foreign proceedings and proceedings under the lawsof India relating to insolvency in respect of the same debtor are taking placeconcurrently; or creditors or other interested persons in a foreign State have aninterest in requesting the commencement of, or participating in, proceedings under thelaws of India relating to insolvency.Finally, the recent experience of Enron and Arthur Andersen gives a newdimension to the institutional dynamics in financial structures and transactionsrevolving around 'conflicts of interests' among the participants and political ordiplomatic forces operating at transnational level on matters which should strictly becommercial.ConclusionTo conclude, the complexities relating to the global financial system in thecontext of strong national interests continuing to dominate public policy viewed in thelight of Indian experience warrant, more than a legal basis, emphasis on three aspects,namely (i) the standards may be set domestically with a recognition that they havesome international dimension also; (ii) the processes of setting, prioritising,incentivising, monitoring and reorienting should be consultative and participative inboth domestic and international dimensions; and (iii) effective implementation is a15complex and varied process with domestic legal framework being one enabling factorat this juncture.16References1. Crockett Andrew, "Why is Financial Stability a Goal of Public Policy,"    inManaging Financial Stability in a Global Economy,      The Federal ReserveBank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 1997.2. Giovanoli Mario (Ed.) 2000, International Monetary Law : Issues for the NewMillennium, Oxford University Press, Oxford.3. Krueger, Anne 2001,  International Financial Architecture for 2002 : A NewApproach to Sovereign Debt Restructuring, Address at the NationalEconomists' Club Annual Members' Dinner, American Enterprise Institute,Washington D.C.4. Reddy, Y.V. 2001, Implementation of Financial Standards and Codes : IndianPerspective and Approach. BIS Review 20.  (lecture delivered at theConference on International Standards and Codes organised by the IMF-World Bank, Washington DC, March 7-8.5. Reddy, Y.V.  Issues in Implementing International Financial Standards andCodes. BIS Review 62. (Lecture delivered at the Centre for Banking Studiesof the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Colombo, June 28, 2001).6. Reports of the ten Advisory Groups on International Standards and Codes,www.rbi.org.in7. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Trade andDevelopment, April, 2001, United Nations, New York and Geneva, 2001.8. White, William, 2001, The Evolving Global Financial System : SomeImplications for Emerging Markets, Keynote Lecture delivered at the IndiraGandhi Institute of Development Research, Fourth Annual Conference onMoney and Finance.* Paper circulated by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the InternationalSeminar on Legal and Regulatory Aspects of Financial Stability sponsored by the World Bank, theInternational Monetary Fund, the Bank for International Settlements and the Financial Stability Forumat BIS, Basel, Switzerland on January 23, 2002.  Dr. Reddy is thankful to Mr. N.V. Deshpande,Principal Legal Adviser, Reserve Bank of India who was associated with parts of the work; forpresenting the paper in the Seminar on his behalf.
