State and Market: Altering the Boundaries and Emerging New Balances *Rao and Mr. Srinivasan,I am delighted to be here among many affectionate friends.  I am thankful tomy college-mate, batch-mate, cadre-mate and a very affectionate friend, V.K.Srinivasan for giving me this opportunity.  The Chairman, Mr. Reddy, has given anexcellent overview of what I intend covering in this address today viz., the changingcontours of borders between State and market.The altering of the boundaries between State and market encompasses, what isvariously described as, realigning government, structural reforms towardsliberalisation or deregulation, and changing mix of the mixed economy. To enable anappreciation of this changing mix between State and market in India, a combinationof descriptive and analytical approaches is adopted in this address, with a focus onwhat may be described as relevant functions, processes and balances. Thepresentation is arranged in five sections. The first section describes how the mix ofthe mixed economy was in the process of changing in India from the commencementof Planning in the fifties up to the current reform period. The second sectiondescribes, by applying a functional approach to the role of the State, how theboundaries between State and market in the mixed economy are currently beingaltered in the reform period. The third section narrates the process of altering suchboundaries, illustratively at Federal (Central) Government level, and at Provincial(State) level. Since reforms in external and financial sectors have been coveredextensively in some of the earlier addresses in the recent past, they are not discussednow. The fourth section explores the new balances that are emerging in our country asa result of such altering of boundaries between State and market. Analysts areadvised, in light of these developments to focus their attention on the emerging newbalances in order to appreciate the reform process and its outlook.  The final sectionbriefly mentions the response of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to some of theemerging new balances. It needs to be clarified at the outset that the word State isused here broadly to reflect the Government sector in totality, i.e., the Central,Provincial and Local Governments, encompassing legislative, executive and judicialbranches. For convenience, the word Central is used for the constitutional expression,"Union Government” and similarly Provincial for "State Government”. Further, theterm, public sector is used broadly to signify aggregate of Government and publicenterprise sector, and public enterprise signifies non-financial publicly ownedcorporate entities – whether under a separate statute or a Government company underCompanies Act. Where publicly owned public enterprises of financial sector areincluded in the broad public sector, this fact is specially mentioned.Mix of Mixed Uni-directionalThere was a virtual consensus, at the time of independence, on three basictenets for free-India, viz., democracy, federalism, and a strong role for Government ineconomic development or what came to be evolved into the concept of mixedeconomy. Mixed economy generally meant active and direct participation of theGovernment in economic life, combined with Government's direction of marketforces, to subserve the goal of development and social justice. The mixed economy1Economy : Reddy, Mr. Swaminatha Chairman Mr. approach held sway over the mainstream economic thought and political debateSwatantra Party active for a while under theleadership of Rajaji) for four decades, i.e. fifties, sixties, seventies and eighties.During this period, the mix between State and market was characterised by twofeatures. First, the role of State expanded, i.e. mix was moving unidirectionally, andthere was seldom a retreat. Second, the pace of expansion of State was not uniformand in fact, there were many occasions of uncertainty and doubt on the role of State,but seldom was decisive action taken towards retreat of State  market, till thebalance of payments crisis of 1991. These features are best illustrated by some1951-61 represents ascendancy of State, with an overwhelming consensus in favourof an active role for State, and such a role was sanctified by Directive Principles ofState Policy, and operationalised through a process of planned development. Thecontrol apparatus of Government imposed during Second World War provided areadymade framework for legal and institutional instruments for State intervention.International consensus was broadly supportive of India's approach, to the extent thatthis approach combined democracy and liberal values. The constitutional provisions,legal framework, and interpretations of the judiciary were supportive of such adomineering role for State, mainly as a result of the Directive Principles of StatePolicy enshrined in the Constitution.However, in the mid-sixties, following war a nd droughts combined withindustrial recession, a "Plan-Holiday" had to be declared. Uncertainties, in particular,political compulsions, led to the nationalisation of major banks, providing theGovernment relatively easy access to household savings in order to finance itsactivities. Soon, the first oil shock affected international sentiment on capital flows todeveloping countries and some aid-weariness also set in. Overall, therefore, the period1967 to 1977, could be treated as a period of uncertainty and mixed signals, butexpansion of State did occur in spurts, particularly in the plethora of legislativeactions.By 1977 it was clear that, the Plan strategies were not paying rich dividendsand a period of introspection started in 1977, lasting till 1984. A number of high levelofficial Committees were appointed to examine physical controls, monetary policy,trade policy, public enterprises, etc. Each one of them recognised the need for areview of the mix between the State and market and recommended a definitive tilttowards marketisation of the mix. However, no tangible policy action wasforthcoming, perhaps due to inadequate political consensus.The next phase, from 1984 onwards, came to be described as New EconomicPolicy and was essentially an attempt to break the stalemate in State action andintroduce market orientation. The new policy aimed at higher growth, but given theunwillingness to impose necessary fiscal discipline, significant acceleration of growthand growth-led exports were achieved at considerable cost, namely, relativelyunsustainable levels of fiscal deficit, current account deficit and external debt,especially short-term debt.  In fact, inadequate productivity from the use of resources,while first and second tranche of Extended Fund Facility from the IMF were drawn,also resulted in strains of repayment to IMF during the late eighties. Since higher2periodisation has some subjectivity. periodisation, though any attempt at vis-à-vis(barring a right wing political party called growth was attempted without breaking what has been described by the author in theIn brief, there was a changing mix, but it tended to be unidirectional, withvarying pace but generally in favour of State, and often in spurts though during thelatter period, with serious doubts.Mix of Mixed The year 1990-91 saw the Gulf war, which triggered a balance of paymentscrisis. The seriousness of the crisis, especially the dramatic act of sale and repurchaseof Government's gold through the State Bank of India and pledge of RBI's gold, didevoke a national consensus on stabilising the economy and undertaking appropriatereform. The crisis provided justification for a serious effort to break the stalemate inState action. In other words, the unidirectional nature of changing mix between Stateand market since 1950 was virtually for the first time reversed in 1990-91. However,it was not merely the crisis, but the prevailing economic scene on the eve of reform,which enabled initiation of reform.  The features of the scene may be summarised asfollows:First, there was an intellectual recognition of systemic problems, particularly in theareas of fiscal, public enterprises and overall competitive strength of industry.Second, while there was respectable, if not impressive growth of over 5 percent in the eighties, compared to the "Hindu rate of growth" of 3 to 3.5 per centpreviously, it was clear to the policy makers that such growth was financed byunsustainable fiscal as well as trade deficits, and growth lacked institutionalunderpinning to take the economy to a higher growth path or ensure social justice.Third, while the policies were originally aimed at protecting labour force,incentive mechanisms got distorted and institutional rigidities crept in, resulting inwhat has been termed by the author as “tyranny of ten percent” –ten per cent beingthe share of organised labour (both in public and private), select industrial houses anda rentier class encouraged by the political system. What was described as a soft State,tended over a period to be so soft to the ‘ten per cent’, that to promote the interests ofthis ten per cent, the State ended up being a hard State on the 90 per cent of labourforce . This large workforce started becoming restive, being tired of promises ofelimination of poverty not backed by delivery, and therefore, this large segment hadto be pacified with what have been described as "populist schemes". It was no longereasy for the policy makers to be both soft on organised work force and, providesuccour to the large unorganised sector.Fourth, the educated constitute the most articulate section in our country, as inmany other developing societies. In the fifties and sixties, and to some extent in theseventies, the flow of a significant portion of educated was absorbed throughemployment in the growing Government sector, the public enterprises and to a verylimited extent, the private corporate sector.  With a larger output of educated youth,and a deceleration in the growth of employment in organised sector, there was anincreasingly larger pool of educated, self-employed or unemployed, outside the “tenper cent”. Politically, it was possible to counter, however feebly, the aggressive stance3Economy : Bi-directionallate ‘eighties, as the “stalemate in State action”, there was fertile ground for a crisis.of the '’ten per cent'’ since a significantly large part, almost the whole of the educatedclass coming out of high schools and universities were left out of employment in theorganised sector and were thus outside of the “ten per cent”.Fifth, it was clear that the delivery of Government services had become costlyand was generally perceived to be very indifferent and inefficient – be it schools,hospitals, or public utilities like water supply and sanitation. The legal andinstitutional set up gave rights to the stakeholders in the public sector even if theserights were to the detriment of the citizen.  The stakeholders were not only employees,but also contractors or suppliers, or retail agents, etc. In fact, many felt that thesestakeholders pre-empted financial resources sometimes at the cost of the originalpurpose of employing them. So, there were schools with teachers and no buildings, orteaching materials and hospitals with no medicines, electricity or water. Incidentally,the salaries of the public sector had assumed implicit productivity increases, viz.,annual increments in addition to inflation indexation and any short fall in assumedproductivity increases worsened the situation.  The managers in the public sectorincluding the financial sector often complained about the inflexibility introducedthrough inherited rights and work practices, resulting in erosion of scope forSixth, there was an emerging parallel economy not only in money, called blackmoney, but in most public services (private schools, private hospitals and bottleddrinking water rather than tap water becoming the preferred options). Further, therewas resentment about delivery of services in public systems even among the 'ten percent’, when somebody else was supposed to deliver the service.Seventh, given the fiscal situation, the public enterprises which saw the fiscal  supportdrying up started clamouring for market access, autonomy and even someEighth, the private sector, including corporate sector, realised that the capacity ofGovernment to support them was getting eroded due to fiscal compulsions, whileregulatory and other demands from Government continued to be perceived as aburden on them.  In the absence of fiscal support from Government, they found itworthwhile to seek deregulation and liberalisation, arguing against what has beendescribed as over-regulation and under-governance.Ninth, there was a widespread realisation that the basic assumption ofefficiency and effectiveness of State vis-à-vis market appear to be less valid thanbefore, mainly due to technological progress and institutional characteristics of publicsector. The success of alternate models in other countries, in achieving both highergrowth and social justice was impressive and sustained, and was too apparent to beignored by the public opinion in India.Finally, it was widely believed that reform was on the cards even by lateeighties. However, the Gulf war, which triggered the crisis, enabled projection ofexternal factors as the main cause of the crisis. Thus, economic compulsions forreforms were clear for at least a decade before reforms commenced, but the issue wasmobilising political support and evolving a consensus on detail of reforms in a4privatisation.productivity increases to match salary increases.democratic-federal set up - a problem for which a favourable environment emergedwith the Gulf crisis.Functional Approach to Altering the BoundariesIn the functional approach to the role of the State indicated by the author inthe late ‘eighties it was argued that altering the boundaries between State and marketcould be analysed in terms of different roles of State. State's role in economic activitycan be broadly classified into that of Producer-State, i.e. producer of commercialgoods and services; Regulatory-State, involving setting and enforcing of rules thatgovern, encourage or discourage economic activities of market participants;Facilitator-State, involving provision of public goods such as police, judiciary, streetlighting; and Welfare State, ensuring provision of a wide variety of merit goods suchas education and health. In the functional approach, the process of altering theboundaries between State and market, are tracked, with reference to each of the fourfunctions mentioned.Retreat as Producer StateThe process of retreat of State as a producer of goods and services involves exerciseof several options in a variety of areas. As a producer of commercial goods andservices, the major option exercised by the Government was to permit entry of privatesector in activities that were reserved for public ownership. This option does notnecessarily involve retreat of State in absolute terms though in relative terms, itamounts to a retreat. Currently, except for sectors such as defence, entry for privatesector is permitted, and in many, in fact, encouraged. These include oil exploration,power production, telecom services, etc. The change was operationalised through aseries of Statements on Industrial Policy. Second, exit of public enterprises in terms ofclosure, is technically permitted under the aegis of Sick Industrial Companies Act,which was amended to bring public enterprises within its jurisdiction. Third, exit ofworkers in public enterprises was also enabled and encouraged through adoption ofvoluntary retirement schemes and creation of National Reconstruction Fund. Fourth,some public enterprises were corporatised (that is converted into companies underCompanies Act) and in many public enterprises, private equity holders brought in.Public enterprise sector which was invariably a 100 per cent Government-ownedenterprise earlier became one in which there were some enterprises with diversifiedownership, although in many cases, majority ownership continues with Government.Fifth, significant autonomy in functioning of public enterprises has been announcedand some attempts have also been made in this direction. Sixth, in a few cases,Government took up financial restructuring of enterprises to enable these enterprisesto compete with private enterprises and meet the threat of imports under a liberalisedtrade regime. Seventh, compared to the past, a hard budget constraint has beenimposed on the public enterprises. Eighth, preferential treatment to public enterprisesthrough exclusivity or price preference in purchases or sales within public sector hasbeen formally dispensed with. Ninth, privatisation involving transfer of majorityownership to private sector and change of control was conspicuous by its absence.It is possible to argue that the entry of private sector has been insignificant in somesectors, possibly due to incomplete process of regulatory reform; that, in reality5extension of jurisdiction of BIFR to public enterprises has not yet served any purpose;that impact of VRS or labour-flexibility has been very marginal; that diversifiedownership was merely a process of revenue generation for Government, often byshuffling of portfolio in public sector either through 'cross-holding' among publicenterprises or directed-holding by Government owned All India Financial Institutions;that revenue generation in a few cases was obtained by assuring the investors of amonopoly-status for a number of years thus undermining competition; that autonomywas not really exercisable in practice; that financial restructuring was done atenormous cost to Government and only to dress up an enterprise to avoid reference toBIFR or privatisation; that  Commission had been ignored; and thatinstitutional rigidities still remain in actual reform of State as producer of commercialgoods and services.  In particular, it is argued that unbundling of so-called naturalmonopolies has not been given attention while diversifying ownership.Notwithstanding the above criticisms, a workable framework for reform has beeninitiated and undoubtedly further progress requires significant thrust.While there were attempts to reduce role of State as a 'producer',correspondingly, there has been deregulation in some and expansion of State in otheras a regulator. Dismantling of industrial licensing and liberalisation of trade are bestexamples of retreat of a Regulatory State.  But, in many other areas, there has beenexpansion.  For example, in Telecommunication, in the area of Ports and Electricity,national level regulatory authorities under appropriate statutes have been established.Similar initiatives are being considered in some other sectors also.  The regulatoryauthorities are expected to exercise independence from the ministries or a public orprivate enterprise concerned and provide a framework for entry and operatingconditions, especially tariff, in a way that would ensure assurances and protections toinvestors and consumers, whose interests often conflict in a monopoly like situation.Though at a macro-level there has been deregulation, it is often argued thatthere are still a plethora of regulatory clearances that are required, thus underminingthe full impact of deregulation. The process of expanding regulatory role is sometimesdescribed as incomplete, if not inadequate, on the ground that the constitution ofregulatory authorities is not necessarily apolitical or designed to counter politicalcycles; that they are being undermined by Ministries concerned either on account ofnarrow interests of public enterprises or to serve what the Ministry perceives to belarger public interest, and that the regulatory authorities are inadequately provided for,in regard to physical, financial or human resources, to perform their task efficientlyand effectively.  However, it is undeniable that, a basic framework for a moretransparent, accountable and, expanded role of State as a regulator has been put inplace in many crucial sectors, though a focussed attention to the strengthening ofthese authorities may be necessary.  More important, there may be many other areas,in particular, an overall competition policy, customer-protection (especiallyinadequately compensating the customers for negligence of producers of goods orservices in public or private sector) setting minimum acceptable levels of standards inservices sector, restrictive practices adopted by trade unions affecting consumerinterests etc., that need to be pursued further.6Regulatory StateDisinvestmentIn its role as a facilitator State in India, the major thrust is to redefine what constitutesa true public-good and then find means by which such a public good is funded andprovided for in an adequate and equitable measure. It is also possible to unbundle anexisting public good into its true public good and commercial component. It isensuring provision of a public-good that is relevant and not necessarily whether does it on its own or through use of private sector.The evidence available on review of scope and coverage of public goods byCentral Government is rather limited except perhaps in the context of roads andbridges where toll charges have been introduced. A detailed framework for review ofwhat are public goods, how to assess adequacy, how to ensure provision and means ofadequate financing need to be addressed by the State as markets cannot respond tothese questions.  For example, there can be a policy decision to treat a way of deliveryof a good as a public good as distinct from another way. Further, water supply in astreet tap may be a ‘public good’ while water supply in a tap at home is a purecommercial good.  It must also be recognised that a significant part of provision ofpublic goods falls in the jurisdiction of Provincial  Governments and not in CentralGovernment. Overall, there is a significant scope and a need for review of role asWelfare ProviderWhile in some developed countries, major source of fiscal stress andconsequently major area of reform has been revamping or cutting down on role ofState as a Welfare State, in India there is a large consensus on expanding rather thancontracting role of State in provision of welfare. The consensus covers entitlementssuch as primary education and medical attention as also old age pensions.  In fact,Constitution of India mentions compulsory primary education as a Directive Principleof State Policy, though actual performance of State has admittedly been inadequate.A study of the process of providing welfare, say though primary schools may providesome insights into the current meshing of State and market. The approach so far hasbeen for Government to build and run most of the schools, often in a centralisedfashion from Provincial headquarters, prescribe syllabus, print, subsidise anddistribute text books on a Government monopoly basis; recognise and often fund, to asubstantive degree, some private sector institutions also. In some cases, mid-daymeals are provided to children in elementary schools while in a few cases, cash inrespect of female students are being provided.  Reform process in this regard has notbeen uniform among the Provinces though recent initiatives relate to provision ofadequate buildings and teaching material, increasing number of teachers inGovernment sector and in a few Provincial Governments encouraging local initiativesin starting or running the school.While there has been a widely expressed discomfort at the relatively low level ofexpenditures on education.  However, it has also been pointed out most recently byDr. C.Rangarajan that the level of Government expenditure on education in India, iscomparable to Sri Lanka or China and hence the inadequacy is not in the level ofpublic expenditure on education.  It has also been recognised in various empirical7facilitator.StateFacilitator Statestudies that, in some States, two thirds of primary school teachers in Governmentschools do not attend the school and in many Provinces, text books are madeavailable in the midyear only.  There is a marked preference for private schoolsamong most parents and a few studies show that literacy is increasing in India on ademand driven basis rather than utilisation of supply created in Government sector.While it is possible to argue that those who can afford, should be persuaded to payschool fees, often, Government schools are not preferred by those who can pay.Similarly, while efforts are made to regulate the fee structure in private schools, theyare often circumvented.  The relative roles of Government, local Panchayat andprivate initiative in regard to setting standards of physical environment, academicrequirements, funding, provision, etc., are yet to be addressed.  In brief, the role ofState relative to the private sector continues to be inadequate and ill-defined in mostparts of India, in regard to spread and quality of education, especially at primary level.The major constraint for adequate provision of services is the defacto country widephenomenon of priority to entitlements of instruments of welfare provision(employees, contractors etc.) over the purpose (schools, dispensaries) or entitlementsof the people to whom welfare is sought to be provided.  Some Provinces areattempting to overcome this through effective decentralisation of initiatives andNotwithst anding the above, there are some Provinces which have progressedsignificantly while new initiatives are being attempted in some other Provinces.  Anall-India framework, such as in operations black-board, for a review of relative rolesof public, private, local, and non-Governmental organisations, in terms of differentcombinations of funding and provisioning is yet to emerge.  Similarly, regulatoryframework in these areas especially medical and health services, is being developed inselect Provinces since private funding and provision is expanding rapidly.Improvements in what has been termed as inefficient provision by public sector and aregulatory framework to govern unbridled private sector in addition to evolvingappropriate mix of funding and provision by public and private sources appear to bethe reform agenda for the future in the realm of State as Welfare provider.Significant attention has been paid in both academic circles and in publicdebate about the challenges posed in reforms at Provincial level.  These include fiscal,power, irrigation, roads and road-traffic, education, health and water supply. DifferentProvinces have adopted a variety of approaches.On the fiscal front, apart from revenue raising, cost rec overy for services andtraditional expenditure-containment, measures include, statutory limit on guarantees,limits on public employment, and establishment of Sinking Fund. It is necessary torecognise the fact that initiatives on fiscal front, both statutory and non-statutory arefar more impressive in some Provinces than the Centre.  In fact, substantial part ofrecent fiscal stress is perhaps justifiably, attributed by Provinces to the recent liberalpay hike by the Centre. Though, legally Provinces are not bound by Centre’s decision,during ‘seventies and ‘eighties socio-political compulsions and centralising tendencies8Provincial Level Reformsmanagement.Similar logic can be applied to health or medical facilities or sanitation.in public systems made Centre’s decisions defacto binding on Provinces.  It isnecessary to recognise that inspite of impressive initiatives in some Provinces , theIn the area of power, measures relate to private sector entry in powergeneration; reorganisation of power monoliths into separate corporates for generation,transmission, distribution; privatisation of assets; and, statutory steps forestablishment of regulatory/tariff authorities.  There are still many Provinces, whichsubsidise power heavily and overall, power sector is still far away from total costrecovery.  Yet, in terms of organisational restructuring and legislative actions, someProvinces have progressed significantly, and well ahead of Central Government inrespect of similar activities (say, power supply or passenger transport by road in urbanareas).In the area of irrigation, stress has been on decentralisation of water managementespecially participative approaches, and upward revision of water rates.  DifferentProvinces have adopted varying systems, but overall, however reasonable, costrecovery is yet to be seriously attempted. While progress in regard to cost recovery istardy in most cases, the progress in institutional improvements for decentralised anduser involved management has been impressive in a few Provinces.  Similar approachtowards decentralisation is yet to be demonstrated in Central Government.In regard to education, bringing primary education under panchayat system and localinvolvement in setting up and part-funding of such schools have been some of theinitiatives in a few Provinces. There is no evidence of any such initiatives, as yet, inrespect of a large number of secondary schools under the aegis of CentralGovernment.In respect of health facilities, a few Provinces have been contemplatingAs regards public enterprises at Provincial level, there have been almostuniversal attempts to review the portfolio and identify non-viable enterprises. Whileattempts to privatise have been made, there have been only a few successful cases.The public enterprises at Provincial level, other than in power, road, transport andindustrial financing, are relatively of smaller magnitude in most Provinces. However,many Provinces have attempted a systematic evaluation of public enterprises, andhard budget constraint has been quite severe in almost all Provinces.  The variety ofoptions by several Provinces in dealing with State level public enterprises isFeatures of Reform ProcessThe major features of reform process of nineties in India, can th us beFirst, the expectations from reforms in India is not in terms of across the boardretreat of State in favour of market but, in terms of enhancing States' capacity to9permit efficiency-gains and expand availability of public and merit goods.summarised as follows:impressive.legislation to regulate private health care facility.fiscal stress at Provincial level is acute.Second, while State is retreating in some areas, such as pure commercialgoods or services, it is both retreating and expanding in other areas such as regulationand is expected to expand further in public and merit goods.Third, a variety of options have been initiated by the Central Government to redefinethe role of State vis-a-vis market and the framework is comprehensive, though asignificant ground is yet to be covered.  In general, the direction of reform is retreat asa Producer State and retreat combined with expansion as a Regulatory State.Fourth, at a Provincial level, while there is some marginal retreat as aProducer State, substantive expansion and redefining of the role of State as aFacilitator and Welfare-provider appears to be in order.  A variety of options havebeen exercised by different Provinces, though significant progress is required if thefiscal sustainability is to be combined with an expanded role for the State, atFifth, the differences in the pace and direction of reforms in differentProvinces are perhaps explicable by the political management of the process,technical capability to design measures, institutional underpinning to implement themand nature of support from Central Government.Sixth, there is evidence to show that, even in areas where State has to expand,mainly at the Provincial level and as a welfare provider, decentralisation of initiativesand management away from Provincial head quarters down to local levels seems to bea preferred option.  This would imply that State may reorient and expand, bychanging degree of centralisation.The descriptive account of the evolution of the mix between State and marketin India, with special reference to process of recent reforms, reveals many interestingaspects, especially on the nature of changing mix relevant to us, as also the variety ofoptions exercised.  It also reveals the significant progress yet to be made , though apreliminary framework is available.  However, to assess the dynamics of the changingmix, it would be useful to track what may be termed as new balances that areemerging as both causes and consequences of a changing mix between State andmarket.  The changing balance between State and market does not happen inisolation, but is related to other balances also.  An attempt is made here to track thesenew balances in a somewhat exploratory fashion or even as conjectures. Thesebalances are vertically between Centre and Provinces; horizontally betweenProvinces; within Governments, both Centre and Provinces; between public andprivate sectors; funding and provision in delivery of services; old and new industrialhouses; poor and non-poor, organised employment and self employment; and finallyrural and urban.Vertical : Centre and ProvincesAs the reform progresses, it appears that the relative balance between Centreand Provinces tends to tilt in favour of Provinces for a number of reasons.First, the most important areas for the Central Government's responsibilitiesare in international trade, financial sector, telecommunications, aviation, andespecially banking and corporate law/practices.  In most of these areas, factors such asmultilateral agreements (say, WTO), globalisation, and recommended best practicesof the world, tend to circumscribe, over a period, the discretionary power available inSecond, the capacity of Centre to reach tax10normal times to Central Government.New BalancesProvincial level.levels as well as tax regimes, very different from international practices (customs,excise, corporate or income tax) also tend to get constrained, over a period, since thefree and rapid flow of commodities, skills and finances among the countries wouldrequire us to be not too much out of alignment.Third, major thrust-areas needing expansion of State are in physical infrastructuresuch as road, waterworks, power and social infrastructure, such as, schools andhospitals.  Whether it is direct intervention or indirect intervention, the regime thatgoverns funding and provision in these areas is to be determined by ProvincialGovernments.  Thus, relative to Centre, Provinces are currently in the expansionaryProvincial Governments currently havemore freedom to access resources for financing economic growth from the marketboth from domestic and in some ways, global sources.  Hence, the proportion of netofficial flows from centre to Provinces as a proportion of total capital flows toProvinces tend to get reduced.Fourth, Provinces could also seek advice on growth strategies not only from PlanningCommission as in the past, but also institutions like Institute of Public Finance andPolicy; or Asian Development Bank or the World Bank.The balance, esp ecially, economic balance among Provinces is also likely tobe affected to the extent the overall Governments' role in allocation of resources tiltsin favour of markets.  Thus, Provinces will be competing more intensely than before,in market place for resources in future and, Provinces may find it somewhat difficultto place a significant responsibility on the Centre for their relative performances.Second, with growth in communications, especially on economic and financialissues, people will tend to benchmark economic performance of States.  There may bea slow beginning but the momentum could pick up, as evidenced by varyingcapacities (both in terms of amounts and interest rates) to raise financial resources forProvincial level public enterprises, on the basis of their guarantees.Third, there are a variety of options for managing change which are adoptedby different Provinces.  For example, a single Electricity Board for each State was anearlier model, while now each Province is looking its own model of combination ofinstitutional arrangements as well as transition path.  There are plenty of opportunitiesto learn from each  other's experiences and make modifications.  Thus, inter-Provincial interaction tends to be more intensive, by themselves or throughinstitutional consultants, who may be Fourth, there is, in this decentralised scenario, a potential for increasing thedivergence in levels of income among Provinces or even intra-Province. To thisextent, there may be pressure from less developed Provinces on the Centre to play amore active role in countering markets’ possible neglect of less developed Provinces.Fifth, there could be competition among Provinces to benchmark, perform andbut, the new balance will have to ensure healthy competition.The balance between the Ministries representing the combination of politicalexecutive and Government bureaucracies vis-a-vis exercise of ownership functions aswell as regulatory functions may also change somewhat adverse to Ministries.  Theprocess of privatisation, diversified ownership and autonomy of public enterprises11Within Governmentsexcel interacting with several Provinces.Horizontal Inter-Provincial Imbalancemodules of State in the State-market mix. may erode the discretionary element of the Ministries.  Once  separate regulatorybodies  on statutory basis are established and strengthened, they are meant to be autonomous.  Often, their membership need not coincide with political cycles andthus may impart greater stability to regulatory regime. Increasing role of autonomous regulatory bodies tilts the balance away from the Ministries and in favourFurther, experience at Provincial level in some areas has shown that thepreferred route to enlarging the role of, and efficiency in functioning of State isdecentralisation in Government.  For example, in primary schools or watermanagement, the approach in some Provinces seems to be through decentralisation orlocalised water management users’ committees or village panchayats.  This may alsoinvolve emerging new balances between ministries or departments at Provincialheadquarters and local bodies, in favour of the latter.Public and Private EnterprisesThe relationship among public enterprises and between public and privateenterprises could be subject to new balances in several ways.Firstly, a large public enterprise sector may continue but it will have to reckonwith growing competition from private sector.Second, regulatory agencies may insist on level playing field between publicand private sector.Third, the public e nterprises faced with hard budget constraint, threat ofprivate sector entry and accountability to the private shareholders where they may have to carve out new pattern of relationships with the government and withinthe organisation.Fourth, strat egic cooperation and cross holdings between public and privatesectors are inevitable, thus replacing water tight compartmentalisation between thepublic and private sectors.  Infact, this process may necessitate the termination of theconcept of Government Companies under Companies Act.Finally, the  managerial and other highly skilled people, who  wereconcentrated  significantly in public enterprises may find alternate and  attractiveavenues in private sector; and consequently their clout within public enterprises maytend to improve.  The emerging flexible market for talent could indeed alter balances,between and within enterprises.Funding and Provision of ServicesThere can be several permutations and combinations of public funding, privatefunding, mandatory cross-subsidisation in private funding, private provision, publicprovision and mandatory provisions by private to meet public interest, etc.  A recentexample of private funding and private provision with some elements of public-funding and regulation has been evolved by the Supreme Court of India, in respect ofprivate engineering colleges in Karnataka. The scheme covered fees chargeable, mixbetween merit vis-a-vis discretionary seats in admission, local vis-a-vis non-residentIndian quotas etc., and mandatory loaning by public sector banks at concessionalinterest rates. While the decision of the highest Court provided a framework in aspecific category, there are large areas, in drinking water supply, education andhealthcare, where public-private mix is entering new balances, in regard to ownership,funding provision, official recognition and governmental regulation.  The traditionalwater tight division between Government or public and private sector each combining12exist,of less volatility in policies.semi-semi-within itself funding and provision may get blurred and larger scope realised forintermingling of the two. Further, such intermingling may involve non-Governmentalorganisation as well as local initiatives.  These are perhaps in nascent stage butevolution of new balances between public and private sectors is clearly in the horizon.Old and New Industrial HousesThe traditional core  industries in the tradeable sector, especially sectors whichenjoyed high levels of protection in the past, are currently under pressure ofcompetition and they tend to be apprehensive of rapid reform.  They are oftenbalanced by the newly emerging internationally competitive industrialists, in areassuch as drugs, pharmaceuticals, software, chemicals industries etc.  As the latterimprove in strength and importance, the balance will tend to tilt in favour of morerapid reform.  There is evidence of a tilting balance even now.  Even within thetraditional industrial houses, one can see changing balances in the composition ofPoor and Non-poorA major issue of concern in the context of reform is whether the poor will beworse off than before in absolute terms due to the reform and whether the balancebetween poor and non-poor, in relative terms, will worsen as a result of reform.  Inthe pre-reform period, there were programmes in the name of the poor but their reachand benefits were often questioned.  Given the stalemate in State action that has beenexplained, the poor may not be worse off than before and may even be able toarticulate their needs better in the absence of bureaucratically determined services,though commercialisation of services may tend to give a sense of relative deprivationto poor.  Perhaps this is an emerging area of new balances, with significant socialdimension that needs to be analysed and feedback utilised in policy actions.In fifties, sixties and onto seventies, the major segment of engineers, doctors or otherskilled professionals coming out of colleges found jobs in Government or publicenterprise or publicly owned financial sector. However, since the eighties a larger andlarger percentage of the skilled and the articulate tend to be in self-employed categoryas against employees-category. The growing services sector also adds to this trend.Indeed, leasing of goods and services, contracting out or outsourcing instead of in-house provision are considered to be more suited to changing times. In democraticsystems, these changing balances between job-orientation and work-orientation tendto exercise a strong influence on the policies relating to employment in the organisedcorporate sector.Rural-UrbanContrary to the generally held fear that reforms would lead to markets holdingsway and thus metropolitan or large centres would thrive to the disadvantage of ruralareas, there is evidence that rural prosperity has been improving significantly in therecent years.  The rural-urban continuum would perhaps assert itself, but in any case,rural-urban, as well as agro-industry linkages are set to get strengthened especiallywhen the services sector is growing rapidly.  Briefly stated, there may be newbalances replacing the traditional rural-urban divide or dichotomy.13Organised employment and self-employmentactivities, boards and management.Before concluding, it is useful to place on record how RBI is responding to theemerging new balances.  This will be illustrated by RBI’s recognition of the fact thatfinances at the Provincial level are critical to the realignment of the role of the Stateand market.First, the RBI has started a close and more intensive interaction with the FinanceSecretaries of Provincial Governments on a regular basis, and on a wide range ofrelevant subjects.Second, a Committee of Provincial Finance Secretaries have with the activeinvolvement of the RBI, recommended limits on Government guarantees. SomeProvinces, such as Third, the system of  Ways and Means advances to Governments has recently beenrevised by the RBI in consultation with the Provinces to introduce better incentiveswith regard to financial and cash management.Fourth, with support from the RBI a Committee of Finance Secretaries of ProvincialGovernments is presently working on the issue of improvements in transparency ofthe Fifth, Provinces have been encouraged by the RBI recently to access the market for apart of their market borrowings. These include, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh andPunjab which have raised funds directly from the marketSixth, in view of this development, the issue of monitoring of the financial health andother relevant parameters of the Provincial Governments by the market assumesgreater significance. A Committee of the Finance Secretaries of Provinces is currentlyacting in an advisory capacity to oversee the indicators of financial parameters beingFinally, the RBI is actively advising the Provincial Governments in areas such as cashConclusionTo conclude, the concept of mix ed economy that we adopted was the rightone.  What is called for is a dynamic and bi-directional movement between State andMarket.  Indeed, growth in technology has recently led to drastic redefining of therelative roles of State and market and such a redefinition need not be a unidirectionalretreat or an across-the-board expansion.  The reform process in India has been ableto capture the basic elements of this complex reality and there is, at least, at aconceptual level, a pragmatic framework.  More importantly, there are emerging newbalances and a dynamism has to be located in these new balances. Analysts need tohave an appropriate understanding of these emerging new balances to appreciate thestability and pace of economic reform.Thank you.Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI at Indian Institute of Economics, August 16, 1999. The Address is based on outline of a public lecture delivered by Stanford University, USA on November 24, 1998.14Dr.Reddy atHyderabad, on Address by * management and funds management.developed by RBI.Budgetary system.Karnataka have already legislated on this subject.Role of RBI
