Conference of Chairman of Private Sector Banksth at NIBM Pune, on 15 February 1999 .(Address  by S.P.Talwar, Deputy Governor,  Reserve Bank of India)Way forward for Private Banks in IndiaIt is a Pleasure to be in the midst of my banker friends whom I had a privilege toR2.  It is indeed nice on the part of NIBM to have organised such a Conferencewhich I am sure would in the normal course deliberate on the role and initiatives of theprivate banking community. I shall at the same time consider it worthwhile if you wouldalso take into account  the responsibilities cast on the private sector banks in the presenttimes when the Indian banking system is trying to  reorient itself to meet the challengesarising out of the competitive environment in the context of ongoing financial sectorreforms by way of deregulation of interest rates and prudential self governance, besidesthe pressures of globalisation bringing in their wake not only extensive use of technologyand also application of  transparency standards in published accounts. For a Conferenceof this kind, it is therefore very appropriate for NIBM to have made this congregation amix of traditional bankers together with the technology driven new breed of Indian banks.3.  Of course, I am also aware that for around 3 decades NIBM has been playingthis catalyst role in bringing together the Rrofessional bankers and providing anopportunity for them to have an interface with the central bank of the country on thevarious aspects of their immediate concern. I am informed that this session is essentiallymeant for an interaction between us. But in the background of what I stated earlier, I seekyour kind permission to convert this into a session of introspection on some of the vitalissues before the Indian banking system and particularly those which I perceive arecrucial for the very survival of Rrivate banks in our country.  I would like to highlightsome of the more important ones to serve as a backdrop for the fruitful discussions thatare bound to follow later.4.  On the positive front, I would be failing in my duty if I do not acknowledge thefact that the new banks have brought in the latest technologies in transaction processing,innovated on banking products and excelled in customer service almost giving a run toeven well established foreign banks in the matter. Their operating costs, particularly staffcosts to total income are at much lower levels than that of the foreign banks due toextensive use of technology and absence of restrictive practices in an officer oriented staffset up. It also makes me proud to note that some of the old private banks maintain highstandards of operational efficiency and won accolades from the market and rated at top byleading financial dailies and journals.5.  The focus of the statutory regulation of commercial banks in India till the early1990s was mainly on licensing, administration of minimum capital requirements, pricingof services including administration of interest rates on deposits as well as credit, reservesand liquid asset requirements.   After evolution of BIS prudential norms in 1988,  RBI hasast. meet individually on many occasions in the taken  a series of measures to  realign its regulatory standards almost on par with theinternational best practices. At the same time it also took care to keep in view the socio-economic conditions of the country, the business practices, payment  systems prevalent inthe country and the predominantly agrarian nature of the economy and ensured that theprudential norms were applied  over the period and across different segments of thefinancial  sector in a phased manner.6.  Some of the regulatory and prudential norms suggested by the NarasimhamCommittee (2) though essential for the transformation process of the Indian bankingsystem to reach global standards also cast heavy responsibility on banks in strengtheningtheir financials which may not be feasible unless there is also a simultaneous structuralrealignment on the lines suggested by the Committee. I would like to discuss a few suchrecommendations of the Committee which do have a bearing on the course the privatesector banks should follow in the days to come.Capital Adequacy standards7.  Main thrust of the committee in this regard is on the following direction:• increase of CRAR from 8 to 10% by 2002 and authority for RBI to raise thisfurther for individual banks taking into account the risk profile• capital adequacy requirements should take into account market risks inaddition to credit risks• 5% risk weight for market risk for government and approved securities• risk weighting of government guaranteed advances100% risk weight for foreign exchange open positionImplementation of the aforesaid  recommendations require a great deal of effortson the part of not only public sector banks but also old private banks many of them being8.  In fact I would like to mention in this forum that the public sector banksdespite their largeness would need to mobilise externally only around Rs 5400 crores, thattoo by only 13 nationalised banks and 5 associate banks of SBI, as additional capitalfunds to meet the proposed CRAR requirement of 10% by year 2002. This is despiteassuming an average annual growth at 15% in their risk weighted assets, conservativeestimate on return on assets at 0.8% and 12% increase by way of retained earnings basedon past trends over this period. Again, a large proportion (Rs. 3350 crores) of the abovecapital funds are meant for the strong banks and easily mobilisable from the capitalmarket either through equity or sub ordinated debt. Further, the needs of associated bankswould easily be met by a cash rich SBI. I thought that we should provide aforesaid correctpicture to the market and public in general and show how the assessment, in some casespitched  upto Rs.13500 crores, by various international agencies on the additional capitalfunds need of our public sector banks falls wide off the mark.9.  All said, it has to be accepted that the old private banks in the country need2   substantially under capitalised.   large infusion of capital funds to make their operations viable and enable them to reach alevel playing field. Additional capitalisation is essential for them for business growth andmatch the capital prescriptions for dealing with various emerging risk weighted productsin Indian banking system. They need to make these efforts to reach the capital levelstandards of, if not the public sector banks, at least their immediate cousins viz. Newprivate banks.10.  It is to be acknowledged that many of the old private banks suffer from lowcapital base. Although many banks have been in existence for considerably long periodand  12 banks have  in fact completed  more than 50 years of existence , they have nottaken steps to adequately strengthen their capital base. This is perhaps due toapprehensions of the management groups of losing controls over the banks on anenhanced capital base.11.  As many as 14 old private banks had capital funds which ranged fromRs.2.04 crore to Rs.95.12 crore as on 31 March 1998. Seven banks had capital funds ofless than Rs.50 crore and have been advised to increase the position beyond Rs.50 crorewithin a period of 3 years.  Five banks had CRAR at levels less than 8 per cent as on31 March 1998 which continued to be so even as on 30th September 1998. Only 18 ofthe 26 banks enjoyed CRAR level of more than 10% as on 30th September 1998. I expectthat these facts would engage your attention and trigger the coming together by theregional groupings and those with symmetry in business and operational profiles towardsconsolidation and restructuring  to provide the much needed  thrust for synergising thefunctioning of private banks in the country.Prudential norms12.  Implementation of financial sector reforms in their second phase requiresentire portfolio of government securities should be marked to market in the next 3 years.While this is already in vogue for new banks, old banks have to gradually  move towardsthis regime from the existing level of 70% in respect of current assets. It is a matter ofsatisfaction that the old private banks together have reached a level of 87.31% in respectof current investments by end of September 1998, with many of them already switchingover to marking their entire investment to market As already indicated in the RBI’s Midterm review in October 1998, marking investments upto 100% to market would be put inplace over the next three years and I expect the remaining banks also to move in thisdirection on their own as done already by many of their counterparts and foreign banks.13.  While dwelling on the subject of investments, I would like to mention anemerging issue of supervisory concern in this area. In the light of substantial growth inthe Non SLR investments by banks during the last 18 months, there is a need for properassessment of underlying risks in equities and corporate bonds and debentures acquiredby banks. This is all the more important in the context of the quoted non SLR investmentsto total non SLR investments reaching a level of as low as 39.59% in respect of new3ststbanks and 35.28% in old private banks as on 30th September 1998.Non performing advances14.  The following are some of important norms of asset classification and incomerecognition norms commended for adoption by the central bank as outlined by the• classification of assets as doubtful if it had remained in the substandardcategory for 18 months in the first instance and to be brought down to 12 months  • non performing government guaranteed advances should also be broughtunder NPA classification norms• evergreening of irregular advances by making fresh advances should beavoided and suggestions for relaxation of the definition of NPAs and the classificationnorms should be resisted by the central bank• average level of net NPAs for all banks should be reduced to below 5% by2000 and to 3% by 2002• banks with international presence (Bharat Overseas Bank has internationalpresence at present amongst private banks and new banks may aspire in the times tocome) should reduce gross NPAs to 5 and 3% and net NPAs to 3 and 0%by 2000 and2002• international practice of income recognition  norm of 90 days as against thepresent practice of 180 days should be introduced by 2002• general provision for standard assets at 1 %As you are already aware,  RBI has already moved ahead in implementing manyof the above recommendations except in regard to adoption of 12 months forclassification of doubtful debts and reduction of past due tenure to a period of 90 days forincome recognition asset classification. At the same time we have taken care to phasethem for adoption, as in the past, over  a gradual spread of time to ensure that the burdenof absorption remains at bearable level for the institutions.15.  While it is normally expected that the banks in private sector will be moreconcerned in credit management and ensure faster recovery and recycling of loanportfolio, it is surprising to note that their NPA level, including that of new banks hasbeen increasing at alarming levels over the last few years.   The gross NPAs of old privatesector banks have been rising   in absolute terms during the last 3 years, from Rs.1474.34crore in March 96 to Rs.2794.13 crore in March 98 and forming 7.99 % and 10.92% tothe gross advances as on the respective dates. As many as 17 old private banks has grossNPAs level exceeding 10% as on 31st March 1998. The level of gross NPAs of thesebanks has shot up to 13.84% (net NPAs at 8.58%) as on 30th September 1998.4      laterNarasimham Committee (2) over the next few years.16.  It is more a matter of concern to note that  New private sector banks thoughhave started their operations in the real sense only from 1995 have accumulated  non-performing advances within short period. The gross NPAs of these banks had increasedfrom 218.90 crore in March 97 to 405.63 crore in 31 March 98 with the percentage alsoraising from 2.30 % to 3.21 %  at the end of respective periods. The gross NPAs wereestimated at 5.40% (net NPAs at 3.98%) at the end of September 1998.17.  The increase of NPA in private sector banks is indicative of an alarming trendin this area viewed in the light of a rise of as much as 71.68% in gross NPAs in respect ofnew banks followed by 22.95% by old private banks as against 5.49 per cent increaseregistered by the Indian Banking System during the half year ended September 1998. It isunfortunate that 2 of the 9 new banks have reported gross NPAs above 5%  and 19 oldbanks reporting gross NPAs above 10%. I would like all of you seriously look at thefactors which led to such a sorry state of affairs in the area of credit management. Youshould initiate  immediate steps for a relook into the credit appraisal techniques followedby your banks and institute or activate loan review mechanism especially for largeborrowal accounts and systems to identify potential NPAs.Credit  and fund Management18.  The private banks and particularly the new banks continued to depend heavilyupon bill  market as a part of their lending operations with bills purchased  constitutingmore than 30% of their loans and advances (13% for old banks) as on 30th September1998. The banks were found on many occasions dealing with such a portfolio in a rathercasual manner leaving aside time tested evaluation standards relating to appraisal ofcustomer’s capabilities to retire the bills in time. They had instead rested on theavailability of other bank’s comfort letters, which at times proved forged and violatedmaximum permissible level of finance a customer can obtain from banking system byway of funded and non funded exposures.The new banks are particularly taking recourse to market borrowings as a regularsource of funding their operations and also for arbitrage reasons. There should be clearlydefined limits beyond which banks should not  rely on the call money market. Access tocall market should be only for meeting unforeseen swings and not as regular means offinancing bank's lendings.Risk Management and ALM techniques19. The ratio of off balance sheet items as a percentage of total assets was high at85.41% in respect of new banks  (30.17% for old banks,  55.36 % for all banks, 321.69%for foreign banks) as  at the end of September 98. The banks should  pay greater attentionto ALM and avoid mismatches and cover liquidity and interest rate risks. They shouldalso adopt statistical risk management techniques like value at risk in respect of balancesheet items which are susceptible to market price fluctuations, forex rate volatility and5interest rate changesCredit Deposit RatioThe Credit Deposit Ratio of the new banks was 46.58% followed by 49.55%registered for old private banks as against 48.68% for the Indian Banking System as on30th September 1998. The banks should make extra efforts to optimise their creditportfolio without sacrificing credit discipline.Profitability20. The proportion of  high cost inter bank deposits is high in the case of newprivate sector banks like in the case of foreign banks.  In fact, largest proportion of highcost deposits is held by new banks followed by old private sector banks. This may lead tolower profitability particularly in the context of these banks already having a thin marginof interest spread in their operations.21. The new banks have recorded the lowest   interest spread at 0.89 per centfollowed by 1.24 % in respect of old private banks which was less than industry averageof 1.48% recorded for the half year ended September 98.  They were still be able tomaintain profits perhaps on account of low operating costs. The staff expenses aspercentage of total income constituted only 2.82 per cent in respect of new banks andeven less than foreign banks at 7.62%. This is indeed a commendable aspect of theirworking. The proportion was 11.46 per cent for old private banks for half year endedSeptember 98.22.  It is worthmentioning that barring 4 banks all other banks reported profitsduring 1997-98 and declared dividends ranging from 9% to 75% for that year.Transparency and Disclosure norms23.  There is a growing demand world over for introduction of better transparencyand disclosure norms. As you all know, RBI has already introduced  such norms over thelast 3 years requiring banks to include in their published accounts various critical ratiosrelating to their operations, state of health of their provisioning and loan and investmentportfolio and staff productivity levels. Narasimham Committee(2) has particularlyrecommended following disclosure parameters for adoption by the industry.• need for disclosure of maturity pattern of assets and liabilities, foreigncurrency assets and liabilities, and movements in provision account and NPAs• direction by RBI to banks for publishing consolidate group balance sheet• full disclosure relating to connected lending and exposure to sensitive sectors• disclosure of loans to related companies in bank's balance sheetRBI is already working out the modalities for introduction of the aforesaidstandards and banks are being advised shortly in the matter.6   Systems and methods24. There is increase in the number of frauds reported by the private banksincluding new banks during the last 3 years. The total number of frauds reported hadincreased from 182 (Rs.14.51 crore) in 1995 to 270  (Rs.95.92 crore) in 1997. Number offrauds reported during 1998 (upto September 1998) were 170 for Rs 76.06 crores. Thebanks should therefore make internal control systems as core of their business operationswith particular focus on internal inspection and audit, concurrent audit, submission ofcontrol returns by branches and controlling offices, visits by controlling officials to fieldlevel offices. The banks should also introduce computer audit on a regular basis.Technology upgradation25. With globalising, financial systems have undergone fundamental changesbecause of the ongoing revolution in IT and EFT and payment system areas, these twoemerging as pillars of modern banking developments. There is immediate need forintroduction of information and control systems particularly in many of the old privatesector banks towards- better tracking of spreads, costs and NPAs for higher- to identify and promote profitable products and quality  customers26. The banks should explore the feasibility of collaborative arrangements withuniversities and other institutions in India and abroad offering specialised training to thefinancial services industry to facilitate inflow of emerging training packages andStructural Issues27.  As already mentioned by me, capital adequacy levels would have to goundergo rapid changes flexible with emerging risk trends in the banking system.  Thequestion of minimum threshold capital for  old private sector banks deserves attention andmergers could be one of the options available for reaching the required capital threshold. Iwould like to emphasise that mergers need not necessarily be between weak and strongbanks but can happen even between strong banks as is happening around the world. Thelatter type of mergers would make greater economic and commercial sense and have a7methodologies.- efficient treasury management- risks and assets liability management and- accurate and timely information for strategic decisions   profitability,Connected Lendings28. I would like to mention another disturbing trend emerging of late in themanagement of banks. As all of you are aware, Section 20 of the Banking Regulation Actprohibits loans to directors or to any firm or company in which directors are interested.The banks should maintain arms-length relationship in respect of own subsidiaries orjoint ventures; all loans to such companies have to be made at commercial rates and aresubject to limits which apply to similar companies. But in many cases the aforesaiddiscipline has not been adhered and violated in spirit and ultimately resulted in the loanfacilities turning as NPAs. Such instances which have come to light during the course ofinspections and through off-site reporting by banks are viewed seriously by the centralbank. I would like to stress again that we resort to extreme supervisory action in suchcases and in fact two chief executives of private banks have been removed by the centralbank for gross violation of the above norms of connected lendings. Though it is not myintention to scare the bank managements, I still thought that I can leave a word of cautionMillennium (Year 2000) Issues29. I would like draw your attention to one of the current IT related issues viz.Y2k problem which is pursued by RBI more as a business continuity risk  than atechnology problem. Initiation of Supervisory measures by RBI is in synchronisation withthe standards set by BIS. RBI has an enlarged role of monitoring and enforcing thecompliance by the entire financial sector and co-ordinates its efforts with the National30.  A target date of 31st December 1998 was fixed for ensuring Y2K complianceand banks may be subject to penal measures in case of persisting non compliance beyondMarch 1999. Institutions have also been advised to put in place appropriate contingencyplans to take care of possible system failures. A High Powered Working Group in RBIunder the chairmanship of Deputy Governor and with representatives drawn also frombanking industry reviews the progress made in compliance at regular intervals.Issues to be addressed31.  To conclude , I would like to reiterate the following issues for introspection• In order to bring in synergy to their operations and bring in economies ofscale, the private banks should go if necessary for voluntary mergers among themselves.The mergers need not necessarily be between a weak and  strong bank. It can also bebetween two strong banks as proven by recent global experiments.• There is an ever increasing pressure on banks' profits and business portfoliodue to globalisation. The banks should therefore go in for an appropriate training8by the banking community.level Task Force set up by the Prime Minister of India.to the private banking community in this area.    'force multiplier' effect.packages and collaborative arrangements with specialists in technology and new productareas.• The future trend of private banks should be not by mere expansion but moreby way of consolidation.• The performance ratios of both old private banks  in comparison to othersegments of the Indian banking system should make them vulnerable. Unless the bankswake up and redraw their business targets and operational strategies towards  optimumearnings some of them will land in serious problems of even survival in the near future.Any apathy on the part of private banks will cast poor reflection on the investors' interestI take this opportunity to thank the Director, Shri Subramaniam for providing mean opportunity to share my views and concerns in this august forum of professional anddynamic bankers. I wish the Conference all success.9besides proving themselves as a drag on the Indian Banking System.
