Indian banks and the global challenges*It gives me great pleasure and privilege to participate in the Seminar jointly hosted byIndian Merchants' Chamber and IBA at a juncture when financial services sectoracross jurisdictions is going through a strong phase of increasing globalisation.Integration of economies leads to integration of financial markets catalyzing theglobalisation process. The growing role of the financial sector in allocation of resourceshas significant potential advantages for the efficiency with which our economyfunctions. Consequently, the adverse consequences of malfunction of the financialsystem are likely to be more severe than they used to be in the past. Hence, all ourefforts today are focused at ensuring greater financial stability. Given the significanceof the Indian banking system, one cannot afford to underplay the importance of arobust and resilient banking system.2. The enhanced role of the banking sector in the Indian economy, the increasinglevels of deregulation along with the increasing levels of competition have facilitatedglobalisation of the India banking system and placed numerous demands on banks.Operating in this demanding environment has exposed banks to various challenges.The last decade has witnessed major changes in the financial sector - new banks, newfinancial institutions, new instruments, new windows, and new opportunities - and,along with all this, new challenges. While deregulation has opened up new vistas forbanks to augment revenues, it has entailed greater competition and consequentlygreater risks. Demand for new products, particularly derivatives, has required banks todiversify their product mix and also effect rapid changes in their processes andoperations in order to remain competitive in the globalised environment.Globalisation – a challenge as well as an opportunity3. The benefits of globalisation have been well documented and are beingincreasingly recognised. Globalisation of domestic banks has also been facilitated bytremendous advancement in information and communications technology.Globalisation has thrown up lot of opportunities but accompanied by concomitant risks.There is a growing realisation that the ability of countries to conduct business acrossnational borders and the ability to cope with the possible downside risks would depend,inter-alia, on the soundness of the financial system and the strength of the individualparticipants. Adoption of appropriate prudential, regulatory, supervisory, and____________________________* Inaugural address by Shri V. Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the seminar on "Indian Banks and theGlobal Challenges" organized jointly by the Indian Merchants' Chamber and the Indian Banks' Association in Mumbai onJanuary 31, 2006technological framework on par with international best practices enables strengtheningof the domestic banking system, which would help in fortifying it against the risks thatmight arise out of globalisation. In India, we had strengthened the banking sector toface the pressures that may arise out of globalisation by adopting the banking sectorreforms in a calibrated manner, which followed the twin governing principles of non-1disruptive progress and consultative process .Global challenges in banking4. Recently I was afforded an opportunity to speak on the challenges faced by theIndian banking industry. To recapitulate, I had identified a few broad challenges facedby the Indian banks in the following areas, viz., enhancement of customer service;application of technology; implementation of Basel II; improvement of risk managementsystems; implementation of new accounting standards; enhancement of transparency& disclosures; and compliance with KYC aspects. If we were to identify a few globalchallenges which banks face today, I am sure we would cover some common ground.An overview of the global challenges would include the following: Basel IIimplementation; enhancing corporate governance; alignment of regulatory andaccounting requirements; outsourcing risks; and application of advanced technology. Ipropose to cover these aspects now.Basel II implementation5. Basel II implementation is widely acknowledged as a significant challenge facedby both banks and the regulators internationally. It is true that Basel II implementationmay be seen as a compliance challenge. While it may be so for some banks, I wouldventure to mention that Basel II implementation has another dimension which offersconsiderable opportunities to banks. I would like to highlight two opportunities that areoffered to banks, viz., refinement of risk management systems; and improvement incapital efficiency6. Comprehensive risk management: Under Basel I banks were focused on creditand market risks. Basel II has brought into focus a larger number of risks requiringbanks to focus on a larger canvas. Besides the increase in the number of risks, banksare now beginning to focus on their inter-linkages with a view to achieve a morecomprehensive risk management framework. Basel II implementation, therefore, isbeing increasingly seen as a medium through which banks constantly endeavour toupgrade the risk management systems to address the changing environment. Further,in the initial stages, banks were managing each risk in isolation. It is no longeradequate to manage each risk independently. Enterprises worldwide are, therefore,now putting in place an integrated framework for risk management which is proactive,systematic and spans across the entire organisation.  Banks in India are also movingfrom the individual silo system to an enterprise wide risk management system. Whilethe first milestone would be risk integration across the entity, banks are also aware ofthe desirability of risk aggregation across the group both in the specific risk areas asalso across the risks. Banks would, therefore, be required to allocate significantresources towards this endeavour.7. Capital efficiency: Basel II prescriptions have ushered in a transition from thetraditional regulatory measure of capital adequacy to an evaluation of whether a bankhas found the most efficient use of its capital to support its business i.e., a transitionfrom capital adequacy to capital efficiency. In this transition, how effectively capital isused will determine return on equity and a consequent enhancement of shareholdervalue. In effect, banks may adopt a more dynamic approach to use of capital, in whichcapital will flow quickly to its most efficient use. This revised efficiency approach isexpected to guide the return-on-equity strategy and influence banks’ business plans.With the extension of capital charge for market risks to the AFS portfolio this year andthe coming into force of Basel II norms in March 2007, banks would need to shore upthe capital levels not only for complying with these requirements but also for supportingthe balance sheet growth. With a view to enhancing the options available to banks foraugmenting their capital levels, the Reserve Bank has recently permitted banks toissue new capital instruments, including perpetual instruments. A notable feature ofthese instruments is that these are designed to help banks in not only managing theircapital effectively but also efficiently.Enhancing corporate governance8. The issues related to corporate governance have continued to attractconsiderable national and international attention in light of a number of high-profilebreakdowns in corporate governance. This becomes all the more relevant for bankssince they not only accept and deploy large amount of uncollateralized public fundsin fiduciary capacity, but also leverage such funds through credit creation.  Banksare also important participants in the payment and settlement systems.  In view ofthe above, legal prescriptions for ownership and governance of banks in BankingRegulation Act, 1949 have been supplemented by regulatory prescriptions issuedby RBI from time to time.9. In view of the importance of the banking system for financial stability, soundcorporate governance is not only relevant at the level of the individual bank, but is alsoa critical ingredient at the system level. Effective risk management systems determinethe health of the financial system and its ability to survive economic shocks. To a largeextent, many risk management failures reflect a breakdown in corporate governancewhich arise due to poor management of conflicts of interest, inadequate understandingof key banking risks, and poor Board oversight of the mechanisms for riskmanagement and internal audit. Corporate governance is, therefore, the foundation foreffective risk managements in banks and thus the foundation for a sound financial2system . Therefore, the choices which banks make when they establish their riskmanagement and corporate governance systems have important ramifications forfinancial stability. These systems can affect how the institution functions and how3others perceive it in the marketplace .10. A good “governance culture” is crucial for financial stability but since it is an‘intangible’, rules may not be able to capture its essence effectively. Therefore, banksmay have to cultivate a good governance culture building in appropriate checks andbalances in their operations. There are four important forms of oversight that should beincluded in the organisational structure of any bank in order to ensure appropriatechecks and balances: (1) oversight by the board of directors or supervisory board; (2)oversight by individuals not involved in the day-to-day running of the various businessareas; (3) direct line supervision of different business areas; and (4) independent riskmanagement, compliance and audit functions. In addition, it is important that keypersonnel are fit and proper for their jobs. Although some ownership structures mighthave the potential to alter the strategies and objectives of a bank, these banks will alsoface many of the same risks associated with weak corporate governance.Consequently, the general principles of sound corporate governance should also be4applied to all banks irrespective of their unique ownership structures .Compliance with international accounting standards11. One of the prime international standards considered relevant for ensuring a safeand sound banking system is the ‘Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision’issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). Accounting standardsare now a part of the set of twelve standards that have been identified by the FinancialStability Forum as conducive to a robust financial infrastructure. Financial reporting andprudential supervision have slightly different perspectives. While the former is orientedtowards capturing the historical position, the latter has a forward looking elementparticularly with reference to measurement of impairment and capital. An importantchallenge, therefore, is to ensure that accounting standards and prudential frameworksare mutually consistent. While working towards achieving this consistency between thetwo sets of standards, it is essential for the regulators to be in a position to address anyimplications that the changes in accounting standards may have for the safety and5soundness of banks .12. Derivative activity in banks in India has been increasing at a brisk pace.While the risk management framework for derivative trading, which is a relativelynew area for Indian banks (particularly more in respect of structured products), isan essential pre-requisite, the absence of clear accounting guidelines in this area ismatter of significant concern. It is widely accepted that as the volume oftransactions increases, which is happening in the Indian banking system, the needto upgrade the accounting framework needs no emphasis.  The World Bank’sROSC on Accounting and Auditing in India has commented on the absence of anaccounting standard which deals with recognition, measurement, presentation anddisclosures pertaining to financial instruments. The Accounting Standards Board ofthe Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is considering issue ofAccounting Standards on the above aspects pertaining to financial Instruments.These will be the Indian parallel to International Financial Reporting Standard 7,International Accounting Standards 32 and 39. The proposed AccountingStandards will be of considerable significance for financial entities and couldtherefore have implications for the financial sector. The formal introduction of theseAccounting Standards by the ICAI is likely to take some time in view of theprocesses involved. In the meanwhile, the Reserve Bank is considering the needfor banks and financial entities adopting the broad underlying principles of IAS 39.Since this is likely to give rise to some regulatory / prudential issues all relevantaspects are being comprehensively examined. The proposals in this regard would,as is normal, be discussed with the market participants before introduction.Adoption and implementation of these principles are likely to pose a greatchallenge to both the banks and the Reserve Bank.Outsourcing risks13. Banks are increasingly using outsourcing for achieving strategic aims leading toeither rationalisation of operational costs or tapping specialist expertise which is notavailable internally.  'Outsourcing' may be defined as a bank's use of a third party,including an affiliated entity within a corporate group, to perform activities on acontinuing basis that would normally be undertaken by the bank itself. Typicallyoutsourced financial services include applications processing (loan origination, creditcard), document processing, investment management, marketing and research,supervision of loans, data processing and back office related activities etc.14. Outsourcing might give rise to several risks including, strategic risk, reputationrisk, compliance risk, operational risk, exit strategy risk, counterparty risk, country risk,access risk, concentration risk and systemic risk.  The failure of a service provider toprovide a specified service, ensure security/ confidentiality, comply with legal andregulatory requirements can lead to financial losses/ reputational risk for the bank andcould also lead to systemic risks for the entire banking system in a country. It wouldtherefore be imperative for the bank outsourcing its activities to ensure effectivemanagement of these risks.15. It is in this background that RBI has issued draft guidelines on outsourcing,which is intended to provide direction and guidance to banks to effectively managerisks arising from such outsourcing activities. The underlying principles for anyoutsourcing arrangement by a bank are that such arrangements should neitherdiminish the bank’s ability to fulfill its obligations to its customers and the RBI norimpede effective supervision by RBI. Outsourcing banks, therefore, should take stepsto ensure that the service provider employs the same high standard of care inperforming the services as would be employed by the banks if the activities wereconducted within the banks and not outsourced. Accordingly, banks are not expectedto outsource any activity that would result in their internal control, business conduct, orreputation being compromised or weakened.Application of advanced technology16. Technology is a key driver in the banking industry, which creates new businessmodels and processes, and also revolutionises distribution channels. Banks whichhave made inadequate investment in technology have consequently faced an erosionof their market shares. The beneficiaries are those banks which have invested intechnology. Adoption of technology also enhances the quality of risk managementsystems in banks. Recognising the benefits of modernising their technologyinfrastructure banks are taking the right initiatives.  While doing so, banks have fouroptions to choose from: they can build a new system themselves, or buy best of themodules, or buy a comprehensive solution, or outsource. In this context banks need toclearly define their core competencies to be sure that they are investing in areas thatwill distinguish them from other market players, and give them a competitive6advantage . A further challenge which banks face in this regard is to ensure that theyderive maximum advantage from their investments in technology and avoid wastefulexpenditure which might arise on account of uncoordinated and piecemeal adoption oftechnology; adoption of inappropriate/ inconsistent technology and adoption ofobsolete technology.Capacity building17. As dictated by the changing environment, banks need to focus on appropriatecapacity building measures to equip their staff to handle advanced risk managementsystems and supervisors also need to equally equip themselves with appropriate skillsto have effective supervision of banks adopting those systems. In the likelihood of ahigh level of attrition in the system, banks need to focus on motivating their skilled staff7and retaining them . Skill requirements would be significantly higher for banks planningto migrate to the advanced approaches under Basel II. Capacity building gains greaterrelevance in these banks, so as to equip themselves to take advantage of theincentives offered under the advanced approaches.18. A relevant point in this regard is that capacity building should be across theinstitution and not confined to any particular level or any particular area. The demandfor better skills can be met either from within or from outside. It would perhaps beworthwhile to first glean through the existing resources to identify misplaced or hiddenor forgotten resources and re-position them to boost the bank’s efforts to capitalise onavailable skills. This does not undermine the benefits that a bank may derive bymeeting their requirements from the market, but is only intended to prioritise theprocess.Conclusion19. The global challenges which banks face are not confined only to the globalbanks. These aspects are also highly relevant for banks which are part of a globalisedbanking system. Further, overcoming these challenges by the other banks is expectedto not only stand them in good stead during difficult times but also augurs well for thebanking system to which they belong and will also equip them to launch themselves asa global bank.Acknowledgements:1. Dr. Y.V. Reddy on Banking Sector Reforms in India An Overview at the Instituteof Bankers of Pakistan, Karachi, Pakistan, May 18, 20052. Dr. Alan Bollard, Corporate governance in the financial sector, Christchurch,New Zealand, 7 April 2003.3. Mark W. Olson, Business Trends and Management Challenges for the BankingIndustry, Annual Economic Outlook Conference, Middle Tennessee StateUniversity, Murfreesboro, Tennessee, 16 September 20054. Enhancing corporate governance for banking organisations, Consultativedocument issued by BCBS, July 2005.5. Malcolm D Knight, Banking and insurance regulation and supervision: Greaterconvergence, common challenges, Madrid, 22-23 September 20046. UBS AG, The Bank for Banks Industry Challenges. August 20047. Ms. K.J.Udeshi, Financial System Stability and Basel II  - Way Forward, SriLanka, August 2005.Inaugural Ad
