Monetary Policy in India : Objectives, Instruments,I thank the organisers for inviting me to deliver the inaugural address at the Fourth AnnualSecurities Industry Summit. Although the discussions in this Summit will specifically veeraround the securities market, monetary policy strongly influences the working of thefinancial markets. As a central banker, I will, therefore, speak on monetary policy making,In India, monetary policy has always emphasised the objectives of price stabilityand growth. What this, in effect, has meant in practical policy setting is, formulating abalance between the two objectives depending on the evolving situation but within theApart from these two important goals, there has been a conscious attempt on thepart of the Reserve Bank in recent years to maintain orderly conditions in the foreignexchange market, and to curb destabilising and self-fulfilling speculative activities. Thishas assumed strategic importance for the sustainability of the external sector in the face ofand international financial integration, exchange rate expectations do impact on thedomestic stance of monetary policy and hence the significance of inflation. In thetransitional phase, however, given the exchange market imperfections, the exchange rateobjective may occasionally predominate due to emphasis on avoidance of undue volatility.In a broader framework, the objectives of monetary policy in India continue to beprice stability and growth. These are pursued inter alia through ensuring credit availability,with stability in the external value of the rupee as well as overall financial stability, allbeing reflective of pursuit of the overall objectives. The relative emphasis among theThe conduct of monetary policy in India has traditionally proceeded with the helpof an intermediate target, which the central bank could influence directly and which bears areasonably close relationship with the ultimate objectives. The particular mode of centralbank intervention is the operating instrument. Macro-economic variables, which postuseful information about the objectives of monetary policy, although they may not inthemselves be amenable to central bank targeting, are ‘indicators’ or ‘information’variables.Targetsobjectives is governed by the prevailing circumstances.term monetary policy adjustments.In fact, sometimes, as was the case recently, it could be the most dominant reason for short-growing cross border capital flows into the economy. With the increasing order of domesticbroad context of keeping the inflation rate within a reasonable bound.Objectiveswhich I trust will provide some perspectives to the deliberations at the Summit.Chairman and friends,Operating Procedures and DilemmasThe Reserve Bank of India (RBI) sets indicative broad money (M3) expansiontargets in line with the expected rate of growth of GDP and a tolerable level of inflation.Consistent with the targeted level of broad money expansion, is a desired level of reservewith the likely fiscal and external payments position, since the main sources of reservemoney expansion are net RBI credit to government and net foreign exchange assets. Thetargeted M3 expansion is publicly announced through the Governor’s statement onmonetary and credit policy. The broad money target is also supported by a number of otherindicators such as movement in interest rates, exchange rate and availability of credit toMonetary target is premised on a stable demand function for money. In the Indiancontext, a number of earlier studies on the demand for money have demonstrated that it isstable. Dr.Rangarajan demonstrated that money demand equations provide reasonablepredictions of average changes in prices over a medium-term horizon of 4-5 years, thoughnot necessarily on a year-to-year basis. In essence, the concern was with the long-runstability of the money demand function in terms of its most proximate determinant, i.e. realGDP, rather than its short-term behaviour. Most recent studies in RBI examined thestability of the money demand equation using a number of alternative procedures. Whilethese tests showed parameter shifts, they did not point to parameter instability. In the1990s, the monetary targets were set either as point targets or in a narrow range implyingscope for missing point targets, but it has to be recognised that a wider range wouldThe pressures on monetary expansion in the earlier part of targeting exerciseemanated from monetisation of fiscal deficit and later on from capital inflows. During theperiod 1985-92, net RBI credit to Central Government accounted for over 96 per cent ofthe monetary base, which was reduced to about 65 per cent in the subsequent period duringAlthough the practice of automatic monetisation of the budgetary deficit was doneaway with, effective from April 1997, it can significantly reduce the pressure onmonetisation only if the size of the Central Government’s market borrowing programme iskept within reasonable limits. However, there is a qualitative difference, since the RBI hassome flexibility now in respect of the extent of its support to Government borrowingWith increasing market orientation of the financial structure and internationalcapital flows, monetary policy responds to developments on an ongoing basis. In anadministered interest rate and exchange rate regime, the quantity variables dominated andtransmitted monetary policy impulses. However, external and financial sector reforms havesince enhanced the sensitiveness of quantity variables to their market determined price, i.e.It must be recognised that in recent times, the emphasis has also been on closelymonitoring different indicators apart from relying on the intermediate target. For aiming atthe intermediate target (viz., broad money) the underlying operating target is reserve2interest rate and exchange rate.programme.1993-98, with corresponding increase in net foreign exchange assets of the RBI.question the credibility, diluting the very objective of targeting.productive sectors of the economy.money expansion. The order of the reserve money expansion, however, has to be consistentmoney, particularly the banks’ reserves, while the supplementary operating target is theThe reforms in the monetary and financial sectors have enabled the RBI to expandthe array of instruments at its command. As already mentioned, the operational target ofmonetary policy continues to be banks’ reserves which is controlled by changes in reserverequirements effected mainly through the instruments of cash reserve ratio (CRR).However, the use of CRR as an instrument of monetary control is sought to be de-emphasised and the liquidity management in the system is increasingly undertaken throughIn view of the overall downward movement in CRR, except on occasions ofgovernment securities by RBI. Over the reform period, the market absorption ofgovernment securities was facilitated by reforms in the government securities market,which ensured market related rates of interest and thus some of the basic conditions wereThe short-term liquidity management is also aided by conduct of repos on a regularbasis. Usually, the RBI conducts repos for a maturity of up to 14 days, which is the cycleabsorb very short-term liquidity and to even out money market rates, especially overnightcall money rates. The repo rates and the amounts tendered in the repo auctions, apart fromreflecting liquidity conditions, provide a floor for the overnight call money rates. In theevent of tight liquidity conditions, the RBI’s liquidity support to primary dealers (PDs)The RBI also reactivated the Bank Rate in April 1997 as a reference rate and as asignalling device to reflect the stance of monetary policy. The interest rates on differenttype accommodation from the RBI including refinance are linked to the Bank Rate. Theactivation of the Bank Rate endowed the RBI with an additional instrument. It must benoted that the announcement impact of Bank Rate changes has been pronounced on theThe refinance window of the RBI provides an additional instrument for influencingreserves. Until recently, the RBI provided two types of refinance facilities to banks - exportcredit refinance and general refinance. While the former facility is formula based and isextended to banks against their outstanding export credit eligible for refinance, the latterThe general refinance window has since been replaced by a Collateralised Lendingfacility (CLF) within the overall framework of an Interim Liquidity Adjustment Facility3(ILAF).facility was provided to enable banks to tide over their temporary liquidity shortages.prime lending rates of commercial banks.call money rates.enables it to directly intervene in the market, thereby moderating pressures on the overnightfor reserve requirements. Recently, the RBI has been conducting 3-4 day fixed rate repos toprovided for developing a secondary market.exchange rate volatility, the excess liquidity in the system is mopped up by outright sales ofopen market operations (OMO), both outright and repos.Operating Procedures and Instrumentsshort-term interest rate proxied generally by the overnight call money rates.Currently, the liquidity management at the short end is in the form of ILAF.Liquidity is injected by the RBI through CLF to banks, export credit refinance to banks,and liquidity support to PDs.  All these facilities are available subject to quantitative limits[formula-based] for specified duration and at the Bank Rate.  Additional limits could beavailed by banks under Additional Collateralised Lending Facility (ACLF) and by PDs attwo percentage points above the Bank Rate.  Absorption of liquidity will continue to bethrough fixed rate repo i.e., at repo rate announced on a day to day basis.  These aresupplemented by OMO in Government dated securities and Treasury Bills by the RBI.OMO involve decisions by the RBI on a daily basis or even intra-day basis in regard to thequantities and the cut-off yields at which the dated securities and Treasury Bills areoperated upon.  It may be noted that these operations are in the given framework of theCRR that directly affects liquidity and the Bank Rate. Often, the periodic Treasury billauctions by RBI, themselves provide opportunities for the RBI to signal its overall stanceThus, the ILAF provides a mechanism by which liquidity would be injected atvarious interest rates, and absorbed when necessary at the fixed repo rate, so that thevolatility in the money market is minimised and the market operates within a reasonableAt present, there is no formal corridor for market interest rates, but the Bank Rateoften has provided an upper bound and the fixed repo rate provided the lower bound.  In asense, an informal corridor exists for short-term interest rates and the introduction of ILAFThe experience with the movements in the interest rates and exchange rate in thelast two yeas has increasingly reflected the integration among various  market segments.The interest rates of major market instruments [91-day and 364-day Treasury Bills,Commercial Paper and Certificate of Deposit] in recent period show some correlation withMonetary management poses dilemmas not only at the analytical level but also atthe operational level.  In fact, some of these dilemmas have been articulated in the recentFirst, the basic dilemma arises out of the trade off between growth and inflation.Although a consensus has emerged on the basis of empirical evidence that in the long runthere is no trade off between employment and inflation, it is the inconclusive evidence inthe short-run that poses a challenge for monetary management. Given the deleteriouseffects of inflation on distribution of income, there is an imperative need in developingwas stated that “As world inflation rates are currently of the order of 0 to 3 percent, 4 to 6percent inflation rate could be regarded as an acceptable level for India at present.”  This4the RBI.order of inflation has been, it may be noted, built into the monetary operating framework ofcountries to keep the inflation rate as low as possible. In the last year’s Economic Survey, itpolicy statements of Governor Bimal Jalan.Dilemmasrates in the conduct of monetary policy.reasonable speed of adjustment, which augers well for some element of targeting of interesthas facilitated the evolution of this corridor.range.on the appropriateness of interest rate and liquidity.Secondly, even a moderate inflation rate poses a dilemma in an open economy.  Ifthe domestic inflation rate of an economy, however low it may be, is higher than theaverage inflation rate of its trading partners, it puts pressure on the exchange rate.  In thiscontext, the question of simultaneous balance of the internal and external sectors becomesThirdly, in a dynamic setting, when the financial markets are continually evolving,and payment systems and technology are changing, one may not find a clear cut evidenceof stability in the money demand, which is taken as a basis for intermediate targeting;  andin such circumstances, one needs to look also at other relevant indicators.  It is not thatsuch dilemmas are specific to us and by and large, countries follow a menu approach or aFourthly, the dilemma that the central bank faces as a manager of public debt andthe monetary authority is well known.  While the former may require keeping its cost low,the latter may demand a reduction in the extent of government debt that it holds,considering the impact it has on aggregate expenditures and thus on demand.  The market-borrowing programme of the government is determined by the fiscal parameters, but thesize of the government debt impacts on the interest rates in the economy and it should beclearly recognised that there is a limit to the extent of market borrowing that the centralbank can support.  These dilemmas can be resolved through proper fiscal monetary co-the monetary policy has often been discussed.  This is illustrated by the case of a centralbank, as a monetary authority, which may require to reduce the liquidity in the system byinterests of the weak banks.  Similarly, while tightening prudential norms, the central bankFinally, in an open economy, the potential conflict between the interest rate andexchange rate objectives could arise when short-term and volatile capital flows occur.  Forexample, the bouts of volatility in exchange rate experienced by us recently necessitatedthat market conditions are rendered less liquid even if it meant that the interest rates arekept high.  This policy has implications for promoting domestic output growth in that theinterest rates may for this purpose, be required to be kept at moderate levels.  But the largerobjectives of evading the likely potential disruption of domestic activities arising out of anConclusionAs part of financial sector reforms, a number of steps have been taken to enhancethe effectiveness of monetary policy, and these include, improvement in the payments andsettlement systems, development of secondary market in government securities with adiversification of investor base, reduction in non-performing assets, introduction of ALMguidelines, and reduction in the overall transactions costs. In particular, the recent5exchange rate crisis should also be kept in view.has to take into account its impact on banking systems’ capacity to intermediate credit.raising the rate of interest.  But, such a rise in the rate of interest could be detrimental to theFifthly, the conflict between roles of the regulator / supervisor and as a conductor ofordination.‘check list’ to track a number of relevant variables.a major issue.initiatives of RBI to develop money market and debt markets should contribute toAll the reforms in the monetary and financial sectors may not have the desiredresults without credible fiscal adjustment. Notwithstanding the discontinuation ofautomatic monetisation of fiscal deficit, the responsibility for management of a largegovernment borrowing programme does circumscribe the manoeuvrability of monetary•by Invest India Pvt. Ltd., at Mumbai, on May 26, 1999.6 :  Address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, at the Fourth Securities Industry Summit, organisedpolicy.improving the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy.
