FINANCE MINISTER'S SPEECH ON THE OCCASION OFRELEASE OF RBI’S REPORT ON CURRENCY AND FINANCE:2004-2005It gives me great pleasure to be here today on the occasion of the release ofthree volumes of the History of the Reserve Bank of India by the Prime Minister.On this occasion, I am happy to release one of the key research publicationsof the Reserve Bank, viz., Report on Currency and Finance for the year 2004-05.Since 1999, the Report has focussed on a particular theme each year so thatthe overlap with the Bank's other flagship publications, such as, the Annual Reportand the Report on Trend and Progress of Banking in India could be minimised.The theme for the present Report, viz., "Evolution of Central Banking in India",befits the occasion of the release of the History volumes. It is seen that the Reportattempts to capture the transformation of central banking in India in the context ofdevelopment of central banking worldwide. It also undertakes an in depth analysis ofthe various functions of the Reserve Bank, such as, monetary and external sectormanagement, development of institutions and financial markets, public debtmanagement and banking regulation and supervision. The Report delineates theflexibility of the Reserve Bank of India Act which enables the Bank to adapt to arapidly changing domestic and external environment.Financial sector reforms have been an integral part of the liberalisation ineconomic policies from 1991 onwards. The RBI has played an important part inushering in the changes, not only for modernising of the banking infrastructure butalso for making it competitive and in conformity with international norms through asuitable road map. The Government and the RBI has worked together for movingaway from directed credit to a market oriented system of credit allocation; we havebroken with the past of an administered interest rate regime. There is no longer anyautomatic monetising of Government deficit by the RBI. This year marks a yetanother departure, with the Government due to take over the management of itspublic debt.Today RBI is fulfilling multiple functions of being the apex monetary authorityshaping the country's monetary policy, managing the foreign exchange reserves,fulfilling its developmental role in banking sector and also laying down standards ofperformance is a supervisor-regulator of the monetary sector.As we embark upon a journey to an even higher growth path of 8-10 per cent,the financial sector will have a key role to play through efficient allocation of savingsto productive investments. I am sure that the financial sector will take up thesechallenges of garnering resources from savers and allocating them to the mostproductive uses in an efficient manner.I am also very happy to note that the Reserve Bank of India in all aspects ofits functioning including as a regular, as a developer of the financial markets and asa provider of services to the general public has kept the interest of the ultimatecustomer firmly in its focus. Its recent instructions and guidelines regarding financialinclusion, quality of credit card services, management of the demand for currencyand clean note policy have all kept in view the need for optimal levels of customerservice through the financial system. I am sure that in the years to come the RBI willfurther intensify its customer focus.In keeping with the emerging challenges in the financial sector, there are afew issues which need to be addressed in the medium term. It is often observed thatmisdemeanour by some market players in the capital market gets traced to theinstitutions in the money market. Though such instances are not wide-spread, it isnecessary that institutional and regulatory safeguards of the country's central bankare effective in ensuring the continued confidence of domestic and foreign investorsin the country's capital market. It is also necessary to address inter-relationship withthe rest of the architectural framework of the financial sector which is still not fullyregulated. In addition, the increased financial openness of the country has itsadvantages as well as risks. These risks will need to be managed within theliberalised framework.As the Report has documented, the Reserve Bank has evolved continuouslywith the changing contours of the Indian economy. As the economy continues tobecome more open, we will face new challenges in macro-management. I can,therefore, expect confidently that the path of continuous change that the ReserveBank has exhibited over the last 70 years will continue for another 70 and beyond.March 18, 2006
