A Decade After 1991: New Challenges Facingthe Indian Economy*Rakesh MohanthI feel deeply honoured to have been invited to deliver the 28  Frank Moraes MemorialLecture this evening. I feel particularly honoured, but also humbled, when I look at the list ofthe very distinguished predecessors who have delivered this lecture. Frank Moraes wasamong the pioneers of independent Indian journalism. As editor of the Indian Express he setnew standards in journalism in terms of both probity and quality of writing. I know thatsuccessive generations of Indian journalists have looked upon him as a role model to guidetheir lives in the pursuit of their profession. He has been an inspiration to all who havefollowed him. The importance of an independent, well informed and fearless press hasbecome all the more noteworthy in recent years. As the economy becomes freerer, growsfaster, and becomes more complex, the press has even greater responsibility to provideappropriate and accurate information to the public so that economic and other policies can beevaluated with a greater degree of understanding and knowledge. I would like to congratulatethe United Writers Association and the Frank Moraes Foundation for instituting the FrankMoraes Memorial Lecture. It is such activities that help in providing focus to current issuesfor more informed debate.In my lecture today, I first propose to provide a brief overview of key developments thathave occurred in the Indian economy over the past decade since the introduction of economicreforms in 1991. I would then like to propose an agenda for further reforms that need to bepursued in certain areas over the next decade. I would not presume to set a comprehensiveagenda. I will only talk about certain areas that I have some familiarity with.Key Developments Since 1991The thrust of the 1991 reforms and those that have followed has been to move theeconomy on to a higher growth path; to build in mechanisms for inducing greater efficiencyand competitiveness in all spheres of economic activity; and to gain the capability for dealingwith the immense shortcomings accumulated over the years in social sectors such aseducation and health. We have accordingly gone through a wide ranging reform processcovering the areas of macro economic and fiscal stabilisation, industrial policy deregulation,trade policy liberalisation, freeing of the exchange rate, financial sector strengthening, capitalmarket deepening, privatisation of and disinvestment in the public sector, infrastructure andagriculture. In all these areas the effort has been to eliminate existing controls that haddistorted resource allocation and inhibited entrepreneurship. The economy is being nudgedtowards the attainment of higher productivity and efficiency.The results have been quite gratifying but there is still much more to do. The economyresponded very well to the reforms in the first half of the 1990s. In fact, India’s growthperformance in the first three years after the start of reform programme was better thanalmost all developing countries that have gone through such a reform process. The economywas inching towards the attainment of a 7 per cent growth path in the mid 1990s,significantly higher than the 5.5 per cent achieved in the 1980s and the 3 to 3.5 per cent in theprevious three decades. Among the significant achievements of economic policy are therestoration of external balance; the sustained reduction in inflation; the significant reductionin poverty to 23-26 percent; the substantial expansion of trade from about 12 to 13 per cent ofGDP in the late 1980s to 22 to 23 per cent now; the introduction of new prudential disciplinein the banking sector; and strengthening of the capital market. Despite all these achievements,the key disturbing development of the late 1990s is the significant slowdown in the growthrate of GDP in the last 5 years to about 5.5 per cent, a level not too different to that achievedin the 1980s, perhaps lower. A particularly disturbing feature of this development is the fallin the industrial growth rate to less than 5 per cent, which is more characteristic of the slowrate of growth in the 1960s and 1970s that had then been characterised as industrialstagnation. Similarly, agricultural performance in the last 5 years has also been exhibitingsome signs of a secular slow down.The elimination of poverty within the next 10-20 years requires a substantial accelerationin per capita economic growth to more than 7 per cent per year. As I have already mentioned,the level of poverty has indeed fallen to about 23 to 26 per cent according to our conventionalmeasures. Population growth has declined from about 2.2 per cent per year in the 1970s and1980s to about 1.7 to 1.8 per cent now. All indications suggest that this will decline further to1.4 per cent to 1.5 per cent over the next 10 years. Thus the achievement of 7 per cent annualper capita income growth, which would lead to doubling of per capita income in 10 years,would require GDP growth of about 8.4 to 8.6 per cent over the next decade. This then is thetask for economic policy in the coming years, even though this would seem like anunattainable target at the present time. An aggressive programme of economic reforms musttherefore be carried out on a continuous basis.Investment Requirements: The Need for Higher SavingsAcceleration of GDP growth to even 8 per cent will require an investment rate of around32 per cent of GDP. In contrast the current investment rate has been stagnating at around 24to 25 per cent of GDP over the past few years. The gross domestic saving rate has also beenstagnating at 23 to 24 per cent of GDP. Thus the achievement of a higher economic growthrate depends crucially on the attainment of both higher savings and investment rates.Gross domestic savings in the country have two main components: private sector savingsand public sector savings. What is notable in the 1990s is that, whereas private sector savingshave increased from a level of about 18 per cent of GDP in the late 1980s to about 25 per centnow, public sector savings have fallen precipitously from about 2.4 per cent of GDP in thelate 1980s to about - 1.7 to - 2 per cent now, a full of more than 4 per cent of GDP. PrivateSector Savings also have two componants: household sector savings have increased from 16per cent of GDP in the late 1980s to about 21 per cent now, and private corporate sectorsavings from about 2 per cent in the late 1980s to about 4 per cent now. Thus, whereas thesavings performance of the private sector has improved quite significantly during the 1990s,partly as a consequence of a relatively high income growth rate, it is very poor performanceof the public sector as a whole that has eroded the investment capacity of the country forgenerating higher economic growth. As is evident to most citizens it is the erosion in publicsector investment that has led to poorer availability of public facilities around the country.The challenge for the next decade is therefore a reversal of public sector savings to at leastthe level achieved in the late 1980s. A net improvement of 4 to 5 per cent of GDP in publicsector savings would take up the Indian gross domestic savings rate to about 28 per cent. Therecord of 1990s suggests that a further 2 per cent increase in private sector savings is notunrealistic. The availability of 2 per cent external savings through foreign capital flows wouldthen provide us adequate resources to achieve a 32 per cent investment rate. The keychallenge before us is indeed the reversal in public sector savings.What is at the root of this abysmal performance of public sector savings over the lastdecade ? First, the overall tax GDP ratio has deteriorated by around 2 per cent of GDP.Second, the Fifth Pay Commission award increased revenue expenditures of the central andstate governments alike, leading to unsustainable revenue and fiscal deficits. Third, the lossesmade by public sector utilities such as State Electricity Boards, State Road TransportCorporations, water utilities, and the Railways have been increasing over time. The users ofall such services are the better off and they have effectively been subsidised at increasingrates. The total losses of all such enterprises could well exceed 2 per cent of GDP.The reduction in the tax GDP ratio is somewhat surprising in the presence of acceleratedincome growth in the 1990s. The reduction in indirect tax collection particularly those fromcustom duties was expected but this should have been more than compensated by increases indirect tax collections. Although the number of income tax payers has indeed increased quitesignificantly over the last 5 years, it is quite obvious that compliance in terms of incomedeclaration at the higher levels has not improved. The substantial reduction in maximummarginal tax ratio to around 30 per cent has not induced the rich to be more honest with thetax collector! It is difficult to believe that the number of tax payers declaring incomes aboveRs.10 lakh in the whole country is not much more than 50,000. Thus, if we are to achieve thekind of growth rate that we aspire to, a major improvement has to be made in the tax GDPratio. This has to come mainly from improved compliance in direct tax collections,particularly in the personal income tax. The current reality is that it is actually painful for theincome tax payer to interact with the tax authorities. It is better to avoid paying taxes than toundergo harassment. What is needed therefore is a major overhaul of the tax collectionmachinery through systemisation of payment methods and the like. The widespread use of taxdeduction at source related to most transactions being tied to unique tax identificationnumbers would help greatly. Better use of systems, not raids and policy actions, will bearmore fruit.The second issue to do with user charges is at least as important. The argument for notcharging appropriate user charges has essentially been on the basis of the inability of the poorto pay for such services. This argument has little basis, in fact, since most such services areessentially consumed by the better off sections of society. At least 60 per cent of ruralhouseholds and about 20 per cent of urban households do not have a power connection; only60 per cent of urban households have taps within their homes, even fewer have in-houselatrines. A major campaign is therefore needed to bring up the levy of user charges toeconomic levels so that the infrastructure entities both public and (potentially) private, areable to get adequate returns to their investments. This may well be the most important featureof the economic reforms necessary for the achievement of higher growth. The fiscal health ofboth the central and state governments would then improve dramatically. Moreover, it wouldthen be possible to invest appropriately in the provision of such infrastructure services whichare essential both for economic growth and for social justice. But this reform cannot be doneby announcement. It needs research, public awareness, public education and persuasion. Thecentral government must lead this campaign and forge understanding and consensus withstate governments, who must in turn do the same with local bodies. Both a carrot and stickapproach will have to be followed. At the same time acceptability of higher charges for suchservices will not be feasible unless there is greater efficiency in the delivery of these services.This requires widespread reform in the public sector.Action on improvement in the tax GDP ratio and on collection of user charges can leadto the required reversal in public savings by about 4 per cent of GDP. The much neededpublic investment in crucial areas of education and health can then become a reality.Furthermore, such a reduction in fiscal deficit would reduce debt service payments at both thecentral and state levels, thereby releasing more resources for revenue expenditures formaintenance of all government services.A key feature of economic development in the late 1990s has been the dominance ofservice sector growth that has been much higher than growth in both the industry andagriculture sectors. Although the service sector can be expected to grow at continued highrates, the acceleration in economic growth thus required will not take place unless highergrowth is achieved in the industry and agriculture sectors in the coming years.Agricultural ReformsHigher agricultural growth has been a feature of higher overall GDP growth achieved inthe 1980s and 1990s, after the relative stagnation of the 1960s and 1970s. The drought of1965 to 1967, and the associated difficulties of importing food at that time, gave a jolt to theIndian Government. Ever since, food security, equated with food self-sufficiency, has beengiven the highest priority in economic policy making. The pre-occupation with food securityand its equation with food self-sufficiency led to restrictive trade policies controlling bothimport and export of agricultural goods. This policy combined with that of high protection toindustry resulted in a decline in terms of trade for agriculture until the early 1990s. Thefarmers had been effectively taxed by the existence of lower than world prices in mostagricultural products. The negative consequences of such policies had necessitated theprovision of input subsidies to partially compensate for the adverse terms of trade that werebeing meted out to agriculture.The economic reforms of the 1990s have partially corrected this situation through thedrastic reduction of industrial protection. But this has been accompanied by significantincreases in agriculture support prices leading to increasing subsidies. Meanwhile, worldagriculture prices have been falling since the mid 1990s. Hence, many Indian agriculturalprices now exceed world prices. Consequently, Indian agriculture is becoming increasinglyuncompetitive and requires increasing subsidies for its sustenance. It is producing more andmore food grains, which no one seems to want at these inflated prices. The distortions inworld trade caused by the existence of high government subsidies to agriculture in theEuropean Union and North America only serve to exacerbate these problems.While policymakers have been mainly concerned with supporting foodgrain production,the consumption pattern of the population has been changing very significantly. Theimportance of foodgrains in peoples’ diets has reduced considerably over the years. Cerealfood stocks have reached almost 60 million tonnes today and are expected to increase furtherto 80 million tonnes by the end of the current fiscal year. The share of cereals in foodexpenditure has declined very considerably in both rural and urban areas continuously. Inurban areas, cereals constituted about 36 per cent of food expenditure in the early 1970s: thishas declined to less than 26 per cent by the end of the 1990s. Similarly in rural areas, theproportion of food expenditure on cereals fell from 54 per cent in the early 1970s to less than37 per cent in the late 1990s. Even though the per capita availability of foodgrains is notmuch more than it was 20 years ago, the foodgrain surplus is continuing to accumulate. Whathas happened is that the availability and consumption of foods, such as vegetables, fruit,milk, fish and poultry has been increasing very fast. According to one estimate, theavailability of potatoes has increased by a factor of 12 over the past 30 years or so, of milk byabout 7, and of meat by about 10. Whereas the evidence of this very significant change isquite obvious from the standard statistical sources, the preoccupation of policymakers withfoodgrain production continues unabated. The green revolution has been followed by a whiterevolution of milk, but we do not know what the next agricultural revolution will be. The factis that the achievement of higher growth in agricultural production will require much fasterdiversification away from the production of foodgrains alone.A new approach to agricultural policy is therefore required and needs much greaterstudy. In the first instance, in view of the relatively high level of food security that has nowbeen achieved, the climate is now right for bold policy reforms in the areas of wheat and rice.A progressive correction is required in the incentive structure for agriculture so that theexcessively high minimum support prices that currently exist for wheat and rice do notcontinue to distort resource allocation in agriculture as a whole. The current policy effectivelysubsidises farmers in a few states at the cost of others elsewhere. Moreover, it effectivelyrestrains these farmers from shifting to other crops, which they would otherwise do. Asminimum support prices for wheat and rice are corrected on a gradual basis, the farmersproducing these commodities will look progressively for investment in other agriculturalareas. They will then respond better to the new demand structure while also providingthemselves with potentially higher incomes. Given the large number of farmers who wouldbe affected by such policy changes, such corrections need to be made with the greatest care,but this correction must be made and without further delay. Otherwise, farmers will continueto produce wheat and rice and unusable food stocks will continue to rise.Corresponding changes would also need to be made in the current policies related toother subsidies, particularly those related to fertiliser, power and water. The reduction invarious subsidies in these areas will provide a very significant fiscal dividend for the countryenabling higher public investment where it is required, and particularly in agriculture. One ofthe consequences of ever increasing food, fertiliser, power and water subsidies has been thereduction in public investment in agriculture. Higher growth in agriculture will be difficult toachieve without a reversal of this trend. More rational user charges have to be levied allround to finance the restoration of productive public investment in agriculture. However, amere increase in public investment will not do. In view of the increasing complexity ofagricultural production much greater care will be needed to ensure that the public investmentgoes into those areas where it is needed most and which achieve the highest returns. For thisto happen, a great degree of decentralisation is needed in decision making, along with betteravailability of relevant information.The agriculture sector continues to suffer from a large number of domestic marketcontrols. Although some progress has been made recently through changes in the EssentialCommodities Act designed to promote free movement of agricultural products across thecountry, some states still continue to regulate such movements. Various products such assugar and molasses also suffer from the imposition of levies designed to procure theseproducts at lower than market prices or to restrict their movements in different ways.The Central Government has announced the availability of incentive funds for states tocarry out appropriate agriculture market policy reforms. This agenda of reform needs to bepushed with vigour but much greater discussion is required with the states and also amongexperts. Correct measures can then be taken. In particular, the various restrictions thatcurrently inhibit farmers from selling their products freely need to be abolished. Theconsequence of the existing controls is the proliferation of intermediaries between the marketand the farmers. Farmgate prices for fruits and vegetables range between 20 and 30 per centof the eventual retail prices in India. In developed countries, such as, the US, UK and Japan,the farmgate prices for such products range between 40 and 55 per cent of retail prices.Hence, the welfare of the farmer will be enhanced significantly if such controls are lifted, thenumber of intermediaries are reduced and significant cost reduction is achieved intransportation, storage and distribution costs of agricultural products. A rural logisticsrevolution is the order of the day, and the private sector has a large role to play.Very significant changes are taking place in the agricultural sector. We can see the beginningof a much closer connection between primary producers, trade intermediaries, foodprocessing entities, and eventual marketing of value added products. With the share ofunprocessed foods falling, the real growth area in the agriculture sector is in value added foodproducts such as meat, poultry, fish, vegetables, fruits and the like. There is an acceleratingmove of consumers to basic processed foods such as atta, packaged milk, fresh poultry, softdrinks, processed meat and poultry, and the like. These trends need to be studied carefully sothat supporting policy changes and investments can be made.The green revolution and white revolution were relatively easy to achieve from the policypoint of view. Wheat, rice and milk are relatively homogeneous products. Thus the policypackage designed to enhance productivity and production of these products could be firstdeveloped in certain areas of the country and then applied throughout the country. In the newgrowth areas of agriculture that I have mentioned, the heterogeneity of products is muchgreater. There is a multiplicity of varieties that can be produced in each of these productgroups; production is often regionally concentrated; the production and marketing conditionsdiffer significantly; and the input requirements are equally heterogeneous.Hence, policies andprogrammes that need to be designed to support higher productivity and production in theseareas need to be much more regionally disaggregated and knowledge intensive. Thetraditional central planning approach will not do in these areas.The green revolution was also aided considerably by a large domestic and internationalresearch and extension effort. The promotion of more diversified agriculture will also need agreater concentration of resources to research and extension in the new areas. Hence a newprogramme for strengthening of agricultural research has to be launched. The agriculturaluniversities that already exist and other agricultural research institutions need to be revitalisedwith new leadership and new visions. Whereas the initial push could come from the Centre,much greater disaggregated attention would be needed from state governments. Almost allresearch, extension and promotional activity in agriculture has traditionally been concentratedexclusively in the government. In these new areas of agriculture, facilitating measures need tobe taken to encourage the private sector to invest in R&D, extension and the activities. Weneed new thinking, new approaches and new leadership.Mere policy reforms in these areas would be inadequate without correspondinginvestment in rural infrastructure so that the closer connection required between the farmerand the market that I have referred to can be achieved. If there are no roads, produce canneither be taken to unconnected villages for marketing, nor can the farmers produce be takento the market. The government has already launched an ambitious rural roads programme.The experience of states like Tamil Nadu, Punjab, Haryana, Kerala and Goa, where ruralconnectivity through roads was achieved much earlier, suggests that such a programme ismore successful when conducted in a decentralised framework. The extreme centralisation ofthe Prime Minister’s Gram Sadak Yojana may actually inhibit the rapid construction of ruralroads that is envisaged. The maintenance and upkeep of such roads will be difficult toachieve on a continuous basis unless there is local ownership and responsibility. As villageconnectivity is actually achieved through the construction of rural roads, it will becomepossible to make other investments that are required for the transfer of agricultural productsfrom where they are produced to where they are processed and to where they are marketed.Heavy investments need to be made in establishing cold chain across the country throughinvestments through cold storage, transport facilities and the like. Once again the governmenthas already made provisions for incentives for such private investment in cold storage, andfor storage godowns as well. Investment in these areas will have to come from the privatesector, this is currently handicapped by the existance of restrictive marketing laws thatprohibit farmers from selling directly to buyers outside the designated mandis. The kind ofstorage, cold storage facilities and transportation facilities required will differ from product toproduct and from region to region. It is best accomplished in a decentralised private sectorframework which is made feasible through appropriate policies and supportive financingfacilities. Cold storage will not be cold unless there is electricity. There will be no electricityunless it is paid for.The rapid transformation that has been observed in these areas in South East Asiancountries in the last 20 years provides pointers to what we can expect in the years to come.One key area of change that has occurred is in the modernisation of retail grocery structures.Most cultures in a transitional phase attach great importance to personalised shopping fordaily needs. The small corner stores are well distributed across towns and cities. The situationin East Asia, was similar until the 1980s. However, tremendous change has taken place inretail grocery structures in these countries over the last 15 years. In Taiwan, for example,whereas only about 2 per cent of groceries were sold in modern retail formats such as supermarkets in the mid 1980s, this proportion has now shot up to more than 65 per cent. Similarchange has taken place from zero to 50 per cent over the same period in Thailand. Even inIndonesia, about 25 per cent of groceries are now bought in modern super markets. Modernretailing firms are much more efficient than traditional firms. Their costs can be as much as20 per cent lower than in traditional firms. Contrary to popular perception, they actuallygenerate greater employment. The economies of scale provide for greater variety in productstocks; they provide a demand pull factor from consumers to producers; and they help inreducing the difference between the retail and farmgate prices. Overall, they help inaccelerating growth in the whole food chain thereby leading to higher agricultural growthand, more important, higher employment growth in the whole food chain from the farm, foodprocessing, logistics, and retailing. The current resistance to foreign direct investment inretail trade should therefore be removed so that the whole food chain is helped to becomemore efficient. The resistance to modern retail formats is benefiting the intermediaries at theexpense of the farmer.In brief, the income changes that have taken place in both rural and urban areas over thepast 20 years have ushered in a new demand structure for rural products that has gone largelyunnoticed. Traditional approaches to agriculture focussed on foodgrain production will onlybring agricultural stagnation and employment distress in rural areas. We have to actdecisively to promote agricultural diversification, encourage production of other foodproducts, invest actively in rural infrastructure, and enable greater food processing and valueadded to agriculture products. We can then look forward to a new agricultural revolution,along with new avenues for rural employment, both farm and non farm.Industrial GrowthThe New Industrial Policy of 1991 introduced new competition by abolishing industriallicensing in almost all industrial sectors, abolishing restrictions on MRTP companies,terminating the phased manufacturing programmes, substantially freeing foreign directinvestment and import of foreign technology, and freeing areas hitherto reserved for thepublic sector. This policy reform removed almost all restrictions on new entry into theindustrial sector. Over the years, the trade regime has also been modified substantially so thatthere are now no quantitative restrictions on the import of industrial goods. At the same timethe tariff structure has been brought down considerably thereby reducing the protectionavailable to Indian industry. The government has also announced a further tariff reductionprogramme to reduce the so-called peak tariff rate to 20 per cent by the year 2004.Competition from trade will therefore intensify and Indian industry has to become morecompetitive.Overall, it must be said that Indian industry has coped extremely well with all thesechanges ushering in new competition after having been sheltered in a closed and protectedeconomy for more than 50 years. A great deal of re-engineering has taken place, newchallenges have been met at a rapid pace, and quality is being upgraded all round. However,the record of industrial production over the last 5 years provides significant cause for worry,with the industrial growth rate slowing down to an annual average of less than 5 per cent, alevel not seen since the late 1970s. What has gone wrong?The whole package of reforms that has been carried out over the past 10 years wasexpected to lead to significant industrial restructuring. The reduction in import protection andthe introduction of new competition were expected to lead to a reallocation of resources morein line with India’s comparative advantage in the international industrial economy. Resourcesshould have moved from the more capital-intensive sectors to the more labour using ones,leading to both higher output and employment growth. In the high growth phases of SouthEast Asian countries the rate of growth in manufacturing employment ranged typically from4 per cent to 6.5 per cent. Growth in manufacturing employment in India has, in contrast,been more in the region of 2.5 per cent per year in the 1980s and 1990s. Quite shockingly, thetotal employment in the organised manufacturing sector in India is less than 8 million ascompared to more than 70 million in China. We therefore have a long way to go. We cannothope to achieve accelerated economic growth unless manufacturing growth is rejuvenated.We must understand that this growth is likely to take place in labour using sectors ofindustry.I believe that the key reason for our industrial slowdown is to be found in inadequateindustrial restructuring. A much more rapid shift of resources has to take place towardslabour using industries. Much more flexibility is required for industrial restructuring. Thisimplies institution of more rapid bankruptcy procedures, easier reallocation of capital, fastertransformation of urban land use, and flexibility in labour use.The government has already introduced a bill to repeal the Sick Industrial CompaniesAct (SICA) and the abolition of the Board of Industrial and Financial Restructuring (BIFR).These mechanisms had made industrial restructuring almost impossible. It has alsointroduced an amendment to Company Law to provide for new bankruptcy procedures.Furthermore, it has now enacted an ordinance for the enforcement of creditors’ right. Allthese bills need to be enacted in Parliament so that industrial restructuring can then takesplace more quickly. The resources that are currently locked up in non performing enterprisescan then get released and put to use for more productive purposes. Accomplishment of theselegislative changes will provide for much greater capital mobility. It will also make thefunctioning of banks and financial institutions more effective. A reduction in their NPAs willalso reduce their costs of lending, benefiting industry all round.The shift of resources to more labour using industries will, however, not take placeunless this is accompanied by labour reform enabling similar labour flexibility. The contentof such changes is well known. The Cabinet has already approved the introduction of labourreforms; what is needed is the enactment of these legislative changes by Parliament. We haveto understand that the availability of greater labour flexibility will lead to create employmentgrowth in manufacturing, not net reduction.Industrial restructuring has also been made difficult by the Urban Land Ceiling Act,which made changes in land use very difficult. The Central Government has alreadyabolished this Act. However, only a few states have repealed their corresponding Urban LandCeiling Acts. Full scale industrial restructuring will not take place unless the remaining Statesalso follow the example of others and repeal the existing Urban Land Ceiling Acts.Once these rigidities are removed we can expect a faster reallocation of resources tolabour using industries thereby rejuvenating Indian industrial growth and employment.However, mere removal of these rigidities will also not be enough. Positive actions areneeded to provide for mechanisms by which some of the unsuspecting losers in thisrestructuring do not suffer. Putting in place a social security mechanism for workersdisplaced due to industrial restructuring is a must. Thus the National Renewal Fund or somesimilar mechanism must be resuscitated so that resources are available to help the labourdisplaced from restructuring. Such a social security mechanism will have to be made a self-sustaining one. Hence action needs to be initiated urgently to set up a self-funding insurancefund for employment. Labour that is affected by restructuring will not only need monetarycompensation but will also need help for retraining and redeployment. Public privatepartnerships need to be forged at the local level between local governments, industryassociations industrial units and training institutions to generate active programmes for re-training and re-deployment that are practical and implementable. I have no hesitation insaying that the kind of labour reform that industry wants will not come about unless thecorresponding positive steps for labour welfare that I have just mentioned are also put inplace simultaneously.The other main rigidity inhibiting investment in labour using industries is the obsoletepolicy of small scale industry reservation. The areas in which South East Asian countrieshave achieved their highest export growth have been typically labour intensive, relatively lowtechnology products such as textiles, clothing, shoes, toys, sport goods, and the like. Theyhave then graduated up to somewhat higher technology consumer goods and then even highertechnology and capital intensive sectors such as those of capital goods and petro chemicals.Over the same period the Indian export pattern has remained stationary at the level of labourintensive low technology products such as clothing, textiles, shoes other leather goods andthe like, almost all goods that were reserved for small scale industries. Adequate qualityupgradation has been absent and unit prices have stagnated. The attainment of both highervolume growth and of higher unit value realisation will require both larger scales of operationand higher quality. It is therefore essential to loosen constraints in these sectors so that theycan grow freely in volume, utilise better machinery, graduate up to higher technology levels,and utilise better international marketing channels. What is observed in other countries inAsia is that production of such consumer goods may be done through final assemblyoperations that are large in scale, but where a great deal of outsourcing to small enterprises isundertaken to preserve their competitiveness. Consequently the freeing of restrictions on thesize of small scale industries through de-reservation is likely to lead to the growth of manymore small scale enterprises than is currently the case, along with a much higher potential forgrowth in manufacturing employment.All the items currently reserved for small-scale industries are now importable freely atthe applicable import tariff. Thus domestic Indian enterprises are now placed at a significantdisadvantage relative to larger foreign enterprises which are free to export their products inthese sectors to India. Consequently, it is of the utmost importance that existing restrictionsmust be removed forthwith in the interest of small-scale industries. Such an action will leadto a new spurt both in industrial and export growth along with much needed employmentgrowth. Once again, mere de-reservation will not be enough. Such deregulation of small-scale industries must be accompanied by targeted action to provide both technology andfinancial assistance in the small-scale industrial sector.It is clear that at present the Indian banking system is not fully equipped to promotesmall-scale enterprises around the country. The key issue is that banking institutions must beenabled to improve their credit assessment capabilities with regard to small-scale enterprisesso that they can distinguish adequately between good and bad credit policy. Small scale mustnot be equated with high risk. The provision for Credit Information Bureaus and betterexchange of information on credit risk between banks and financial institutions is alsonecessary to enable these institutions to recognise higher risk without excessive costs.Furthermore, the cost of credit assessment of small and medium enterprises can be reducedby a focussed recognition of clusters of like small scale industries that exist around thecountry. Such financial assistance programmes also need to be devised to provide assistanceto those industries that are in the reserved list to enable them to expand and upgradetechnology. This should be done both at the individual and group level. The focus of manysuch activities can be on the basis of industrial clusters so that economies of scale can beachieved both in financial assistance and in technology upgradation.The new industrial environment internationally is now placing much greater importanceto technology based industrial activity. Production is being globalised, economic distance isshrinking through ever lower transportation and communication costs, and widespread tradeand investment liberalisation is providing continuing competitive pressures. The new trendsin manufacturing suggest that it is becoming more dispersed internationally; newinternational value chains are being created; investors are on the constant look out for lowestcosts; they want greater flexibility in production; and consistent quality in products andreliable delivery.Indian industry has to be much more aware of these new international trends and has tobe nimble enough to cope with these rapid changes. It has to invest much more actively inskill building, in product quality upgradation, and in R&D. I would venture to say that ourindustry associations are not giving the kind of focussed attention to technology investmentthat is required to make Indian industry competitive. Much more needs to be done to forgebetter relationships at the local level between industrial units, regional engineering colleges,industry associations and other educational institutions so that local hubs of industrialexcellence can be developed. The removal of rigidities already mentioned is also essential toenable fast action by industrial firms in the face of new competitive pressures.In this context I would like to dwell a little bit on the emergence of industrialconcentrations. It is now well recognised that industrial growth that has taken place in the1990s has been much greater in the Southern and Western States than in the Northern andEastern States. What has been less commented upon is the concentration of economic activityin certain cities such as Bangalore, Pune, Chennai, Hyderabad and, perhaps, Ahmedabad.What do these new hubs of economic activity in India have in common? It should be quitenoticeable that each of these cities is characterised by the availability of excellent highereducation facilities particularly in science and technology. They also have concentrations ofhigh level research institutions in scientific and technological areas. They also happen to havea good concentration of high technology industries, often in the public sector. What we canlearn from this phenomenon is that rapid industrial growth requires a nurturing environment,not only in terms of physical infrastructure, but much more importantly in terms of softinfrastructure related to the development of technical human resources. Agglomerationeconomies are essential for a vibrant industrial environment. Industry is increasinglyknowledge intensive, it can no longer thrive in isolated industrial estates. It needs theproximity of all associated services.It is quite remarkable that, except for Delhi and its environs, there are no similarconcentrations available in the Northern states. Kanpur and Kolkata could perhaps haveemerged as similar concentrations but poor governance and lack of investment in these areashas led to their decline rather than growth in recent decades. The rejuvenation of industrialand economic activities in the northern states in the new policy environment requires specificand focussed programmes in the future in cities such as Chandigarh, Ludhiana/Jalandhar,Jaipur, Bhopal, Kanpur/ Lucknow, Ranchi, Kolkata/Durgapur where coordinated investmentscan take place in both the public and private sectors in ways similar to that in the Southerncities that I have just mentioned. Once again, this will not happen unless appropriatestructures for public/private participation are devised. Coordinated public investment isneeded in educational facilities, research institutions, and physical infrastructure.Correspondingly, the private sector needs to be encouraged to invest in industrial andtechnology parks, industrial technology development institutions, and other service industriesin these cities.Rejuvenation of CitiesI have emphasised the importance of economic concentration in a limited number ofcities for generating rapid technology based industrial growth. Our traditional approach tocities have been antithetical to such developments. Consequently, the promotion of higherindustrial growth that is so vitally needed for the overall acceleration in economicdevelopment also needs new focus on city development.We now have 35 cities with more than 1 million population in the country. There are also400 other cities that have population greater than 100,000. This constitute a health city basefor the promotion of economic activities throughout the country. A great degree of wealth hasbeen generated in all these cities over the past 20 years. This can be seen from the ubiquitoustraffic jams that have resulted from an explosion on private transport ownership. However,any visitor to cities in India will find it difficult to believe that they have indeed generatednew wealth. Private affluence and public squalor do unfortunately characterise our cities. Ifnew industrial and service sector growth is to be generated in the country, investment inurban infrastructure will have to be accelerated to make up for many lost years.As in many other areas, urban infrastructure development has also suffered fromexcessive centralisation and erroneous and irrational policies governing user charges andth local resource generation for urban local authorities. Until the passing of the 74 Amendmentto the Indian Constitution, urban local government had suffered a great degree of erosionsince independence. Some correction has taken place in recent years but not enough. Giventhat urban per capita incomes are much higher than rural per capita incomes, there is littlereason for cities to be subsidised by non-urban residents. Thus, the financing and sustenanceof urban infrastructure must effectively come from the urban residents themselves. Paymentof local taxes for public goods and carriers, and user charges for other services is a must.The key elements of urban infrastructure are adequate availability of water, andassociated sanitation and sewerage facilities, urban transportation availability, public lighting,and education and medical facilities. Some of these facilities can be characterised as publicgoods whereas others are private goods or in between. The provision of public goods clearlyhas to be made from tax resources whereas those of private goods and services should befinanced from the levy of proper user charges. The collection of both, local taxes such asproperty taxes, and user charges for services, requires efficient functioning of municipalgovernments.Our traditional approach has been to set up parallel authorities such as urbandevelopment authorities (UDAs), housing boards and the like, which are organs of stategovernments and which receive plan finances as allocated by the central PlanningCommission and further devolved by state level Planning Commissions. In the system thathas been followed, UDAs typically make investments in urban infrastructure which is thenhanded over on completion to municipal authorities for maintenance and upkeep. Hence,there is no mechanism nor incentives for the investing authorities to make sure that adequateresources exist for the maintenance of assets created. Similarly, municipal authorities havelittle incentive to devise either local taxation systems or user charges that are adequate togenerate enough resources for both investment and maintenance. There is almost no publicinvolvement in deciding what investments are made. Furthermore, municipal authorities arerendered toothless since executive authority rests with the municipal commissioners who areappointees of state governments. The result of this rather confused administrative structuregoverning our cities is that they have become increasingly unliveable with population growthfar exceeding investment in associated urban infrastructure facilities. Municipal governmentsare inadequately empowered; they do not have either the financial or human resourcecapacity to govern growing modern cities.We therefore, have to give new attention to the administration of our cities throughstrengthening of local governance. The staffing of municipal authorities has to beprofessionalised; working in municipal governments has to become respectable andadequately compensated so that high level professionals are willing to work in suchorganisations; local public utilities need to be made autonomous and financially responsibleand accountable. Most urban services are effectively consumed by higher income residents;they must be made to pay appropriate property taxes and user charges for all services thatthey consume, particularly those of water supply and urban transport.I know that this is asking for the moon, but unless we as urban citizens generate suchdebate and demands, we will not be able to develop the kind of urban environment that isenvironmentally sustainable and economically self-generating and which nurtures the kind ofrapid economic growth that I have talked about. Given the existing state of urbanadministration, we need much greater debate and thinking to come up with solutions that areboth practical and implementable. We have to induce much greater citizen participation inurban governance. Local governments have to be seen by residents as their governments.This is the challenge that faces us as we think of the actions necessary for nurturing cities thatgenerate the kind of growth necessary over the next two decades.ConclusionI have touched on only a few of the challenges that now face the Indian economy. I havefocussed on the key areas where we need to act to induce significant acceleration in thegrowth process that is also employment friendly.I have emphasised the necessity for fiscal correction at both the central and the statelevels. The combined centre and state fiscal deficit is now of the order of 10 per cent of GDP.This is possibly the highest for any large country in the world. We have to understand that thekind of growth acceleration that we need will simply not be possible unless our fisc is put inorder. With the significant cuts that have been made in the tax rates all round, thesimplification and unification of excise duties that has taken place, the reduction andsimplification of custom duties, and the forthcoming introduction of VAT at the state level,there is simply no justification in condoning tax evasion any more. At these low rates oftaxation, tax compliance must be enforced. But this has to be done through better systems andmore effective tax administration rather than through raids and police action.Acceleration in growth requires restoration of the public investment to levels that hadbeen achieved in the 1980s, but public investment should now be only in public goods,specially in education and health. This enhancement in public investment cannot take placewithout a large scale improvement in the operation of public sector entities, particularly, thepublic utilities in electricity, transport, railways and the like. It is only if the functioning andefficiency of these enterprises improves significantly that the public would be willing to paythe economic user charges that people must be charged for using these services.There is a growing belief in an influential section of the intelligentsia that India’seconomic future lies in the services sector. I have, in contrast, emphasised the importance ofrekindling growth in the traditional areas of agriculture and industry. I place the greatestemphasis on these sectors as generators of employment that is so vitally necessary for thewelfare of our growing labour force. The time is right for a total revamp in our agriculturepolicy designed to promote fast diversification in agriculture. What is needed is a multipronged effort that brings in bold policy reform along with new investment in ruralinfrastructure that is designed to bring the farmer closer to the market and the market closerto the farmer. With the great heterogeneity that characterises non-foodgrain agriculturalproducts, policies and infrastructure programmes would have to be much more regionallydisaggregated and demand responsive than has hitherto been the case.In the industrial sector, I have emphasised the need for much faster industrialrestructuring, the lack of which I believe has led to the current protracted industrial slowdown. Here also we have to act boldly and give up past shibboleths such as the obsolete andcounter productive policy of small scale industry reservation. It is only if coordinated policyreforms allowing for faster bankruptcy, faster changes in the land use, and flexibility inlabour use and implemented can we look forward to a new boom in industrial investment,industrial exports and industrial employment.The generation of vibrant industrial growth will be difficult to achieve if our citiescontinue in the direction that they have been drifting in the past couple of decades. Industriesthat are competitive require constant generation of new technology, they need to adapt to newdemand structures and to build capacity to upgrade skills in a continuous fashion. Thecapacity to cope with such new competitive pressures is severely curtailed unless thesurrounding environment nurtures such skills and activities. Thriving cities that haveinnovative educational institutions, the best medical facilities, forward looking researchinstitutions and other supportive structures, are the kind of cities that promote the kind ofindustrial sector growth that we would like to see. The governance of such cities requiresmuch more local participation and control than has been the case in the past.I would also like to say a few words on the new challenges facing us in education, healthand governance. The future of our country will not be healthy unless we give greater attentionto enhancement in the quality of education at all levels. We have justly been proud of some ofour institutions of higher learning that have produced some of the best professionals in theworld. We must, however, understand that the rest of the world has gone much further aheadand unless we give special attention to the enhancement of quality in our institutions, we willbe left behind. A great degree of innovation has taken place in health services in the privatesector in the past decade. This is all for the good. However, the health needs of the majorityof our population remain unmet and we have to provide better methodology for extendingadequate health services in both urban and rural areas. In each of these areas, I believe thatmuch greater local control is required. Centralised control will simply no longer do.Let me now close by emphasising once again that the new challenge facing the Indianeconomy is to generate higher economic growth that is much more labour using in bothagriculture and industry than has been the case in the past. One cross cutting theme runningright through my lecture is the need for much greater decentralisation in policy making and ininvestment. The economic reforms that have been introduced since 1991 have alreadyencouraged much greater decentralised decision making at the state level. This trend has nowto go further down to the cities, and to rural panchayats. Finally, I emphasise the role of muchgreater knowledge intensity in policy making. The tradition of command and controlgeneralised civil services will no longer do. They now have to make way for much moreknowledge intensive professionals at all levels so that the new complexities of the world canbe understood and acted upon as appropriate.th28 Frank Moraes Lecture delivered at Chennai on July 26, 2002 organised by United Writers Association andthe Frank Moraes Foundation.
