Finance, Credit and MarketsThe role of the financial system is to intermediate between lendersand borrowers and provide avenues for saving and help investors findtheir financing needs. The financial markets impact growth bychanneling saving to firms and improving the allocation of capital.Moreover, efficient financial markets and institutions tend to lowersearch and transactions costs in the economy.2. As the industrialized nations’ economies grew in the eighteenth,nineteenth and twentieth centuries, their financial systems also grewin depth and breadth. In the 19th century, London achieved its statusas the world's leading financial centre, because the financial sectorhad developed rapidly in order to serve the needs of British industryand British exporters.  Similar is the case with 20th century New Yorkwhich played a similar role in relation to the American economy.3. The relationship between financial development and economicgrowth is a subject of debate. Some economists just do not believethat the finance-growth relationship is important. For instance,Robert Lucas asserted in 1988 that economists badly over-stress therole of financial factors in economic growth. Moreover, JoanRobinson declared in 1952 that "where enterprise leads, financefollows". According to this view, economic development createsdemands for particular types of financial arrangements, and thefinancial system responds automatically to these demands.Speech delivered by Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor on August 26, 2014 at "CreditSummit India 2014", organised by Association of International Wealth Management ofIndia and National Institute of Securities Market (NISM).4. The well-known former editor of "The Economist" Walter Bagehotexpressed this in 1873 as follows "In England, however, ... capitalruns as surely and instantly where it is most wanted, and where thereis most to be made of it, as water runs to find its level".5. However, it is now increasingly accepted that financialdevelopment has a positive effect on growth. Financialintermediation can affect economic growth by acting on the savingrate, on the fraction of saving channeled to investment, or on thesocial marginal productivity of investment.6. The studies of McKinnon and Shaw in early seventies propoundedthat financial repression depresses growth; conversely, financialdevelopment should raise growth. A positive correlation betweengrowth and indicators of financial development is well documented.A growing body of evidence suggests that financial institutions (suchas banks and insurance companies) and financial markets (includingstock markets, bond markets, and derivative markets) exert apowerful influence on economic development, poverty alleviation,and economic stability.  This position holds good for India too.7. It is imperative that our nation must achieve high economic growthto cater to growing aspirations of its people. To attain such growthlarge capital and efficient distribution of capital is needed which canonly be possible through efficient and developed financial markets.28. World Economic Forum has constructed an Index that measuresfinancial development. Measures of financial development arecaptured across the seven pillars of the Index viz. Institutionalenvironment; Business environment; financial stability; Bankingfinancial services; Non-banking financial services; financial market;and financial access.th9. India is ranked 40 out of 62 countries in the World FinancialDevelopment Index in 2012.  India’s rank in the parameters assessedin the Index is as under:Parameter Rank 2012Institutional environment 56Business environment 55Financial stability 46Banking financial services 45Non-banking financial services 9Financial markets 28Financial access 4510. While there may be debate on the methodology of rankings andthe relative importance one may give to these rankings, it is pertinentto recognize the fact that there is tremendous scope forimprovement. There is a need for working together in building moreefficient financial markets.11. Characteristics of financial markets development inter aliainclude:a) Size of financial institutions and markets (financial depth)3b) Degree to which individuals can and do use financialinstitutions and markets (access)c) Efficiency of financial institutions and markets in providingfinancial services (efficiency), andd) Stability of financial institutions and markets (stability)12. Market development is also dependent on the structure of themarket and preference of savers for intermediation. In Asianeconomies there is a marked preference for bank intermediation.Bank-based finance has a special role to play for many economies inneed of capital, and thus helps to ensure a well-balanced growthprocess. Benefit of bank-based finance relates to the intrinsic natureof the banking business: some projects cannot be financed directly bythe market on account of significant information asymmetriesbetween the borrowers and potential lenders. Banks can bridge thisgap thanks to their comparative advantages in the assessment andmonitoring of investment projects, which contributes to overcominginformation asymmetries. Further, the economic literature on"relationship banking" has demonstrated that banks can contributeto alleviating the impact of sudden economic shocks on their clients.Banks are, however, financial intermediaries that by nature add costto the allocation of capital.13. In Asian economies banking is a marvelous mechanism forchanneling into productive investments the huge flow of householdsavings generated, since those countries including Mainland China,4have savings-to-income ratios that are three, four, or even moretimes than the countries in the West. For all its potentialcontributions to economic growth, banking remains fragile. The highleverage combined with their “extreme mismatch” of maturities(funding long-term assets with short-term and, in some cases, foreigncurrency-denominated liabilities) and reliance on demand deposits,makes them inherently vulnerable – and their economies to severeand recurring credit crunches.14. Although banks play an important role in these economies bychanneling funds from depositors to companies without access tocapital markets, banking itself, says Nobel laureate Merton Millerfrom University of Chicago, is " basically a 19th century technology”.Today’s emerging Asian economies do not have well-developedcapital markets and so remain heavily dependent on their bankingsystems to finance growth. However, as Miller argues, countriesshould develop a well fleshed out set of financial markets andassociated institutions.15. According to an Asian Development Bank's study the initiatives todevelop bond markets should focus on: (i) sustaining a stablemacroeconomic environment with low inflation and stable interestrates (ii) developing a healthy government bond market that wouldserve as a benchmark for the corporate bond market (iii) completingthe post-crisis agenda of banking sector restructuring (iv) improvingcorporate governance (v) strengthening the regulatory framework forbond market (vi) rationalizing tax treatment of bonds (vii) broadening5the investor base, and (viii) promoting the growth of regional bondmarket centers.Indian Debt MarketBank Credit16. India has the distinction of long history of both banks and capitalmarket. Economic history of India narrates how both have beenvibrant in many important cities, though Mumbai has beendominating all others. Slowly and steadily, especially afternationalisation, the banking sector has emerged as THE source forinvestment funding.17. In India, bank credit has been the significant contributor to theinvestment. Bank credit increased from ` 5 billion as at end March1951 to `13 billion by March 1961, `47 billion by March 1971, `254billion by March 1981, `1164 billion by March 1991, `5114 billion byMarch 2001, `39420 billion by March 2011 and`67352 billion byMarch 2014. What has been the contribution of capital market?During the 1970s, while capital market helped raising `10 billionworth of equity, bonds and debentures, banks extended credit worth`207 billion in that period. During the 1980s, the correspondingfigures were `233 billion and `910 billion. In the 1990s, they were`1172 billion and `3950 billion respectively and in 2000s they were`2115 billion and `34206 billion respectively. In 2013-14, it was `556billion and`9,556 billion respectively.18. While the capital market has been disappointing, the private6placement market in the past twenty years has been good. Thoughthe issues thereat had been predominantly in the form of bonds anddebentures, the growth in size has been very reassuring. It gainedpopularity from mid 1990s; from 1995-96 to 2000-01, this marketraised`752 billion, in the next ten years, it helped raise `7614 billionand in 2013-14, this market raised `3899 billion.19. Thus, the primary engine for Indian investments is the creditmarket. Despite all our efforts to develop corporate debt market, andcalibrated increase in foreign capital, credit market remains thebulwark of Indian investment scenario.OTC Market20. In India, the small size of the OTC derivatives market, low level ofcomplexity in products and regulatory structure that mandates thatvalidity of any OTC derivative contract is contingent on one of theparties to the transaction being a regulated entity, resulted in orderlyderivatives market development and lessened the concerns withregard to systemic risk. The OTC derivative products were introducedin a phased manner keeping in view the hedging needs of the realsector. Reserve Bank has focused on improving transparency andreducing counterparty risk in the OTC derivatives markets andfostered development of robust market infrastructure for trading,settlement and reporting of transactions. As India is committed toimplementation of the G-20 / FSB reforms, reasonable progress hasbeen made in implementing the OTC derivative reform measures inIndia. The status of reforms is as under:7· Standardization: The process of standardization is plannedto be undertaken gradually. CDS transactions arestandardized in terms of documentation, coupon, couponpayment date, etc.  IRS on Overnight Index Swap have beenstandardized from April 1, 2013. Other benchmarks in IRSwould be standardized in a phased manner.· Central clearing: Calibrated steps towards central clearingof OTC derivative transactions are being taken. More than70% of IRS trades currently being centrally cleared withoutregulatory mandate. CDS market is still developing and itmay take more time to achieve the necessary marketactivity to support central clearing of CDS transactions.Timeframe for guaranteed settlement of CDS will bemandated after a critical level of volume is attained.· Exchange or electronic platform trading: Electronicplatforms are available for transactions involving repos inGovernment securities, IRS, forward rate agreements andforeign exchange forwards. Report of the Working Group onGovernment Securities and Interest Rate DerivativesMarkets (Chairman: Shri R. Gandhi) has also recommendedintroduction of  an electronic swap execution facility(electronic trading platform) for the IRS market, andconsider introduction of a CCP which may provideguaranteed settlement of trades executed through theelectronic platform.· Reporting to trade repositories: As per existing regulatoryguidelines, banks and primary dealers report IRS/FRA and8foreign exchange derivatives transactions on CCIL reportingplatform. With regard to CDS, all market makers mustreport all trades (including client trades) on the CCIL’sreporting platform. Presently, client trades in IRS are alsobeing reported by banks.Conclusion21. I am sure in this Summit, you will all be discussing the creditinvestment market infrastructure, the various opportunities andchallenges that the credit investment market offers and how tobenefit out of this important segment of the financial market. I wishyou all useful deliberations.22. Thank you all for your attention.&&&&&&&&&&&&&9
