Y.V.ReddyMy association with the Department of Commerce, Osmania University goesback to 1960 when I registered for Ph.D course under the guidance of ProfessorV.V.Ramanadham, the then Head of the Department.  In 1963, I taught PublicEnterprises as an optional subject for students of M.Com. which explains why I chosethis topic for today.  While Professor Satyanarayana was also one of my guides forPh.D, Professor Ramakistayya, Vice Chancellor and I were colleagues in the late`eighties.  Naturally, I jumped at the opportunity of coming back to University.  Of course, as my friend Professor Raghuram of Economic DepartmentOsmania University”.In 1964, Mr.S.S.Khera in his pioneering book on Public Enterprises says, “thereis hardly any country today in which the Government is not engaged actively in thesetting up and management of economic and industrial enterprises”.  Today, any bookon the same theme will substitute the words ‘setting up and management’ of enterpriseswith the words “ privatising and restructuring” of enterprises.  It is necessary tounderstand why this dramatic change has occurred.Almost fifty years ago, our country decided on a system of planning throu gh amixed economy model to achieve our developmental objectives.  Public enterpriseswere important instruments of public policy in general and planning in particular.Since then, there were a number of occasions when there was disenchantment with theperformance of public-enterprises.  There were reviews of public enterprise policies bya host of Committees and we have been experimenting with holding-companystructures, Memoranda of Understanding, etc. However, a review of the role andfunctioning of public enterprises in the 1990s has a qualitative difference, in that theirrelevance and scope are being analysed and changed in a more fundamental way, andthis is being done as part of economic reforms that we have undertaken.  Economicreforms reflect a review of the role of the Government, or more generally of the StateIt is  true that market oriented economies and socialist countries or even “mixedeconomies” like India had been parties to expanding role of the State and publicenterprises since Second World War upto 1980s.  This happened as a reluctantconcession to realities by market-economies, as a commitment to ideology by socialistsystems, and as a pragmatic approach by mixed economies like ours.  This periodcoincided with unprecedented growth in prosperity in most, if not all, of theseeconomies.  This policy was naturally in full recognition of the “market-failures”.  Yet,by early ’nineties, most, if not all economies have launched on a policy of redefiningand reducing overall, the role of the State vis-à-vis the market.  This phenomenonclearly signifies the new trade-off between ‘State failures’ and ‘market failures’ or1Dramatic Change and New Realitiesvis-à-vis the market.once said, I “never really left OsmaniaPublic Enterprises and Economic Reforms*what may be termed as the new realities in the relationship between the State and theInstitutions and ValuesThere are recent developments in the institutional dynamics in the relationshipbetween the State and the market.  The identification of the Government with theinterest of public at large is being questioned because Government is often being madean instrument of sectional interest in the guise of serving poorer sections.  As acorollary, the burden of proof of efficiency, compatible with public interest, has shiftedfrom private to the public sector.  There is an increasing perception that State failureson account of political factors and bureaucratisation may, in many cases, exceedmarket failures.  Moreover, the importance of incentive-reward system in ensuringconsistent improvement in efficiency has come to be recognised and it is observed thatmarkets provide better incentive-framework.  Finally, the concept of efficiency itselftends to be redefined in as much as the values prevalent in the society have undergoneimportant changes asserting individualism in their relationship with the state andvoluntarism among specific groups.Competition as a MeansClosely related to the institutional factors is the belief that competitiveenvironment tends to create a climate conducive to enhancing efficiency.  In otherwords, while there could be some doubt as to the capacity of the competitive marketstructures to determine the ends, there is more confidence in competition as a means ofachieving the desired ends.  A differentiation is sometimes made between competitionin the international markets and in domestic markets.  Increasingly, the perception isthat international competitiveness is a more effective instrument of competition andthus efficiency.  Differentiation can also be made between competition in products andcompetition in capital markets.  Here again, there is an increasing tendency to believethat competition in capital markets is essential to ensure allocative efficiency, thoughcompetition in product-market may bring about operational or technical efficiency to alimited extent.  Further, it is argued that what has been perceived to be naturalmonopolies in the past need not necessarily be monopolies in as much as a number ofcomponents of these monopolies could be “unbundled”, hived off and subjected tocompetition.  Even if it is established that some components of a system can beeffective only on monopoly basis, competition can be introduced for operating suchmonopoly through franchising by means of competitive bidding procedure.  Moreimportant, it has been empirically established that public ownership has a tendency ofundermining competitive impulses and promoting monopoly.  Hence, it can be arguedthat, even if monopoly appears natural it could as well be privately owned butregulated by State so that over a period, competition can be injected by Government .In a monopoly situation, an assessment of costs and benefits of publicly ownedmonopoly and regulated private monopoly are compared.  No doubt, the costs oftransferring an existing publicly owned monopoly into a private monopoly would haveto be reckoned.  The transfer costs would be both the direct costs of transferring2market.ownership and the indirect costs of restructuring the enterprise and transferring thecontractual obligations.Regulation and RegulatorsThe approaches to regulation and control have also changed dramatically.  Thechanges in technology, rapid obsolescence in products, and varied tastes of theconsumers leading to a variety of products, have resulted in difficulties in defining aparticular product or service.  Thus, regulation becomes an increasingly complex legaland bureaucratic task.  In any case, the regulated units supply most of the neededinformation to the regulator – a phenomenon resulting in what is described as“information asymmetry”.  This makes quality of regulation dependent on nature ofinformation supplied by the regulated units.  There is some empirical evidence of this“regulatory capture” viz., that  the regulated tend to capture the regulatory. There isfrom behavioural angle, scope for “ clientasis”, i.e., constant exposure to the client’sproblems, making the principal or his agent identify more with the interest of theclients i.e., regulation units, than with public interest.  Finally, of late, there is anemphasis on evaluation of the costs of regulation and the benefits on account ofregulation.  The costs of regulation are being reckoned to include not only the cost ofadministering the regulation by the state but also the costs of compliance incurred bythe units which are subjected to such regulation.Technology and ResponseThe most important impact of technologies is in regard to rapid obsolescence.The publicly owned Government institutions are reputed to have limited capacity toquickly respond to technological changes.  Moreover, the globalisation of consumptionpatterns implies the need for quick interaction with changing consumption patterns – amatter in which the private sector seems to have an advantage.  Further, the materialcomponent in industry is becoming less important due to technological advances ascompared to knowledge-component and service-component.  The public systemsappear to be better suited towards mobilisation of material resources rather thantowards enthusing people to innovate or respond promptly to them.  Overall, the impactof technological development has, therefore, been to make public systems andbureaucratic systems less efficient compared to private systems in some areas.  It ispossible to argue that bureaucratic systems can be made equally flexible to respond totechnological changes by providing the necessary autonomy, but experience has shownthat Government institutions generally tend to be less flexible.International Environment : Recent DevelopmentsWe should also recognise some new realities in the international economic andtrading environment which are relevant to developing countries .  The role of officialflows. i.e., multilateral and bilateral flows which usually supported Government andpublic enterprise, has been reduced.  Even at the reduced levels of these flows, they arenow reversing the trend of support to public sector in favour of private sector.  There is3thus enormous privatisation of global financial flows.  Further, with the demise of alarge socialist block, the scope and need for investment flows or trade flows on publicsector account such as, through Indo-USSR agreements gets reduced.  The countryobligations under World Trade Organisation (WTO) are also having a bearing onpublic private mix.  With provisions of WTO favouring non-discriminatory treatmenteven for Government purchases, the special role or privileged role for public sectorgets diminished.  Also, the WTO agreement expands the coverage to services,recognising the fast growing service component of international trade.  Be it tourism,banking or insurance, there is a strong bias in favour of private sector in internationaltrade in services .  We should also note the increasing importance of trade within andbetween multinational corporations ( MNCs) in international corporations ( MNCs) ininternational trade, even though some of the MNCs may not be giants.  To the extentMNCs are mostly in private sector, any effort to expand one’s share in internationaltrade may require larger role for the private sector.  It was widely believed in the past,that MNCs tend to have adverse impact on the goals of growth with social justice indeveloping countries.  Empirical evidence in regard to most countries shows thatMNCs have not hurt the cause of either growth or social justice – provided appropriatedomestic policies of intervention were effected.Wholesale Review and Not Retreat of StateThese new realities do not imply  that there is or that there should be awholesale retreat by the State in favour of market.  While, in fact, there is a wholesalereview of the role of the State, the new realities are giving rise to new types of Stateintervention and of course, concerns .  To start with, restructuring Government’s sharein ownership and dismantling of regulatory mechanisms in some areas and introducingregulating mechanisms in lieu of publicly owned monopolies are activities  in thedomain of the State, effected with the initiative of the State.  While the State mayreduce its role as a producer of goods and services, it could expand its role as aregulator and as provider of “public goods” or “social goods” like primary educationand health.  In the past, funding and provision of supply were considered indivisibleand had to be solely the responsibility of Government or market.  It is now that there can be combinations of public and private sectors in funding and supply –say public funding with private supply.  Both funding and supply can be partly publicand partly private.  In fact, new instruments of State control do provide what may becalled reserve power rather than active involvement in direct supply of goods andservices.  Similarly, new combination of ownership are being attempted in which theState becomes one of the owners along with the workers and public .  In fact, contraryto the rhetoric of privatisation, the pace has been slower than anticipated in mostcountries as the actual extent of privatisation of public enterprises has been less thanwhat has been planned. It is inconceivable that public sector or public enterprise willdisappear.  They will still be significant, continue to be critical qualitatively butperhaps not in terms of magnitudes.Our Response4recognisedWe ha ve reason to believe that, in our country, by early ‘eighties, there was aclear recognition that there should be a fundamental review of India’s economic policy.Reports of various committees on important policies such as Abid Hussain Committeeon Trade Policies; Narasimham Committee on Physical Controls; Committee on Monetary Policy; Arjun Sen Gupta Committee on Public Enterprisesand Statement on Long Term Fiscal Policy testify to this.  In reality, effective policyreform was stalled for a variety of reasons.  Perhaps, the costs of reform are higher nowbecause of our delayed response.The Gulf crisis and consequent crisis in the external sector forced policymakers into action.  Since the malaise expressed itself in the external sector, initialthrust of the early ‘nineties was in exchange-rate management, trade-policy andbalance of payment in general .  To the extent, the reform of external sector demandedadjustment programme to correct macro-economic imbalances , fiscal correction andBy now, broad directions of structural reform, reflecting the new realities havebeen identified and there is what can be termed as “national consensus” on thedirection of change. No doubt, progress in reform has not been uniform and thesequencing is still somewhat unclear in some areas.  In fact, there may be differingperceptions on the transitional costs, possible risks and in particular on the adverseconsequences on some sections of the population.  There is thus, the critical issue ofgainers and losers in current and potential terms, as also in absolute and relative terms.Overall, it would be reasonable to claim that the direction and parameters of change arereasonably clear, and then set out the broad contours of this consensus.a) A more  dynamic mix of mixed economy i.e., changing mix of State and market orb) Greater integration between domestic and international sectors at a sustainable pacec) Larger role for ‘prices’ and reduced role for licensing and other quantitatived) To the extent ‘subsidies’ distort prices across the board, gradual replacement ofe) Greater transparency in the application of policies and procedures to enablef) More effective rather than more pervasive regulation – taking cognisance of costsof regulation to the regulator (Government) as well as costs of compliance withregulation to the regulated ( Special emphasis on emerging concerns, such as, environmental, health, price-leveland consumer protection, many of which affect the poor more than the non-poor.h) Reorienting the resources of Government to public goods (law and order or streetlighting); merit goods (education and health) and economic infrastructure (roads)where there are substantial lags between investments and output adversely affectingboth growth and social justice .  If this reorientation demands, as it would sinceinvestible resources are not unlimited, some roll back of the Government especially5consistent with our own interests;g)enterprises) vis-à-vis the benefits.economic agents both domestic and international to operate efficiently.these by target oriented subsidies such as through Public Distribution System;restrictions or discriminatory instruments or policies.public and private sector;monetary-restraint were essential.Chakravarthyin provision of tradeable goods and yielding place to private sector, may bewarranted.Overall, the reform strategy asserts that medium to long-term solution to lies in a combination of adequate public goods and reasonable level of “merit goods” toall through public sector; provisions of efficient infrastructure through combinedefforts of public and private sector and economic growth through constantimprovements in productivity.  Work opportunities, incentives to work and reward forwork are central to both growth and justice and not mere creation and protection ofjobs.The question then is, how does reform impact on public enterprises? There isno presumption now that investments in public enterprises necessarily generatebenefits commensurate with the costs incurred by the Government through budgetarysupport or with alternative uses of such public funds.  The instrumentalist view towardspublic enterprise i.e. as instruments of objectives of growth and social justice ratherthan an ideological view i.e. public enterprises are better merely because of publicownership ,  seems to be in order.  Thus, public ownership is only one of the options ofGovernment intervention towards defining and achieving social or economicobjectives.  It is, therefore, necessary to constantly identify ways of achieving thedesired objective and view public ownership as one of such ways.  Consequently, thereis no reason to presume that the existing public enterprise would continue to bepublicly owned.  Today’s public enterprise may be tomorrow’s private enterprise; and.  Also, public ownership need not necessarily mean a 100 per centownership by the Government or other public sector bodies.  It is possible that there aredifferent mixes of public and private ownership or control.Since competition is desirable under reform policy, market structure appears tobe important as competition between public enterprises or between public and privateenterprises will have to be induced and ensured.  To ensure competition, independentregulatory bodies may be required.  Such regulatory bodies may have to be seen to beindependent of the Ministries that are also owners of pubic enterprises.  After all,owners and regulators cannot be the same just as a player cannot be an umpire.In the context of reform, central public enterprises have been classified in termsof market structure in which they operate, and profitability.  In regard to marketstructure, they are often divided into those which operate in competitive and.  In terms of profitability, they are divided into profit-making and.  This classification is static.  The very purpose of economic reform is tochange the market structures in favour of competitive element and any coping strategyrecognise this.In regard to profitability also, many of the enterprises and indeed most of theprofitable enterprises benefitted from administered price of some sort or the other,6will have to loss-makingmonopolistic marketsvice-versaRedefining the Role of Public Enterprisespovertysince both input costs and output price were either formally or informally regulated byGovernment or through other public enterprise in the network.  Further, what isimportant is not the present profitability but the future profitability in the changed.  Moreover, what is critical is the possible impact on profitability througheven for Government’s decision as owner on disinvestment, what is critical in purelyfiscal terms is not present profit or loss but future stream of costs or benefits withcontinued public ownership vis-à-vis the one-time cost or yield of one time sale of itsshares.Public sector, at a conceptual level, includes  Government sector and publicenterprises sector.  Public enterprises may be at the Union level or at the province/Statelevel.  The public enterprises may be financial public enterprises or non-financialpublic enterprises.  Within the non-financial public enterprises, there may bedepartmental public enterprises and other autonomous bodies.  The general practice inIndia is to equate the central non-financial autonomous public enterprises as “publicsector”, though departmental enterprises at the Union level (such as Ports, Railwaysand Telecommunications), and enterprises at State level (Power and Transportutilities), together have greater significance for the twin objectives of growth and social.  Indeed, many of central autonomous non-financial public enterprises producetradeable goods with little direct relevance to the welfare of poorer sections.In view of the common understanding of the “public sector”, and in order tolimit the discussion to managebale elements, we may take public sector or publicenterprise to mean Central non-financial public enterprises now.  For convenience, itwould be useful to adopt a five layer conceptual approach in analysing economicreform policies of the Government and their impact on public enterprises.  The fivelayers are (a) the general macro-economic environment, (b) the policies of theGovernment in regard to the broadly defined public sector as such; (c) the relationshipbetween the Government and the public enterprise as though between a principal andan agent; (d) the ownership structure of the public enterprise itself; and (e) the internaloperations of the public enterprise.The general macro-economic environment refers to the institutions  and othermacro-economic policies which affect the society institutions and the totality of theeconomic environment and not the public enterprises alone.  The liberalising elementsof reform may cover conditions of entry, operations and exit. The changes in thegeneral macro-economic environment do affect all economic agents including thepublic enterprises.At th e second layer, there would be a follow-up in regard to the macro-policybut specifically dealing with public sector.  These may include dereservation ofactivities of the public sector; corporatisation; creating institutions or procedures whichemphasise commercial or enterprises elements; withdrawal of discriminatory treatmentbetween public and private sector, etc.  Steps in this direction include intended changesin regulatory framework and minimising budget support.7justicediverse options such as partial or full divestiture or revised corporate strategies.  In fact,environmentAt a third layer, the relationship between Government and public enterprise asprincipal and agent may change.  In fact, a large part of the liberalisation of the‘eighties in India  was aimed in this direction and included the concept of access to capital markets for loans; representation of private sector leaders in Boards,etc.  The process of redefining the relationship has been strengthened as part of reformand includes minimising budgetary support, and disintermediation by Government inregard to external aid.  There is admission of the possibility, however remote of ‘exit ofthe unit’ through Bureau of Industrial and Financial Reconstruction or exit of workforce through Voluntary Retirement Scheme.  Interface now is on an intensified ‘arms-length’ basis between principal and agent.The fourth layer relates to the ownership structure.  Liberalisation in this area,amounting to some sort of privatisation, involves sale of share by Government or insome cases through expanded equity base to private share holders, and limits on furtherThe fifth layer relates to internal operations of public enterprises, often inducedby the Government as owner and sometimes as a response to changing environmentbrought about by the other four layers.  These may relate to contracting out someactivities to the private sector.  There is a distinct, if not appreciable progress, in thisCoping StrategiesCoping strategies will have to be evolved by both private and public sectorenterprises due to changes in the macro-economic environment induced by our reform-policies.  There has to be a greater focus in managing their own business than inmanaging the Government for success in their operations.  To this extent, there is anadvantage in public enterprises closely monitoring as to how the private enterprises areIt is, however, true that coping strategies will be different for the publicenterprises compared to private enterprises because of a number of reasons.First, there will be a new dynamism when the functions of the Government asSecondly, there will be changes in the approaches of Government as theprincipal owner and as lender since the objectives of the principal are under rapidchange unlike in the private sector where the objectives remain the same, namelyThirdly, changes in ownership pattern itself are being engineered by the owner8MOUs;and such changes in ownership may encompass changes in management control.profitability.sovereign-regulator and owner are differentiated.coping with the change in macro-economic environment.area under the new policies.equity-support by Government.Fourthly, and as a consequence of the new economic environment, the attitudeof workers and management may change.  In the past, they owed their loyalty either tovaguely defined general public interest or at a more operational level to theGovernment, that is, political or bureaucratic expression of Government.  The newreality is “enterprise” and not “public ownership”.  Public ownership is being diluted,has admittedly become flexible and there is a threat of its exit under the reformprogramme.  Hence, the attitudes of the management and workers will be orientedtowards the survival and growth of each enterprise in order to maximise their ownwelfare.Some enterprises in their response so far have been seeking funds for theenterprises from the receipts of the disinvestment.  This also implies making availablefunds to an enterprise by the owner without regard to either the return to the owner orthe requirement of funds to the enterprise concerned.  There are also proposals fromenterprises for mergers or restructuring, often with the intention of protecting theirenterprises from immediate compulsions of coverage by BIFR.  These measures, insome cases, may have potential for short-term relief or incentives but may result inmedium-term collapse of the enterprise.  If some of these are tactics to give time torespond, it would make good coping strategies for an enterprise.There are inherent strengths of public enterprises in many areas.  These areoften overlooked and more often inadequately exploited to the advantage of theenterprise.First, most private corporate sector is family-oriented and surely Government asan owner cannot be less professional.Second , public enterprises as compared to private enterprises have large verytalented, qualified and experienced employees though they are often not motivated and poorly rewarded.Third, the public enterprises usually have physical assets which may notcontribute directly to the income stream now, yet command high market value .  Largeunderutilised capacities do exist in some areas.  Hiving off of non-income earningassets and using their resources modernising is possible.Fourt h, many public enterprises have reach and penetration in terms oftechnical collaborators, input-suppliers, markets etc. and they can be actively exploredFifth, the private enterprises that may try to come in now will have to bear thecost and time of entry and entrenched public enterprises could utilise this gestation9period to enhance their competitive strengths.for coping strategies.rationalising/ for  adequately-Strengths of Public EnterprisesIn brief, timely coping on the par t of public enterprises by exploitingopportunities is possible and perhaps desirable, irrespective of decisions on the extentof ownership by Government.If structurally, the coping strategies by the enterprises require that they shouldhave greater autonomy, it is quite possible that such an autonomy is more likely underconditions of diversified ownership.  By the very nature of Government ownership .Government considers appointment to the Board or to the management as an incidentalor minor aspect of its governance.  Further, if a choice has to be made between politicalaccountability and the interest of the enterprises clearly, it will be in favour of politicalThere is reason to believe that autonomy of an enterprise to cope up withreform is often difficult as long as Government owns an absolute majority ofshareholding.  The desirable  level of Government holding and the manner of reachingsuch  a level have been analysed by Dr.Rangarajan Committee on disinvestment in1993.  The report recommended that the target level of ownership could be zero; 26 percent to ensure limited control over special resolutions brought in general body meetingof the enterprise; 51 per cent to have effective control and 100 per cent for fullownership.  The report adds that while determining the final level of Governmentownership, it must be recognised that there may be group specific or enterprise specificintermediate levels of  depending on the state of preparedness of eachenterprises, stock market conditions and the requirements of Government, apart fromIn brief, coping strategies are in order, for Government, public and privateenterprises.  For the intellectual community, a study of such strategies would be arewarding experience.  I look forward to such studies by the members of this augustaudience.* Golden Jubilee Endowment Lecture by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, at the Osmania UniversityDepartment of Commerece on December 27, 1996 at 10Hyderabadthe possibilities of expanding the equity base.disinvestmentaccountability.Finally, public enterprises can take initiatives in foreign collaboration also.
