Emerging Realities in Banking & Finance: Role of New Generation Managers It is indeed a pleasure to be here in your midst today. To be amongst bright youngstudents is not only energizing but also a learning experience - as we look at issues afresh andstart by asking basic questions, which at some level are the most difficult. 2. The Reserve Bank has shared a very special relationship with the NIBM – it catalyzedits creation in 1969, provided the venue for its first campus and has been intimately associatedwith its functioning. While the institute has been a part of the capacity building exercise for thebanking sector for over three decades, the PGPBF programme in Banking is an endeavour ofthe NIBM to ‘catch them young’ and create the bankers of tomorrow – a set of new generationmanagers for a new generation of banks.3. Building up an organizational architecture that generates intellectual capital has been ahuge challenge for banks and financial institutions. It is even more so today, when we areundergoing a period of the most rapid acceleration of what is alluded to as ‘creative destruction’in the history of the financial sector. In the process of creative destruction, new constructsemerge. It is here that ‘new generation’ managers may have a role more demanding than that ofthe managers of yesteryears. A role which calls for more than just ‘probity and prudence’ whichcharacterized the banker of yesteryears and increasingly focuses on managing ‘competingimperatives’.4. What do we mean by a new generation? How is the new generation different from theold? What has changed and is changing? And does it matter? In the context of timemeasurement, a generation refers commonly to a period of about 23 to 30 years, in which mosthumans become adults and have children. In another sense, the term generation refers to acommon identity arising from common experience. Thus the identity of ‘new generation’managers would arise from the common experience of a changing world around us, a productof the wider historical context. For a better insight into this we take a long view of the Indianbanking.5. While historians can slice the past into countless slices, in terms of transformationalchange, there have been only a few inflexion points in post-independence banking in India. Thefirst was the enactment of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which brought in a comprehensiveand formal structure of bank regulation and supervision in India. The nationalization of banks inour country marked the second such point. It generated forces that took banking from an eliteclass to the masses. It led to the establishment of a very substantial infrastructure across thegeographical expanse of the sub-continent and was thus a critical trigger for financial outreachof institutions and empowerment of the common man. The third inflexion point in banking wasthe financial sector reforms initiative that was launched in the early 1990s. These reformsheralded a dramatic shift in the way banks functioned and operated in India. The changedenvironment and the internal compulsions arising from greater competition and the need toimprove their market share / profitability gave rise to the quest for greater efficiency and theneed to reposition themselves given the realities of the environment and their internal strengthsand weaknesses.6. This period also coincided with the onset of the knowledge revolution that launched agigantic Third Wave - as famously described by Alvin Toffler – of economic, technical and socialchange and is still forcing businesses to operate in radically new, continually shifting ways.Every shred of industrial-era thinking is in fact now being re-scrutinised and re-formulated. It isprecisely when an old paradigm crumbles and the new one is not yet fixed in place that we getgreat bursts of creative thinking. This is perhaps such a moment. *Address of Shri V Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India to the students ofPost Graduate Programme in Banking And Finance, National Institute for BankManagement, Pune on April 3, 2005.7. What does the future hold? One thing is certain; - the future will clearly not be acontinuation of the past. It will rather be a series of discontinuities. The exciting thing aboutdiscontinuity is that it breeds opportunity. We live in an age of unprecedented opportunity. Butwith opportunity comes responsibility. It is for tomorrow’s managers to carve out their ownplace, to know when to change course and keep themselves engaged and productivethroughout. To do things well, one needs to cultivate a deep understanding of oneself - not onlythe strengths and weaknesses but also how one learns, how one works with others, what his orher values are and where he or she can make the greatest contribution.  Because only whenone operates from strengths can true excellence is achieved.8. These challenges call for a new, more dynamic, aggressive and challenging workculture to meet the demands of customer relationships, product differentiation, brand values,reputation, corporate governance and regulatory prescriptions. Understanding and dealing withdifficult transitions is the key for the new managers to designing strategies for theirorganizations. Broadly along an analysis of transition trends by Edward E. Furash, we attempt asomewhat loosely structured tracking of the emerging realities of banking in India. Anappreciation of these trends would perhaps help map the competencies that new generationmanagers may require to convert these challenges of the changing environment intoopportunities.The trend from deposit banking to financial services9. First, there is the transition from banking to financial services.Banks are uniquely poised to broaden their product lines into the complete offerings that wouldgo under the rubric financial services. This would imply a new founded emphasis on marketing;be it of investment, insurance and other products that consumers want. Banks have advantagesin their image of trustworthiness and their extensive distribution systems. How they convert thisinto a marketing advantage will determine how they win market shares.The trend from Balance sheet to off-balance sheet intermediation10. Then there is the trend from balance sheet to off-balance sheet intermediation. Bankingis no longer confined to ‘acceptance of deposits for the purposes of lending’ – today it refers tointermediating and managing risk. As the scope of intermediation expands to incorporatemarket risks, bankers are taking a view on how they will strategically position themselves in thisnew environment. While some will, perhaps, choose to migrate rapidly to off-balance sheetinvestment - or merchant-banking activities, others may stress volume origination which theycan securitize and then manage for a fee, and still others may continue to position themselvesas traditional banking retail players focusing on deposit intermediation. Nevertheless, the trendto off balance sheet intermediation and the complexities that it entails will demand that the somemanagers of the future be equipped with financial skills in a significantly greater measure.The trend from capital adequacy to capital efficiency11. Thirdly, there is the transition from capital adequacy to capital efficiency.The Basel II prescriptions have already put us on track for transition from the traditionalregulatory and market measures of capital adequacy to an evaluation of whether a bank hasfound the most efficient use of its capital to support its new business mix. In effect, future plansmay therefore include the fluid use of capital, an approach that has been called the "just-in-timebalance sheet" management, in which capital flows quickly to its most efficient use. Thistransition in how capital is used and how much capital is needed will become a significant factorin return-on-equity strategy for years ahead and strategic plans may be required to execute thiskind of approach.The trend from physical to virtual distribution12. Perhaps the most visible and overt change in banking in the eyes of the public hasbeen the trend for banks to move away from branch banking to electronic, anywhere-anytimedistribution of financial services. If this has triggered the ‘death of distance’, the Real time GrossSettlements (RTGS) System is threatening to consign time lags in settlement of financialtransactions to history. In reality, delivery systems like ATMs, on-line banking and ‘phonebanking are a continuum of options from which the consumer selects. Consumers select thedelivery system that is right for them. In other words, distribution differentiates a bank when itsets up a delivery system that attracts certain customers. Distribution is the new way tosegment consumer markets and the transition of distribution systems is in fact emerging as anessential part of bank repositioning strategy.The trend from fragmentation to consolidation:13. The forces of change today are favouring larger entities which bring mergers andacquisitions squarely into the strategic decision making of the banking sector. We are slowlymoving from a regime of ‘a large number of small banks’ to ‘a small number of large banks’.Every bank will of course, depending on its strategy, have to migrate to its best position in thisnew structure. Picking a market position and transitioning to it is one of the most significantstrategic decisions a bank must make. All types of entities can be highly profitable if theytransition to the right market position and right cost structure to execute the strategy. The trend from data to information to knowledge14. Perhaps the most talked about, yet least understood, transition ahead is in the area ofinformation technology and information application. Distribution and processing technologytransitions are keys to the shift to virtual banking which is prompted by the desire to have lowcost operations. But technology-driven information transformation is at the center of the evenmore important management, marketing, and risk transitions that banks must make.Information is only valuable if it can be put to work and used for decision tools such asprogrammed trading, target marketing, predictive credit modeling and scoring, amongst others.Most new financial services are in fact based on technology creating ways to do them. Thetransition from an old world of data processing and information management to a new world inwhich knowledge is being put to work on competitive advantage will be a major strategicpreoccupation in the years ahead.15. It is today's bank strategies that must handle these transitions for tomorrow's success.Managing these transitions well is the secret to strategic execution. Organizations howeverultimately stand or fall on the quality of the work and decisions made by their people. So whatsets most successful organizations apart is how they manage human resources. Increasingly,banks all over are therefore adopting the socio-technical approach to job design that recognizesthe productivity gains of optimum technological arrangements as well as the importance ofworkplace sociology. The new generation managers on their part will have to learn how tocreate and thrive in an environment that embraces change not as a threat but as an opportunity.16. What are the challenges that these changes bring to the persons who manage thesector? A challenge for the sector is to attract and deploy a new generation of managers in anage when turnover of human capital is extremely high. How organizations define and align thejob orientation and employee expectations and put it to optimum use, today top their boardroomagenda. As the dominant demographic profile of our banks change rapidly and the customerneeds and positioning strategies take different contours, finding and placing the right person forthe right job is indeed critical.  Not only has the environment changed, there has also been apalpable change in the attitudes of the new generation. The present generation, correct me if Iam wrong, is increasingly looking for a mix between opportunities for personal growth,autonomy, job delight, social esteem that comes with responsibilities which are entrusted,diversity, stability, and of course, remuneration.17. There is an increasing trend that remuneration, though the most tangible, is only one ofthe mix of offerings that the new generation of managers today demands. What truly gets themgoing would ideally have to be the right mix of a set of ‘push’ – motivation, recognition, careerprogression, capacity building and - and ‘pull’ factors such as higher pay, better benefits, heftierperks as well as drawing out plans.18. What is the identity that will define the new generation managers? While leadershipskills, the ability to multi-task and manage competing imperatives will be the necessaryingredients of the new generation managers, the old- fashioned qualities of a desire to learn, astrong sense of professional ethics, an enquiring mind, a strategic view, the qualities of humilityand empathy, a willingness to embrace practical experience, and an eagerness to adapt to newexperiences would be critical.19. As I have said, this calls for a diverse repertoire of competencies, the diagnostic abilityto understand what new things are required or what things should be unlearned and thebehavioural flexibility to be able to change. I am sure your management course would haveprepared you to see things before the curve, before others do. We live in exciting times and - asyou stand on the threshold of a new life and a career in the banking – I trust you will continue tocherish the ideals and dreams of youth, after all they are what make life worthwhile. I wish all ofyou – tomorrow’s leaders - every success in your entire future endeavour. 
