Treating Bank Customers Fairly- Regulatory Initiatives *It gives me great pleasure to participate in this Congress organised by theFinancial Planning Standards Board India. Today, there is much more awarenessof the need to protect consumers' rights and ensure fair practices in financialservices. Countries are designating specific regulators or self regulatory watchdogs for overseeing whether there is mis-selling and whether fair and transparentpractices are being observed by financial intermediaries. While specificgrievances relating to deficiency in financial services can be a matter forconsumer courts or the concerned ombudsman, from a systemic point of view, itis recognised that services have to be benchmarked against codes andstandards developed by all stakeholders and as a matter of public policy. In thiscontext, an organisation such as the FPSB India whose mission is thedevelopment and promotion of standards for financial planning professionals tobenefit among others, the general public is indeed timely and relevant. The FPSBneeds to be congratulated for holding this Congress, which I am sure, will throwup a number of issues keeping in view the central theme viz. the interests of theconsumer. I am glad to note that the FPSB India is also focusing on financialliteracy and solutions for the rural population.The focus on the common man is extremely important in our country as heis usually the neglected one. At the annual meeting of IBA last Friday, theHon'ble Finance Minister has talked about financial inclusion and targeting thebottom of the pyramid. With greater penetration of formal financial services intothe economy and society, there is a need for ensuring evolution and adherenceto codes and standards in delivering financial services to the financially excluded.________________________________________________________________*Inaugural Address delivered by Smt. Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank ofIndia at the Financial Planning Congress 2006 on 'Establishing consumer CentricFinancial Services Delivery Infrastructure', organised by the Financial PlanningStandards Board India on May 29, 2006 at New Delhi. The banking system in India today has perhaps the largest outreach fordelivery of financial services. Apart from the traditional financial products viz.deposits, loans and money transfer, bank branches are also serving as animportant conduit for delivery of mutual funds, other capital market and insuranceproducts. The number of savings accounts with scheduled commercial banks inIndia stood at little over 300 million in March 2005. If one were to take intoaccount cooperative banks, the number would be even higher. Taking intoaccount the number of households in the country this number certainlyrepresents a significant coverage.Hence, evolving standards for bank service to depositors and the commonperson has to be a very important part of financial planning standards.Recognising an institutional gap in measuring the performance of the banksagainst codes and standards based on established best practices, Reserve Bankof India has taken the initiative in setting up the Banking Codes and StandardsBoard of India (BCSBI). It is an autonomous and independent body, adopting thestance of a self-regulatory organisation in the larger interest of improving thequality of customer services by the Indian banking system. Banks registerthemselves with the Board as its members and provide services as per theagreed standards and codes. The Board in turn, monitors and assesses thecompliance with codes and standards which the banks have agreed to. Theregistration of banks with the BCSBI, as members, enables the Reserve Bank ofIndia to derive greater supervisory comfort, so also the customers of the memberbanks. This would also enable the BCSBI to accommodate the bank-specificdifferences in the customer service related benchmarks set by the banks forthemselves. I think there would be considerable synergy in the FPSB exchangingviews and interacting with the BCSBI.The BCSBI represents the latest in a series of initiatives taken by RBI foraddressing the issues relating to fair practices for bank customers especially thecommon person. I wish to take this opportunity today to give you an outline ofReserve Bank’s efforts in this field and its vision for the future, in which theFinancial Planning Standards Board, can play a complementary role.In the late seventies, RBI had advised banks to adopt therecommendations of the Talwar Working Group constituted by Government in1975 to study the quality of customer service in banks. This was more or less thefirst regulatory initiative in imposing certain discipline on the banks to renderquality service. This was followed by several and guidelines covering differentareas of bank's interfaces with customers.Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services(CPPAPS)In November 2003, while presenting the  mid-term review of the annualmonetary and credit policy for the year 2003-04, Governor Reddy brought intosharp focus the inadequacy in banking services available to common person andthe need to benchmark the current level of service, review the progressperiodically, enhance the timeliness and quality, rationalize the processes takinginto account  technological developments, and suggest appropriate incentives tofacilitate change on an ongoing basis. Accordingly, he set up the StandingCommittee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services under theable and sagely Chairmanship of Shri S.S.Tarapore. The approach of theCPPAPS was unique in that it started its evaluation from the customer-end andwas totally customer-centric. Shri Tarapore and other members of the Committeeundertook incognito visits to bank branches including RBI’s offices for a first handexperience of difficulties faced by the public at large. The Committee was bothclinical and critical in its observations and made a number of recommendationscovering an individual customer's dealing with the bank in the areas of foreignexchange, currency and government transactions including pension, besides themain relationship as an account holder. I am taking this opportunity forhighlighting the regulations issued to banks on aspects covering bank accountsfollowing the Committee's recommendations.• Banks are required to inform customers upfront about the requirement ofminimum balances and the charges if such balances are not maintained. Theyare also required to inform customers one month in advance any changes insuch minimum balances and charges.• Banks are also required to provide a choice of a ‘no frills account’ where theminimum balance is nil or very small but having restrictions on number ofwithdrawals etc. to facilitate common man’s access to bank accounts.• It has been clarified to banks that NRO accounts can be held jointly withresidents• In case of collection of cheques , banks are required to formulate and  disclosetheir policy for affording immediate credit, time frame for collection and interestpayment for delayed collection, taking care to ensure that the interests of thesmall depositors are fully protected. The policy should clearly lay down theliability of the banks by way of interest payments due to delays for non-compliance with the standards set by the banks themselves. Compensation byway of interest payment, where necessary, should be made without any claimfrom the customer.• Banks are required to provide both the drop box facility and the facility foracknowledgement of the cheques at the regular collection counters and nobranch should refuse to give an acknowledgement if the customer tenders thecheques at the counters.• Depositors cannot be forced to sign a declaration that dispatch of cheques bookby courier is at the depositor's risk as it constitutes an unfair practice. Banksshould also ensure that cheque books are delivered over the counters on requestto the depositors or his authorised representative.• Banks have been advised to ensure that brief, intelligible particulars areinvariably entered in passbooks / statements of account and they adhere to theprescribed monthly periodicity while sending statement of accounts.• It has been clarified to banks that payment to the survivor /nominee of adeceased depositor where there is a valid nomination or where the account hasbeen opened with a survivorship clause is a valid discharge of liability providedinter alia it has been made clear to the survivor(s) / nominee that he would bereceiving the payment from the bank as a trustee of the legal heirs of thedeceased depositor, i.e., such payment to him shall not affect the right or claimwhich any person may have against the survivor(s) / nominee to whom thepayment is made. In such cases insistence on production of legal representationis unwarranted and would, invite serious supervisory disapproval.  In such case,therefore, while making payment to the survivor(s) / nominee of the deceaseddepositor, the banks have to desist from insisting on production of successioncertificate, letter of administration or probate, etc., or obtain any bond ofindemnity or surety from the survivor(s)/nominee, irrespective of the amountstanding to the credit of the deceased account holder.•  In case where the deceased depositor had not made any nomination or for theaccounts other than those styled as "either or survivor" (such as single or jointlyoperated accounts), banks have been told to adopt a simplified procedure forrepayment to legal heir(s) of the depositor keeping in view the imperative need toavoid inconvenience and undue hardship to the common person.  In this context,banks may, keeping in view their risk management systems, fix a minimumthreshold limit, for the balance in the account of the deceased depositors, up towhich claims in respect of the deceased depositors could be settled withoutinsisting on production of any documentation other than a letter of indemnity.•  In the case of term deposits, banks are advised to incorporate a clause in theaccount opening form itself to the effect that in the event of the death of thedepositor, premature termination of term deposits would be allowed.  Theconditions subject to which such premature withdrawal would be permitted mayalso be specified in the account opening form.  Such premature withdrawal wouldnot attract any penal charge.•  In order to avoid hardship to the survivor(s) / nominee of a deposit account,banks are advised to obtain appropriate agreement / authorization from thesurvivor(s) / nominee with regard to the treatment of pipeline flows in the name ofthe deceased account holder.• Banks are advised to settle the claims in respect of deceased depositors andrelease payments to survivor(s) / nominee(s) within a period not exceeding 15days from the date of receipt of the claim subject to the production of proof ofdeath of the depositor and suitable identification of the claim(s), to the bank'ssatisfaction.•  Information should not be gathered in the name of KYC with the intention ofusing it for cross-selling of services. The banks should obtain the informationrequired for opening an account independent of any other information that theymay seek for cross-selling purposes with the consent of the customer. The formscontaining this information must not be a part of the account opening form.• the KYC procedure for opening accounts for those persons who intend to keepbalances not exceeding rupees fifty thousand (Rs. 50,000/-) in all their accountstaken together and the total credit in all the accounts taken together is notexpected to exceed rupees one lakh (Rs. 1,00,000/-) in a year has beensimplified to enable those belonging to low income groups without documents ofidentity and proof of residence to open banks accounts. In such cases banks cantake introduction from an account holder on whom full KYC procedure has beencompleted and has had satisfactory transactions with the bank for at least sixmonths.  Photograph of the customer who proposes to open the account and hisaddress need to be certified by the introducer.Considering the significant growth in credit cards in the recent years andthe experiences of banks and customers with this product, the Reserve Bankissued detailed guidelines on credit card operations of banks in November 2005.These guidelines, aimed at protecting customer’s interest, include cleardisclosures of terms and conditions, including rate of interest on annualisedbasis, prohibit issue of unsolicited cards, ensure customer confidentiality, andalso cover matters such as ‘do not call’ registry, fair practices in recovery andcollection.Revised Banking Ombudsman Scheme 2006Keeping in view the large number of complaints continuously beingreceived against banks, the Banking Ombudsman Scheme has been revampedthis year to enlarge its extent and scope of the authority and functions tospecifically cover redressal of grievances against deficiency in banking services,including a variety of banking products/services, such as, loans and advances,credit cards, non-payment/ inordinate delay in the payment or collection ofcheques, drafts, bills, non-issue of drafts to customers, non-adherence toprescribed working hours by branches etc. Banking Ombudsman (BO) functionsas an arbitrator in respect of any dispute with mutual consent of both the partiesprovided that the value of the claim in such dispute does not exceed Rupees tenlakh. Under the new scheme, the complainants will be able to file their complaintsin any form, including online. The complainant can appeal against the awardsgiven by the Banking Ombudsmen.A quick review of the complaints received at the various offices of theOmbudsman since the revised scheme came into force reveals that the numberof complaints received by the BO’s offices has more than doubled to 13,483during the quarter ended March 31, 2006. This increase could be attributed to thecomplainants tending to approach the Ombudsman’s office or RBI directlyinstead of first approaching the concerned bank’s internal machinery forredressal. There is an urgent need for banks to strengthen their own internalgrievance redressal machinery and set up nodal officials at various centres.Banks should give wide publicity to the names/contact addresses etc. of suchnodal officers so that members of public can forward their grievances to theseofficials. If no response is received within a month's time or if the customer isdissatisfied with the response he can approach the concerned BankingOmbudsman. Currently BO offices are functioning at 15 centres.Fair Practices Code of Indian Banks’ AssociationIndian Banks’ Association (IBA) has also played a complementary role inefforts for improving customer service in banks. IBA had come out with modelFair Practices Code covering lenders liability, depositors’ interest that cover whata customer can expect from his bank. It also indicates the responsibilities ofbanks while giving different kinds of banking services. IBA has further come outwith a Model Deposit Policy. The Fair Practices Code has been recentlyreviewed and made more comprehensive in consultation with the BCSBI and isexpected to set higher benchmarks for customer services in banks. The bankswill be entering into covenants with the BCSBI for adhering to the FPC.Ensuring reasonableness of bank chargesAs the Reserve Bank was receiving several representations from publicabout unreasonable service charges being levied by banks, it was felt that theexisting   institutional mechanism in this regard is not adequate. Accordingly, andin order to ensure fair practices in banking services, the RBI has recently issuedinstructions to banks making it obligatory for them to display and continue tokeep updated, in their offices/branches as also in their website, the details ofvarious services charges in a format prescribed by it. The Reserve Bank has alsodecided to place details relating to service charges of individual banks for themost common services in its website. Furthermore, Reserve Bank has sinceconstituted a working group headed by the Banking Ombudsman, Mumbai andincluding nominee of IBA and representatives of customers to formulate ascheme for ensuring reasonableness of bank charges and to incorporate this inthe Fair Practices Code, the compliance of which will be monitored by theBanking Codes and Standards Board of India (BCSBI).Customer service – institutional machineryIn the area of customer service, the institutional machinery in banksshould comprise -• At the Board level, every bank has been asked to constitute a CustomerServices committee of the Board including as invitees experts andrepresentatives of customers to enable the bank to formulate policies andassess the compliance thereof internally.• Every bank has been asked to convert the Ad Hoc committee ofexecutives on customer service headed by the CMD/ED into a StandingCommittee that periodically reviews the policies and procedures andworking of the bank’s own grievance redressal machinery. Thesecommittees have been found to be very useful as the CEO of the bankand his top management team is singularly focused on matters relating tocustomer services at the meetings of these committees and decisions forimproving services tend to get taken instantly, cutting across differentdepartments.• Each bank is expected to have a nodal department/ official for customerservice in the HO and each controlling office, whom customers withgrievances can approach in the first instance and with whom the BankingOmbudsman and RBI can liaise. More interaction between the RBI/BOand the nodal officers will enable banks to take necessary correctives atthe local level.Financial InclusionIn the context of the focus on financial inclusion and distress amongstfarmers, there is a need for the formal financial system to look at increasingfinancial literacy and financial counselling. As part of the CommunityReinvestment Act in US, banks are expected to contribute towards educatingpersons from socially and financially disadvantaged groups on matters relating totheir financial needs. Indian banks and financial market players should activelylook at promoting such programs as part of their corporate social responsibility. Ihad recently visited a cooperative society having linkages to women SHGs inurban slums, where the borrower was counselled in a full day program, on theimplications of the loan, how the interest is calculated and so on, so that she istotally aware of its features. I wish the banks would have similar program for theirclientele including farmers.  There is clearly a lot to be done in this area.Advisory ServicesFinally, given the vision and mission of the Financial Planning StandardsBoard India, I would urge the Board to develop standards for financial advisoryservices covering marketing, advisory and counselling. While doing so the Boardmay specifically look at possible areas of conflict of interest between selling andadvising. In this context, I would draw reference to a recent report on 'Conflict ofinterest in financial services' of a group set up by RBI, available on our website.The FPSB India could evolve codes of ethics and other measures to minimizeunacceptable conflicts or improper acts.I thank the Financial Planning Standards Board India for this opportunityand wish it success in its endeavour.
