• •It is a great honour and privilege to be here in IIM - Ahmedabad to interact withdistinguished scholars and brilliant students of management. You represent the cream ofIndian intellect, and Indian intellect is recognised as perhaps the cream of world intellect. I amIn consultation with the organisers, I selected the topic for today’s talk, viz., “RBI andBanking Sector Reform”. Financial sector reform, of which banking sector reform is easily themost critical, is an important element of overall economic reform that we have undertaken.Naturally, the RBI plays the most significant role in banking sector reform. In fact, the lateststatement on Monetary and Credit Policy issued on October 30, 1998, lists actionscontemplated on a large number of structural aspects related to the banking sector followingNarasimham Committee’s recommendations. I do not intend repeating these actions in thisforum, since they can be easily accessed, if you had not already done so.Instead, I will start with some snippets on banking in our ancient history. You mayfind it amusing. I would, then, move to the serious business of explaining to you in detail howthe services in the banking sector have changed dramatically in the recent past since the early`nineties, i.e., between pre-reform and today. The idea is not merely to state the reforms in thebanking sector that have been undertaken by the RBI, but to focus on how such reforms havechanged banking services. Of course, there are a number of measures that are yet to be takenup to bring our banking to global standards. I will, therefore, place before you the currentapproach of the RBI to reforms in banking sector and conclude by listing some issues thatneed to be addressed in future.Like in many other aspects, we have a long tradition of banking. Evidence regardingthe existence of money-lending operations in India is found in the literature of the Vedictimes, i.e., 2000 to 1400 B.C. The literature of the Buddhist period, e.g., the Jatakas, andrecent archaeological discoveries supply evidence of the existence of sresthis, or bankers.From the laws of Manu, it appears that money-lending and allied problems had assumedWhat were the interest rates? They were prescribed almost by all Hindu law-giversManu, Vasistha, Yajnavalkya, Gautama and Baudhayana as also Kautilya. A common basenumber was 15 per cent per annum - what the banker-economist Dr. Thingalaya calls HinduIt is not as though everyone used to get loans at PLR. Only prime borrowers get atPLR, then, and even now, though the basis is different. According to Manu and Vasistha, theinterest rates do not vary with the risk involved or the purpose for which the money isborrowed. But, they are directly linked to the caste classification of the borrowers. Brahmin isto be charged 2 per cent, Kshatriya 3 per cent, Vaishya 4 per cent and Shudra 5 per cent per•I am grateful to Dr. A. Prasad for his valuable assistance.Ahmedabad on November 14, 1998. Address by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Indian Institute of Management,month. We also have some differential rates of interest now, prescribed by the authorities.rate of interest. Incidentally, this is close to current Prime Lending Rate (PLR) of many banks.considerable importance in ancient India.Historylooking forward to a lively and fruitful discussion today.Chairman and Friends,RBI and Banking Sector ReformChanakya, however, gives a different approach. The interest rate works out to be 15per cent per annum for general advances. The traders are charged a rate of 60 per cent perannum. Where the merchandise has to pass through forests, the traders have to pay 120 percent while those engaged in the export-import business handling sea-borne cargo have to pay240 per cent per annum. Chanakya’s interest rate structure is risk-weighted; the rate of interestAgain, it is not everyone who could take up banking business. The Dharmasastra laiddown rates according to the castes of the borrowers, and the eligibility of men belonging tothe Vaishya caste alone could take up the money-lending profession. In other words, inments to be given incase of disputes arising about loan repayment and lists 18 types of disputes. When a creditorsues the debtor for recovery of money, it is the duty of the king to ensure that the creditor getsback his money. Manu permits the king to employ all means, fair or foul, to recover the dues,for example, torturous punishment like killing the debtor’s wife, children and cattle orobstructing his movements, which is described as Aacharita. Manu holds the view that adefaulter cannot absolve himself of his debt burden even by death. Chanakya says that sonsshall pay with interest the debt of a deceased person or co-debtors or sureties. Thisphenomenon is likely to have prompted one of the committees on rural indebtedness toconclude that ‘the Indian farmer is born in debts, lives in debts and dies in debts.’ Chanakyadoes not prescribe elaborately different types of punishments for non-repayment but hasshown some considerations to the government servants and agriculturists in the matter of debtrepayment.Was a spouse, i.e., husband or wife responsible to pay for the debts incurred? Yes, andno. Wife is exempted from debt burden of her husband if she has not given her assent to hisborrowings. However, for the debt incurred by a wife, her husband is liable for repayment. So,One of the objectives of nationalisation of the banks in 1969 was to extend the reachof organised banking services to rural areas and to the neglected sections/sectors of society.Since 1969, there has been a significant spread of the banking habit and a large mobilisationof savings by banks. Banking system also played a major role in widening the entrepreneurialbase of the country. However, by ‘eighties, it was clear that the operational efficiency wasunsatisfactory. Banks were characterised by low profitability with high and growing non-performing assets. There was a problem of low capital base and also a belief that withGovernment ownership, there was little to worry about a low capital base. More important, thelack of proper disclosure norms led to many problems being kept under cover. Poor internalcontrols raised serious doubts about the integrity of the system itself. The quality of customerservice did not keep pace with increasing expectations. In fact, there was a feeling that theinefficiency of the banking system was encouraging diversion of domestic financial savingsaway from banks. No doubt, a series of reform measures were undertaken since 1985 but thefirst phase of comprehensive reforms in the banking sector can be traced to the 1991 Report ofthe Committee on the Financial System, i.e., Narasimham Committee I. These reforms wereundertaken in parallel with, and as an important element of the overall economic reforms of2the ‘nineties.Why Reform and What Reform?Let me now turn to serious business.there was some gender discrimination in the ancient times.What about disputes and debt recovery? Manu specifies the punishancient times, your caste gave you licence to banking; not RBI!increases with the risk involved in the borrowers’ business.The major features of this phase of reforms can be summarised in the words of mypredecessor, Dr. S. S. Tarapore:First, the fisc undertook to restrict its demand for monetisation of its deficit and aconcerted effort was made to move to market related rates of interest.Secondly, the pre-emptions by way of the cash reserve ratio and the statutory liquidityratio were reduced.Thirdly, there was a total freeing of deposit and lending rates with only very limitedcontrols (loans up to Rs.2 lakh, export credit and savings bank interest).Fourthly, following the Basle Committee standards, prudential norms were prescribedSixthly, the regulatory/supervisory system was strengthened by the setting up of a institutional strengthening was undertaken to ensure the progressiveWhat effect did these reforms have on the services rendered by the banks? In theultimate analysis, the banking reform should benefit the people, in all their transactions withbanks. I intend elaborating on the changed scenario due to reform in regard to each service. IPrior to reforms, the RBI prescribed the deposit rates and the maturities of depositsthat could be offered by banks. There was no price competition among suppliers of bankingAs a result of deregulation, barring saving deposits, banks are free to fix their owndeposit rates for different maturities, which implies choices for the depositor. Also, acustomer can earn interest on a term deposit for a minimum period of 15 days as against 30/46days until recently. Banks are now also free to offer varying rates of interest for different sizesEarlier, the RBI decided the penalty structure for premature withdrawal of deposits butthis has now been left to each bank so that banks can manage interest rates.Further, Certificate of Deposits (CDs) are available, at market related interest rate, andoffer the additional facility of transferability. The minimum amount of CDs has also beenbrought down gradually to Rs.5 lakh and the minimum holding period has been brought downThus, as a result of reform, customers now can choose from a variety of banks andinstruments and maturities. A number of add-on features are available to deposits such asfloating rate deposits, automatic switch-over from time to saving deposits or saving to timedeposits, withdrawal through ATMs, etc.Incidentally, the retail depositors are protected through a Deposit Insurance and CreditReform has certainly imparted greater flexibility to banks to offer products, keeping in3Depositsview both the customer needs and the banks’ own asset-liability management needs.Guarantee Corporation cover up to Rs. 1 lakh of deposits per insured bank.to 15 days.of deposits above a cut-off point since the cost of transaction differs by size.services and the customer had only limited products to choose from.will also make an attempt to indicate further reforms that are needed.RBI and Banking Servicesdevelopment and integration of the securities, money and forex markets. Lastly,Board for Financial Supervision.Fifthly, the banks were required to observe stricter disclosure norms.for capital adequacy, income recognition and provisioning.There are a couple of issues that remain to be resolved. These relate to reduction in theminimum period for term deposits and the interest rate on saving deposits. Removal ofminimum period of 15 days could result in volatility of funds as deposits could tend to moveSaving account is presently offering an important source of comfort to middle classrural and semi-urban savers and many feel that interest offered to them needs to be increased,particularly since they do not really use the accounts for frequent transactions. The interestrate offered on saving deposits at 4.5 per cent is, in any case lower in terms of cost, comparedto other resources to banks, except the current account which is cost free to banks but has fullchequable facility. Two alternatives seem to be available in this regard. The first is to createtwo categories of saving account - chequable and non-chequable accounts. The option then isto reduce interest rate on saving account with cheque facilities and increase the interest rate onnon-chequable accounts. The second alternative is to deregulate interest rates on saving bankaccounts completely. The opinion among banks is divided and it is unclear whether banks areThe Indian banking system was operating for a long time with a high level of reserverequirements both in the form of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) and Cash Reserve Ratio(CRR). Prior to reforms, these requirements effectively represented 54 per cent of deposits.Progressive reduction has brought down the effective SLR from 37.4 per cent in the pre-reform period to 25.0 per cent and the effective CRR from 16.5 per cent to 9.75 per cent.Thus, for every rupee of deposit in banks, only about one-third to one-half wasavailable for lending to commercial sector before reform, but now about two-thirds isavailable since statutory prescriptions have been reduced from 54 per cent to less than 35 percent. Reform has effectively doubled the proportion of banks’ resources available forUntil recently, banks were extending working capital finance to corporates through asystem of cash credit. Under the new dispensation, much of the working capital finance wouldbe in the form of demand/short-term loans. Now, corporates are expected to take care oftreasury management and ensure sound management of funds. However, this shift from thecash credit system of financing to loan system was gradual and smaller borrowers still havethe option of leaving treasury management to banks. Some banks charge a slightly higherEarlier, the level of credit to a corporate was determined on the basis of a maximumpermissible bank finance (MPBF) - an elaborate but rigid procedure - to fix the eligible limitsof credit. This mandated system was abolished and banks now have total freedom to decide onthe methodology of assessing working capital requirements. It is for corporates to convinceCorporates can now choose to go through a single bank, consortium arrangement, ortake a syndication route.With the implementation of R.V.Gupta Committee recommendations in the agriculturesector and Kapur Committee recommendations in the SSI sector, the borrowers should findprocedural requirements simplified and should be able to obtain credit in a timely andexpeditious manner. Similar ease in credit delivery may be expected for exporters once therecently appointed Subrahmanyam Committee gives its recommendations and they areimplemented.4banks about their unique working capital needs.interest rate if the customer takes cash credit instead of a loan.commercial sector by drastically reducing statutory preemptions.Advancesready for this.into term deposits out of current accounts frequently, thereby adding to the cost of funds.Most important, lending rate was fixed for most credits during the pr e-reform period -by size, purpose, etc. and there was no price competition among banks or even weight forcreditworthiness of borrower. With gradual deregulation, lending rates are prescribed only forsome of export finance and small borrowers. Now, each bank announces its own PrimeLending Rate (PLR) and a customer is charged at PLR or a higher rate but within a bandannounced. So, a customer with good credit record can get a better price or can pay higherprice for better service from a bank of his choice. Of course, small borrower customers forSome corporates, and in particular exporters, feel that interest rates in India are high ascompared to international interest rates. The RBI has recently given an option to corporates.They can borrow in rupees at domestic interest rates or in foreign currency denominated loansat relevant foreign currency related interest rates - out of foreign currency denominateddeposit resources available with the banks. The RBI ensures that such foreign currencyresources are raised at reasonable cost, i.e., within ceilings prescribed; and when lent, atreasonable price, i.e., within prescribed margin. In this option, the borrower is taking foreignexchange risk, which is ideally hedged in forex market or naturally hedged by future earningsWith the reform in the financial sector, banks have the flexibility to invest in a numberof innovative instruments of different maturities including Commercial Paper, bonds anddebentures of corporates, preference shares, etc. So, corporates now have the flexibility toraise money from banks through a variety of sources, and they can take advantage of lowerrates in the market when they are lower than bank lending rate, which is generally more stickythan CP rate.Now, issuers have the flexibility to raise funds from the banking system by structuringinnovative customised instruments that would help drive down cost of borrowing, and bankstoo have a menu of options to choose from which will facilitate their asset-liabilityInitially, a prudential limit of 5 per cent of incremental deposits was fixed, in terms ofbank exposure to shares, bonds, debentures, preference shares, etc. More recently, all debt andquasi-debt instruments have been taken out of this limit. There is thus scope for larger accessof funds to corporates.Reforms also enable individuals to take loans more liberally than before, againstThe reform process has infused greater competition among banks and has given banksgreater freedom to operate. This has enabled a reduction in the cost to the system and to thecustomer. The depositors and borrowers are likely to benefit because of a number of measuresthat have been initiated. For instance, the Government pays market related interest rates on itsborrowings, the credit appraisal systems of banks are improving, banks have better resourceRBI is encouraging banks to provide better service to customers by encouragingTo enable faster clearing of cheques, MICR processing centres have been established5management.in major centres of the country.adoption of state-of-the art information technology.Payments System and Technological Issuesmanagement systems in place, and the NPAs are reducing.shares and debentures subject to prudential limits.Investmentsin foreign currency.loans up to Rs.2 lakh will get loans at PLR.In order to provide extended banking hours to customers, many banks are going in forShared Payment Network Systems (SPNS), installation of Automated Teller Machines(ATMs) and cash dispensers. The SPNS will provide services like deposit/withdrawal of cash,balance enquiry, printing of statement of account, request for cheque book, standinginstructions, etc. These apart, banks are providing services like tele-banking and internetCustomers can now get access to international markets in a cost-effective mannersince banks have become members of the Society for World-wide Inter-bank FinancialTelecommunications (SWIFT).Electronic clearing system (debit and credit) has been operationalised in all the fourmetropolitan cities in order to facilitate quicker remittances, faster clearing and more efficientPrior to reforms, banks were mostly engaged in traditional non-fund based business,viz., opening letters of credit, acceptances, issuing guarantees, remittance business and foreignexchange business such as offering forward contracts to exporters/importers. In the reformperiod, in order to cater to the increasing needs of customers, side-by-side with growth intraditional non-fund business, more innovative forms of off-balance sheet financing haveOne area relates to merchant banking. Banks are allowed t o undertake merchantbanking activities in-house or through a subsidiary. As a result, corporates can now get anentire package of services from banks connected with the activity of primary issue, startingfrom project appraisal to advising capital structure, fund raising, loan syndication and leadmanaging and underwriting of the issues. The network of branches which banks have, alsoCorporates can appoint banks as underwriting agents or seek their assistance forprivate placements even where they may not be lead managers to the issue. The merchantbanking departments also render advisory services to corporates including on mergers andBanks offer a variety of agency services to corporates, whereby they retail securities In addition, they offer custodial and depository services for both domestic and foreignCorporates now have the facility to structure currency swaps, interest rate swaps andforward rate agreements through banks (i.e., authorised dealers in respect of foreign currency).These products enable corporates with foreign currency liabilities to manage currency andinterest rate risks. These arrangements enable borrowers of foreign currency to access marketswhere they can get the finest rates and then swap these into currency of choice or interest rate(i.e., floating or fixed).Banks have been given permission to enter into rupee dollar swaps which enable anIndian company which can raise foreign currency loans at attractive rates to swap these intorupees in case it requires only rupee funding or has problems managing the currency risk. InOnce rupee interest rate swaps are introduced, as recently announced, it would provide6another option to corporates/banks to manage interest rate risk more efficiently.this arrangement, companies pass on the currency risk to the bank and obtain rupee funds.customers.and sell units of mutual funds.acquisitions.enables them to act as collection agents.emerged.Non-Fund Based Business of Banksservice to the customers.banking services. These facilities enable customers to have round the clock access to banks.Customers of banks now have a complaint redressal machinery. Under the BankingOmbudsman scheme, customers can obtain expeditious and inexpensive resolution of theirThe East Asian crisis brought to fore the problems that a weak and fragile financialsector can pose for the real economy. Clearly, the objective of the reforms in the bankingsector is to increase efficiency of banks while ensuring stability in the system. From thecustomer’s point of view, it is important that while multiple services are made available, theydo not in any way compromise the stability and soundness of the system. The measures thatthe RBI undertook aimed at preserving the stability of the banking system and warding offpotential systemic risks. Measures were taken to strengthen the regulatory and supervisoryframework, introduce prudential norms and reduce non-performing assets. Further, wediscouraged banks’ investments in real estate and stock markets. We applied limits tocorporates’ exposure on debt, especially external debt. Transparency was introduced in theoperations of banks. Thus, it was the prudent policies that were undertaken that saved us fromthe South East Asian contagion and preserved our stability. Let me elaborate what theseThe approach of the RBI to banking sector reform may be viewed from a variety ofangles, due to both the policy and institutional complexities involved. Striking features of theFirst, cautious sequencing of various measures - giving enough time and notice to thevarious participants to appreciate and respond; e.g., gradual increase in mark to market ofSecond, mutually reinforcing measures, that as a package would be non-disruptive,e.g., effect on profitability of banks taken into account by combining reduction in exportThird, complementarity between reforms in banking sector and changes in fiscal,external and monetary policies, especially in terms of co-ordination with Government; e.g.,recapitalisation of Government owned banks coupled with prudential regulation; tradeliberalisation coupled with current account convertibility; abolition of ad hoc treasury billsFourth, developing financial infrastructure in terms of supervisory body, auditstandards, technology and legal framework; e.g., establishment of Board for FinancialSupervision, setting up of Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology,Fifth, taking initiatives to nurture, develop and integrate money, debt and forexmarkets, in a way that all major banks have an opportunity to develop skills, participate andbenefit; e.g., gradual reduction in the minimum period for maturity of deposits, permittingbanks to determine the penalty structure in respect of premature withdrawal, syndication inrespect of loans, flexibility to invest in money and debt market instruments, greater freedomto banks to borrow from and invest abroad.I would now refer to some of the major issues that need our attention in the context ofbanking sector reform. Let me clarify that I have selected a few issues at random, and they are7Select Issueslegal amendment to the RBI Act on Non-Banking Financial Companies (NBFCs).with a system of ways and means advances, coupled with reforms in debt markets.refinance with reduction in CRR.Government securities.approach, in my view, are:The Approach to Reformprudent policies were or rather what is the approach that ensures efficiency and stability.Stability and Soundnesscomplaintsnot necessarily the most significant.It is the medium term objective of financial sector reforms to bring down the pre-emption of resources from commercial banks through reduction in SLR and CRR. Reductionin CRR will not only result in additional resources to banks for deployment but will alsoincrease the profitability of banks since the CRR is not adequately remunerated. Reduction instatutory pre-emption is constrained as long as fiscal deficit, particularly revenue deficit,There is no doubt that the level of non-performing assets should be properly assessed,accounted for, provided for adequately and reduced progressively. Yet, there are manystrengths of our banking system which do not get adequately reflected in the simple ratios ofnon-performing assets to advances since our banks are currently subjected to extraordinarilyrigorous prudential requirements at CRR of 11 per cent and SLR of 25 per cent. Let meillustrate with some data from the latest RBI’s ‘Report on Trend and Progress of Banking inIndia’. The quantum of gross NPAs as a percentage of advances of public sector banks (PSBs)declined from 17.8 per cent in 1996-97 to 16.0 per cent in 1997-98. However, gross NPAs asa proportion to total assets of PSBs declined from 11.8 per cent in 1992-93 to 7.0 per cent in1997-98. Provisions have been made for one half of gross NPAs of PSBs. The net NPAs aspercentage of net advances also declined from 9.2 per cent in 1996-97 to 8.2 per cent in 1997-While every effort needs to be made t o improve the credit appraisal system and debt-recovery tribunals have been established, the legal framework should perhaps be reviewed andrevamped in a comprehensive manner to facilitate recovery. In fact, it is alleged that someinstitutional arrangements like Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, instead offacilitating, make debt-recovery prolonged. As pressure is mounted by the RBI to reduceNPAs, in the absence of effective debt-recovery, banks have no option except pick up gilt-edged securities or highly rated investments rather than credit, thus, choking credit delivery,particularly to medium and small-scale units. In brief, how to ensure credit-delivery at a timeA large part of banking operations in India is accounted for by public sector banks.The competitive impulses engineered by the RBI in the cause of enhancing efficiency have totake into account the extent of response of public sector banks and the Government as theirprincipal to competitive pressures. Similarly, the regulatory and prudential considerationsadvanced by the RBI have to reckon with the impact on and response of the public sectorbanks and Government as their principal. It is not possible to ignore the systemic implicationsof the large sub-system (accounting for about three fourths of the banking business) of publicThere are four broad areas of internal systems which may need thorough overand which need to be facilitated by Government and the RBI.Second, the placement, work practices etc., which inhibit incentives for efficiency and8First, the internal control systems in the banks, especially Public Sector Banks.haulingInternal Systemssector banks.Ownership, Regulation and Competitionwhen banking reforms and legal reforms are under way?Debt-Recovery98. Net NPAs to total assets declined from 4.0 per cent in 1994-95 to 3.3 per cent in 1997-98.Non-Performing Assets: Need for Clarityremains high.Reduction of Fiscal DeficitFourth, introduction and effective use of technology in ba nks, especially public sectorThe prudential requirements imposed on banks to protect the deposits and ensuresystemic stability do imply a cost to the banks. In a way, this additional cost may give arelative advantage to financial intermediaries other than banks and capital markets. We shouldrecognise that banks continue to be special in terms of distinct functions they perform as thecore payments mechanism and as repositories of the economy’s immediate liquidity. Thus, thepolicy has to ensure a balance between banks and non-banks - in terms of regulatory impact. The additional capital adequacy requirements announced in line with therecommendations of Narasimham Committee II and normal expansion of banks’ business willApart from diversification of ownership, mergers and acquisition m ay also be neededeven among public sector banks and financial institutions to cope with the consequence offinancial sector reforms, in particular, market compulsions and prudential requirements. Thepublic sector banks are currently governed by three different statutes. To impart the requiredflexibility for ensuring level playing field in the emerging competitive environment, thepossibility of bringing all these institutions under the Companies Act by transforming them asThe cooperative banks, especially urban banks are expanding rapidly and theiroperations affect the interest of depositors. Similarly, Regional Rural Banks in some areas areactive. Detailed examination and early resolution of many problems of these banks, includingdual control between State Governments and the RBI in cooperatives should also beInterest tax adds to the cost of lending by banks. The intention to abolish this tax wasannounced in 1996-97 and the process was initiated by reducing the interest tax from 3percent to 2 per cent. It is necessary to complete this process as soon as possible and abolishinterest tax completely, as it will serve to reduce the transaction cost and cost to borrowers,I trust I have amused you a bit, enlightened you also on what RBI has done, andcreated an appetite to address the issues. Please do pose questions and raise further issues sothat some I could answer, and on others, I will ponder over.I thank the organisers for this opportunity and wish all of you a bright future in yourThank you.9careers.Conclusionthereby enhancing overall efficiency.Interest Taxconsidered.Other Bankscompanies needs to be explored.Flexibilitythe mix of public-private ownership of banks.require banks to explore various sources for enhancing their capital. Their efforts could impactAdditional Capital RequirementsHow Special are Banks?banks.Third, flexibility in obtaining and enhancing highly skilled or talented people.improved customer service.10
