April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Orderly Global Economic Recovery : Are Exchange Rate*Adjustments Effective Any More?RAKESH MOHANWhen we last met in London in October, is significant to note that in both US andI had talked about medium and long-term Japan there are distinct signs of accelerationissues related to globalisation and possible in manufacturing activity. In the Euro area,enduring imbalances in the medium- and long- there is also some evidence that activity hasterm. I had talked in particular about the begun to pick-up although it is lagging behindconsequences of economic demographics and significantly in comparison with other regions.ageing. So I am delighted that this is now a On the whole, the sentiment today appearsspecific subject for discussion in this meeting. to be much better than it was a year ago whenToday, I will focus on possible short-term the outlook for the global economy wasissues that may arise as the current economic weighed down by various uncertainties andimbalances are corrected. Recent data show risks.that the global recovery has gained furtherAlthough overall global growth prospectsmomentum with various leading indicatorshave improved markedly, considerableshowing a robust turnaround. Financialuncertainties still remain. The main risk facingmarkets have rallied on the back of higherthe global economy today continues to be thecorporate earnings. Emerging markets debtpersistence of the US external imbalancesspreads continue to decline. The latestwhich, in turn, are reflected in externalavailable data suggest a strong accelerationimbalances in several countries in Asia. The1in world merchandise exports.current account deficit in the US at 5.1 perEmerging Asia continues to be the cent of GDP could pose a serious risk tofastest growing region in the world. While global growth. This, if not corrected in anChina is expected to grow by over 9 per cent, orderly manner, could seriously harm theIndia is not far behind with its growth expected health of the global economy. There areto be around 8 per cent in 2003-04. Economic different views on this. Most recently, Alanactivity in Japan has also picked up, led by Greenspan, in a lecture at the Bundesbank,exports and business investment. Japan has expressed the view that economic flexibilitybenefited significantly from expansion in world in the world is now such that unwinding oftrade, particularly that with China. In the US, this deficit will not cause serious disruption. Ieconomic activity has turned quite robust. It hope that he is right.Intervention by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the G-20 Deputies Meeting held*at Leipzig, Germany on March 3-4, 2004.1In the first half of 2003 world merchandise exports rose by 15 per cent in US dollar terms over thecorresponding period in 2002. Average annual growth in 2002 was 4 per cent.429April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Past experience suggests that the The question, therefore, which all of uscorrection of such a high order of external need to address is whether we are landingimbalance could be associated with high up in same situation as was faced last time.inflation, rise in interest rates and fall in output. The trade-weighted exchange rate of the USThe US ran a current account deficit between dollar has depreciated by about 13 per cent1982 and 1987 when the CAD widened to 3.4 since February 2002. However, thisper cent of GDP in 1987 from a surplus of depreciation of the US dollar is only about0.2 per cent of GDP in 1981. A reversal in one-third of the sharp appreciation of 32.5 perthis trend set in in 1988 and the CAD-GDP cent in real terms between 1992 and 2001. Itratio reached a near balance position in 1991 is, therefore, widely believed that the dollar- the phase of correction spanning over four would have to depreciate further (by 15 peryears. The correction was facilitated by a cent in real terms) to make a significant dentnarrowing down of the saving-investment gap on the current account deficit, regardless offrom 4.2 per cent in 1986 to 1.0 per cent in structural factors. Over the medium-term,1991 and an average annual rate of US dollar correction of CAD to the level of the mid-deprecation of 6.5 per cent in nominal terms 1990s (i.e., 1.5 per cent of GDP) couldand 5.5 per cent in real terms. necessitate an annual average rate ofdepreciation of about 6.5 per cent spanningThe depreciation of the US dollar fed intoover a period of six years. Will this happeninflation in the following years. Nominaland how will it impact the rest of the world ?exchange rate depreciation passed throughWe have to note that there has not beeninto domestic inflation in about 22 months.any adverse effect of the dollar’s decline onEven after the exchange rate stoppedthe US economy so far. Interest rates are atdepreciating, inflation continued to rise for2historically low levels. Inflation is still low dueanother 12 months. The inflation rate whichto slack in the US economy, especially in thewas 1.8 per cent in 1986 moved up graduallylabour market where weak demand for labourto 5.3 per cent by 1990 before sliding downis holding down wage growth. However,from 1991. This necessitated monetarydepreciation of the US dollar eventually istightening in 1988 and 1989 when interest3expected to feed through inflation. Commodityrates had to be raised. GDP growthand asset prices have already risen sharply.decelerated sharply during 1989-90 and it4And going by the past experience, it wouldturned negative in 1991.2The depreciation began in February 1985, i.e., after the second inflation episode was almost over and continuedtill May 1988. Trade-weighted US dollar depreciated by 13.3 per cent over the period. Headline inflation whichwas falling until December 1986 (trough of 1.2 per cent) began to rise from January 1987 to reach 4 per centby May 1988. Inflation continued to rise until May 1989 when it touched 5.3 per cent.3The Federal Fund Rate, which was 6.66 per cent in 1987, was raised to 7.57 per cent in 1988 and further to9.22 per cent in 1989.4The growth rate of the US GDP decelerated from 3.9 per cent in 1988 to 2.5 per cent in 1989 and 0.8 per centin 1990. GDP registered a negative growth of 1.2 per cent in 1991.430April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004not be long before the US dollar’s declineexchange rate adjustments as a means ofstarts impacting import prices in particular and correction of imbalances have become lessinflation in general. With little room topotent, then the swing in exchange rates tomanoeuvre on the fiscal policy front, this maycorrect emerging imbalances will have to berequire monetary tightening leading to a rise much larger than before, bringing in their wakein interest rates. This would have seriousgreater instability eventually.implications for the sustainability of growth notAccording to various commentators,only in the US but in several developingsuch as The Economist, Business Week, largecountries.investment banks and others, the US dollar-Correction through Exchange RateEuro rate will have to depreciate to levelsAdjustmentsuch as 1.7 to 1.9 for appropriate externalcurrent account adjustments to take place. IfThe very significant adjustment in thesuch movements take place, and inflationUS dollar exchange rate does not seem toeventually does rise along with interest rates,have translated into changes in import priceswhat will then happen to the world economy?(excluding fuel), which rose by only about 1.4How quickly will this take place? Will this nowper cent in 2003 in the US. Prices of importedstart happening over the next 12 months andnon-auto consumer goods rose by only 0.4if so will the current world recovery stop in itsper cent. It is then not surprising that theretracks before it takes off?has been little palpable behavioural responsein the US to the recent exchange rateThus, we need to be vigilant of the newadjustment through a lower demand forrisks that would be generated in the processimports. The general expectation still seemsof correction of current macro economicto be that a sliding US dollar will not causeimbalances. To minimise the harmful effects,inflation to surge. Similarly, in Europe,there is a need for a coordinated andcurrency movements appear to have lesscooperative approach. The current accountimpact on inflation than in the past. There aredeficit in the US is, to a large extent, adifferent explanations being given. One ismanifestation of its large saving-investmentrelated to globalisation and “Walmartisation”.gap which widened to a high level of 5.3 perThe increased intensity of globalisation andcent in 2003. The US, therefore, will have tothe commodification of many goods havetry to curb household and governmentperhaps reduced the pricing power ofborrowings and strengthen national savings.producers, particularly of low technologyThe Euro Area continues to depend largelygoods in developing countries, whereas theon external demand. It, therefore, will needpricing power of large retailers like Walmartto pursue some structural reforms, especiallyhas risen.in the labour policies, to boost domesticdemand. Japan also needs to continue to takeThe question that arises then is if thesome concrete measures to strengthen itsnew globalised economy means that431April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004financial system and reduce huge fiscalto ask whether the access limits are sufficientimbalances. We in India have followed ato deal with the kind of crises countries willrelatively flexible exchange rate policy toface. Or are we assuming that the catalyticensure smooth adjustment along withrole of the international financial institutionscorrections in the world economy. Suchis more effective than it really is? The recentflexibility has served us well and we canexperience has amply shown that while largecommend it to other countries.and assured financing ( e.g., Mexican bailout)has been successful to keep the marketsThe world leadership also needs to takequiet, limited financing ( e.g., Argentina) hasappropriate steps to guard against thenot produced good results. It is this groundprospective risks. There are two areas thatreality which has led to excessive caution onare particularly important at present and wherethe part of developing countries in buildingG-20 leadership can play an important role.large reserves.One relates to developments on the tradefront. Current trends from Cancun onwardsIt is difficult to predict what kind of crisesare deeply disturbing with industrialisedwill take place in the near or medium termcountries slipping into a protectionist posture.future. What we know with near certainty isThis is uncalled for especially becausethat crises will take place in the future too.developing countries have at last started toWhere, how and when they will take placeget out of their protectionist mindsets. Thecannot be predicted. As I have indicated, asindustrialised countries (US, Europe andthese exchange rate adjustments in theJapan) have a major role to play in revivingworld’s major currencies take place, andthe trade talks which involve seriousinflation and interest rates do rise, they willdepartures from their present positions onbring in their wake economic debris inagriculture.different places. We need to be vigilant onAnother area relates to international this point and recognise that the magnitudefinancial architecture, the deficiencies of of financing needs that typically arises nowwhich were exposed in recent East Asian and is much larger than before. The question Isubsequent crises. We, therefore, need to will leave you with is: whether the existingask ourselves whether we have really made financial architecture is competent for tacklingprogress in developing a sound international such future crises and, if not, what do wefinancial architecture. In particular, we need need to do?432
