Emerging Challenges before the Indian Banks –The Road Ahead *It is indeed an honour to be invited to commence the Dena BankFoundation Day Lecture Series. Today, as we remember the founders, weessentially pay homage to their vision and drive that led to the establishmentof the Dena Bank. Shri Pranlalbhai Nanjee, inspired by his late father ShriDevkaran Nanjee’s dream to start a bank and play a seminal role in thedevelopment of the Indian banking industry, started the Devkaran NanjeeBanking Company in January 1938, about three years after the ReserveBank was established. It was then incorporated as a private limited company under the Indian Companies’ Act on 26 May 1938. In a span of twenty fiveyears, the bank grew in size and stature to rank amongst the top 14 banks inIndia and was converted into a public limited company and renamed asDena Bank Limited in December 1966. It was nationalized in July 1969 alongwith 13 other banks in the first phase of bank nationalization in India. Today,as the bank is gearing itself to enter the fast changing, turbulent anduncertain environment that characterises the banking terrain, we trust it willpick up the momentum of its first twenty five years.2. Founding days are always very special. They are one of the few‘possessions’ which are owned by each and every one of the institution’sfraternity alike. It is not only a day to feel proud, it is a day to reflect, a day toshare, and a day to celebrate. It is also an opportunity to re-emphasise whatthe institution stands for, to renew its symbols, its imagery and its values.These symbols and imagery not only help project its corporate culture andidentity, but they also constitute an integral part of the institutions’ brandbuilding exercise. Founding days constitute one of the few opportunities forcollective sharing in an institution. The coming together and the camaraderiethat this day evokes is perhaps the appropriate moment to reinstate anemotive content into the work place.3. The emotive content, team building, the ownership in work, how toinspire, how to draw out from the staff the very best, are perhaps new issuesin the boardroom agenda in the world of Indian banking. Strategy sessionsare increasingly focusing on the ways of unleashing the tremendous powerof emotions that has been hidden in organizations and using it in aconstructive manner to energise people and to maximise motivation. The2personally engaged in their work in the pursuit of institutional excellence.The common theme underlying these perspectives is that leaders maypersuade with logic but they motivate through emotion and that a strongmotivation and psychological involvement is not possible without anemotional attachment to the work or the work context. What has broughtabout this change? For a few decades preceding the onset of banking andfinancial sector reforms in India, banking operated in an environment thatwas heavily regulated and had a certain security of expectations built into it.Banks, the institutions which evoked notions of ‘fortune, probity andprudence’, charted their way slowly but surely, secure in the belief that theregulatory environment protected their margins, their territories and theirbranch network. This also posed sufficient barriers to entry and protectedthem against too much competition and a relationship based on the loyaltycontract bound their customers irrevocably to them. This environment ofcomplacent certainties has now changed bringing with it profoundimplications for the manner in which banks operate, their responses tocustomer needs, their agility, the never-ending quest towards efficiency andthe continuous search for ever newer pastures – ‘hunting for cheese’ and themore serious concern for the need to continuously reassess and repositionthemselves in their business plans.4. The last decade has witnessed major changes in the financial sector:New banks, new financial institutions, new instruments, new windows, andnew opportunities and, along with all this, new challenges. Whilederegulation has opened up new vistas for banks to augment revenues, ithas entailed greater competition and consequently greater risks. Cross-border flows and entry of new products, particularly derivative instruments,have impacted significantly on the domestic banking sector, forcing banks toadjust the product mix, as also to effect rapid changes in their processes andoperations in order to remain competitive in the globalised environment.These developments have facilitated greater choice for consumers, whohave become more discerning and demanding compelling banks to offer abroader range of products through diverse distribution channels. Thetraditional face of banks as mere financial intermediaries has since alteredand risk management has emerged as their defining attribute.5. It is clear that we are at the beginning of this new phase in the Indianbanking. The recent measures announced by the Government and the3Reserve Bank of India for opening up India’s banking sector to internationalinvestors will further increase the pressure of competition. At the same timethere is renewed emphasis by the Government on the social sector togetherwith thrust on rural and agricultural lending. Caught between the competitivepressure, both domestic and external, and the politics of development, bankswill have to be on their toes, become even more efficient in managing fundsand in meeting the needs and demands of customers.Economic outlook and banking sector’s performance6. During the last couple of years, global growth has been above theforecast in almost every region stimulated by strong monetary and fiscalmeasures. The domestic economic outlook is also bright with the real GDPgrowth rate surpassing 8% last year and estimated to be around 7% in thecurrent year. Industrial performance also improved considerably with astrong manufacturing growth for the second consecutive year. Inflation ratehas been under control, barring some hiccup for a short period.7. Aided by a good macro economic environment, banks’ bottom linehas improved significantly over the last three years. However, let us notforget that a major contributor to the windfall gains has been treasury profitsfuelled by a secular decline in interest rates during the three years periodfrom 2001 to 2004 and consequent profit booking on sale of governmentsecurities. From the current year, with the hardening of interest rates, thistrading component of profits is no longer going to shore up banks’profitability. On the contrary, most banks have been required to provide forthe decline in the market value of their investments portfolio. Thankfully, oneoffsetting factor has been the strong pick up in the credit off-take due tobuoyant demand in the economy and revival of industrial activity, which haveresulted in substantial increase in banks’ core interest income.Globalisation – a challenge as well as an opportunity8. Currently, the most important factor shaping the world is globalisation.The benefits of globalisation have been well documented and are beingincreasingly recognised. Integration of domestic markets with internationalfinancial markets has been facilitated by tremendous advancement ininformation and communications technology. But, such an environment hasalso meant that a problem in one country can sometimes adversely impact4one or more countries instantaneously, even if they are fundamentallystrong.9. There is a growing realisation that the ability of countries to conductbusiness across national borders and the ability to cope with the possibledownside risks would depend, inter alia, on the soundness of the financialsystem. This has consequently meant the adoption of a strong andtransparent, prudential, regulatory, supervisory, technological andinstitutional framework in the financial sector on par with international bestpractices. All this necessitates a transformation: a transformation in themindset, a transformation in the business processes and finally, atransformation in knowledge management. This process is not a one shotaffair; it needs to be appropriately phased in the least disruptive manner.High capital inflows: not an unmixed blessing10. As you all know, liquidity position in the financial sector has beenquite comfortable in the recent times. The buoyant capital market coupledwith an appreciating rupee vis-à-vis US dollar has been attracting largeforeign institutional inflows during the last two years. While we have an alltime high foreign exchange reserves of more than $140 billion, high capitalinflows pose a big challenge to monetary and exchange rate management.In this context, operationalisation of Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) hasgiven an additional instrument for liquidity and monetary management. Tosum up the challenge, I would like to quote a statement of Dr. Y. V. Reddy,Governor, Reserve Bank of India, which he made at the annual meeting ofBank for International Settlement (BIS) on June 28, 2004. And I quote,“…..Special defences need to be put in place for ensuring financial stabilityin the case of countries like India that are faced with the prospect of volatilecapital flows. The issues relating to cross-border supervision of financialintermediaries in the context of greater capital flows are just emerging andneed to be addressed.”5Interest Rate Risk for Indian Banks – Profits under Pressure11. The rapid and relatively substantial rise in rupee interest rates inrecent months has brought into focus the market risk faced by Indian banks.Your own bank’s current years profits have been badly affected due toincreased provisioning requirement on the investment portfolio. Your fourthquarter results have shown massive losses due to Mark to Market (MTM)losses on your G-Sec portfolio. The story is not much different for most ofthe public sector banks. The benchmark 10-year yield on governmentsecurities has risen from 5.2% in May last year to around 7.2% at this point.The spike in interest rates has affected the trading profits of banks. We inReserve Bank have been regularly carrying out quantitative impact studies ofrising yields on banks’ economic value. While, financial media, and someacademic circles have been portraying an overly alarming and pessimisticpicture regarding banks’ potential interest rate risk, our analyses reveal thatgradually increasing interest rate regime is unlike to erode banks’ equity,given the likely increase in net interest income (NII), some residualunrealized gain on the portfolio (though, I must confess, most of it hasevaporated), and the recent forbearance by RBI permitting banks to hold alarger proportion of securities under the ‘held to maturity’ (HTM) categorythat need not be marked to market. Of course, as I cited your own bank’sexample, banks had to take a one time hit before shifting the securities fromtrading to banking book.12. Different banks, however, vary in their levels of vulnerability, withsome new private banks being less susceptible to market risk compared withmost old private banks and some government banks. In the medium term,however, most banks are likely to need to increase their equity to meetgrowing regulatory capital allocation for market risk.Technology is the key13. The decade of 90s has witnessed a sea change in the way banking isdone in India. Technology has made tremendous impact in banking.Anywhere banking and anytime banking have become a reality. This hasthrown new challenges in the banking sector and new issues have startedcropping up which is going to pose certain problems in the near future. Thenew entrants in the banking are with computer background. However, over aperiod of time they would acquire banking experience. Whereas the middle6and senior level people have rich banking experience but their computerliteracy is at a low level. Therefore, they feel the handicap in this regardsince technology has become an indispensable tool in banking.14. Foreign banks and the new private sector banks have embracedtechnology right from the inception of their operations and therefore, theyhave adapted themselves to the changes in the technology easily. Whereasthe Public Sector Banks (PSBs) and the old private sector banks (barring avery few of them) have not been able to keep pace with these developments.In this regard, one can cite historical, political and other factors like workculture and working relations (which are mainly governed by bipartitesettlements between the managements and the staff members) as the mainconstraints. Added to these woes, the PSBs were also saddled with somenonviable and loss making branches, thanks to the social banking conceptthrust upon them by the regulatory authorities in 1960s.Basel II Accord, Capital and Market Discipline15. The most prominent on our minds in the context of banking thesedays, perhaps, are the implications arising out of the Basel II accord. Twodeserve special mention – one relates to capital and the other to marketdiscipline. Where capital is concerned, the prescriptions have ushered in atransition from the traditional regulatory and market measures of capitaladequacy to an evaluation of whether a bank has found the most efficientuse of its capital to support its new business mix, i.e., from capital adequacyto capital efficiency. In this transition, how effectively capital is used willdetermine returns on equity and a consequent enhancement of shareholdervalue. In effect, future plans may, therefore, include the fluid use of capital,an approach that has been called the "just-in-time balance sheet"management, in which capital flows quickly to its most efficient use. Thistransition in how capital is used and how much capital is needed will becomea significant factor in return-on-equity strategy for years ahead and banks’strategic plans may be required to execute this kind of approach.16. The accord also has, as an underlying principle, the reliance on themarket to assess the riskiness of banks. This translates into an increasedfocus on transparency and market disclosure, critical information describingthe risk profile, capital structure and capital adequacy. Besides makingbanks more accountable and responsive to better-informed investors, these7rewards and to improve the access to markets. Improvements in marketdiscipline also call for greater coordination between banks and regulators.17. India has been a participant in the international initiatives to ensureimproved processes of market discipline that are being worked out in severalfora, such as, the multilateral organisations, the BIS, the Financial StabilityForum, and the Core Principles Liaison Group. Concurrent efforts areunderway to refine and upgrade financial information monitoring and flow,data dissemination and data warehousing. Banks are currently required todisclose in their balance sheets information on maturity profiles of assetsand liabilities, lending to sensitive sectors, movements in NPAs, besidesproviding information on capital, provisions, shareholdings of thegovernment, value of investments in India and abroad, and other operatingand profitability indicators. Financial institutions are also required to meetthese disclosure norms. Banks also have to disclose their total investmentsmade in equity shares, units of mutual funds, bonds and debentures, andaggregate advances against shares in their notes to balance sheets.18. The critical regulatory initiatives taken by the Reserve Bank of India toprepare the banking sector for these changes are : (i) the Reserve Bank’sendeavour to ensure that the banks have suitable risk managementframework oriented towards their requirements dictated by the size andcomplexity of business, risk philosophy, market perceptions and theexpected level of capital; (ii) The introduction of Risk Based Supervision(RBS) in 23 banks on a pilot basis; (iii) the drive to encourage banks toformalize their capital adequacy assessment process (CAAP) in alignmentwith their business plan and performance budgeting system; (iv) Ensuringbetter disclosure so as to have greater transparency in the financial positionand risk profile of banks and (v) finally, the Reserve Bank at its end is in theprocess of building capacity to ensure it can vet models for banks who willbe adopting the IRB / Advanced Measurement approaches.19. As banks have two years lead-time to prepare themselves for Basel II,they are encouraged to focus on capacity building and undertake impactanalyses. On the basis of the impact studies, banks would be required to putin place appropriate strategies and plans for raising fresh capital or augmentcapital through internal resources. Banks may also need to redefine theirbusiness strategy with a view to altering their profile of risk exposures or8adopt a combination of both these approaches to meet the capitalrequirement.20. Organizations all over are rushing to implement the latest ideas onmanagement, sometimes to the point of overuse. Most of these ideas areabout doing things better, about improving operational effectiveness. Ifeverybody however is competing on the same set of variables, then thestandard gets higher but no one gets ahead. And getting ahead – thenstaying ahead - is the basis of strategy and creating a competitiveadvantage. Strategy is about setting yourself apart from the competition. Itstherefore not just a matter of being better at what you do, its rather a matterof being different at what you do. The major challenge now for banks as wellas any other organisation is therefore how to develop their socialarchitecture that generates intellectual capital as the quintessential driver ofchange. Developing the individual or human capacity is an integral elementof building capacity and, in fact, capacity building initiatives are nowincreasingly becoming almost an index of institutional quality. Capacitybuilding would in the days to come not only influence the structure ofinstitutions, it would also determine how they are run.21. Taking the banking industry to the heights of excellence, especially inthe face of the afore-detailed emerging realities, will require a combination ofnew technologies, better processes of credit and risk appraisal, treasurymanagement, product diversification, internal control and externalregulations and, not the least, human resources. Standing as we do at thiscritical juncture, I trust innovative, illuminating ideas, fresh insights andalternative ways of thinking about the competitive yet cooperative combatthat the world of banking and finance is readying itself for will mark DenaBank’s business strategies and institutional development plans and will giveyou the emotive content to carry forth Shri Nanjee’s legacy of financialentrepreneurship and set the lead to position your institution not just as anational but as a global player. I wish you every success in your all futureendeavours.Thank You.* First Annual  Dena Bank Foundation Day Address by Shri  V. Leeladhar, DeputyGovernor, Reserve Bank of India  to commemorate its founder, Late Pranlal DevkaranNanjee
