Operationalising Capital Account Liberalisation : Indian ExperienceThe objective of this paper is to narrate the Indian experience in operationalising capital accountliberalisation.  At the outset, the Indian context is described followed by a brief account of thefactors that triggered the process of liberalisation in the ‘nineties.  The policy framework thatgoverned liberalisation, the process of liberalisation and the current framework of controls arethen explained.  Subsequent sections describe the management of capital account and volatilityin capital flows.  The perceptions on the links between capital account, current account and,dollarisation are also mentioned.  Other aspects relevant to capital account such as policy onreserve accumulation, exchange rate, monitoring of flows, dissemination of data and legalframework are elaborated in view of their significance for operational purposes.  The currentthinking on further steps towards liberalisation is briefly indicated.  While recognising thestringent limitations on inferences based on experience of one country, some broadThe country-context provides an essential background for approaching the process ofoperationalising capital account liberalisation.  An initial step in understanding the Indiancontext is appreciating why strict capital controls existed till the reform of ‘nineties. Firstly, inview of the colonial past, the public opinion since independence (1947) has been very guarded orsuspicious about the presence of foreign trading interests or foreign capital, since nationalfreedom was lost to the foreign traders who were licensed to trade in India by the then rulers.Secondly, as a natural consequence there are concerns about capital outflows also, reinforced byrepeated stress on balance of payments often due to droughts, wars and supply shock, mainly oil.Thirdly, in this context and with the adoption of planned approach to development, the emphasishas been on utilising domestic savings for domestic investment; a logical extension of thepreference for national economic self-reliance in trade. Fourthly, till ‘eighties, influentialassessment among policy makers was that the world trade was not open enough to permit strongexport-led growth of a large economy like India.  Usually, it was argued that strongprotectionism will be put in place by industrial countries if  “a thousand Singapores” areattempted by India.  Similarly, it was felt that, given the level of capital flows, which was mainlyon official account, India’s large needs may not be met in any significant way.  In other words,possible quantities of capital inflows to India in that view, did not justify the risks of opening upthe economy. Fifthly, it has also been felt that the domestic economy was endowed with areasonable base of human skills, institutional social and physical infrastructure and diversifiedindustrial base that the country could successfully launch on the path of self-reliance withThough there have been several international and domestic developments in the ‘nineties tomodify the country context indicated above, significant public opinion is not yet fully convincedthat objective conditions have changed so dramatically that there should be complete reversal ofpolicy.  In particular, the critics of liberalisation point out that in the traditional strategies thatover ninety per cent of domestic investment has been financed by domestic savings and yetgrowth performance was not unimpressive.  According to them, In the ‘nineties, during thereform, foreign savings as a proportion of domestic investment has been no different, while on*relatively low level of economic dependence on the rest of the world.Contextgeneralisations are made to enable meaningful discussion.average, growth of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was no more than in ‘eighties.  Further, it isargued that a large country like India would have faced serious threat to national social cohesionif a crisis like that of East Asia had taken place, and hence, the policy makers ought to be riskaverse in regard to capital account. Finally, it is held that from geopolitical angle as well as thedesign and operation of international financial architecture, India is well advised to be cautiousin estimating the international support for a bail out or in times of international crisis.  Manyobservers in India feel justifiably or not, that this caution is warranted by India’s experience sofar in the manner in which international financial markets have been assessing India, relative toother countries. The approach to and process of capital account in the recent years captures, as itIt will also be useful in the country context to appreciate some of the characteristics of thecontrol regime over the external sector.  Soon after independence, a complex web of controlswere imposed for all external transactions and these were controls over transactions in foreignexchange independent of trade or other policies and indeed, the control regime extended to alltransactions between residents and non-residents.  In fact, a significant part of control regime tosubserve the plan effort for development was built upon the framework of wartime (SecondWorld War) control.  These were put into a more rigorous framework of controls through alegislation in 1973 due to fears of capital flight.  Severe restrictions on current accounttransactions continued till mid ‘nineties when relaxations were made in the operations of thelegislation of 1973 to enable convertibility on current account.  It was only in June, 2000 that alegal framework to assure convertibility on current account has been put into effect.Since the control framework was essentially transaction based (all transactions in foreigncurrency or between residents and non-residents were prohibited unless specifically permitted), itwas equally valid for capital account, though the capital account itself was negligible till‘eighties.  Most of receipts on capital account were on Government account and through externalassistance in addition to the bilateral arrangement with erstwhile USSR.  In the ‘eighties, therewere significant private capital flows through External Commercial Borrowings (ECB) anddeposits from Non-Resident Indians (NRI). The factual position changed in the ‘nineties, withgradual liberalisation of capital account though the overall legal framework for control overcapital flows continue till the new legislation effective June 1, 2000.The formalisation of the shift in the external sector policy which commenced in early ‘nineties isfound in the preamble to the new legislation effective from June 1 which, inter alia, states thatthe objective of the legislation is facilitating external trade and payments and for promoting theorderly development and maintenance of foreign exchange market in India. This, effectivelyreplaces the old Act whose relevant extract of Preamble reads as: “for the conservation of foreignexchange resources of the country and the proper utilisation thereof in the interest of theeconomic development of the country.” The details of new legal framework are described later inthe paper.2Triggering LiberalisationControl Regimeshould in a democratic set up, these diverse, but influential public opinions in the country.India, after independence, opted for a model of development characterised by what was thenperceived as self-reliance. Hence, till the early ‘eighties, external financing was confined toexternal assistance through multilateral and bilateral sources, mostly on concessional terms to orthrough Government. In the ‘eighties, global developments, particularly the perceptible declinein the availability of official concessional flows in relation to the external financing needs ofdeveloping countries, changed the external sector situation at a time when India was initiatingliberalisation. The compulsions of repayments to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) duringthe late ‘eighties (of the External Fund Facility (EFF) drawals in the early ‘eighties) added to theproblems.  Hence, recourse to external debt on commercial terms became inevitable.  In additionto institutional sources (such as Export-Import agencies), syndicated loans and bonds, anddeposits from non-resident Indians were accessed. These had to be supplemented, in the late‘eighties with significantly large recourse to short term facilities including, in particular, short-term non-resident deposits.  Most of these liabilities were on account of government orThe onset of the ‘nineties, however, saw the impact of the Gulf crisis on India. Combined withthe large fiscal deficits of the ‘eighties and political uncertainties, repercussions of thisdevelopment in the Gulf resulted in drying up of commercial sources of financing and in whatcould be described as a severe liquidity crisis in the balance of payments.  Another globaldimension that affected India’s management of the balance of payments during this period wasthe serious disruption of trade with the erstwhile USSR on top of worrisome recessionarytendencies in the industrialised countries and loss of export markets in West Asia. The crisis wasovercome by a series of stringent measures with an overriding objective of honouring all externalobligations, and non-reschedulement or non-prioritisation of any external payment obligation.While successfully meeting the Gulf crisis through an adjustment programme, it was decided tosimultaneously launch upon a comprehensive programme of structural reform of which theexternal sector was on component.The broad approach to reform in the external sector after the Gulf crisis was laid out in theReport of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments chaired by Dr. C. Rangarajan.  TheCommittee recommended the introduction of a market-determined exchange rate regime whileemphasising the need to contain current account deficit within limits.  It recommended, alia, liberalisation of current account transactions leading to current account convertibility;compositional shift in capital flows away from debt to non debt creating flows; strict regulationof external commercial borrowings, especially short-term debt; discouraging volatile elements offlows from non-resident Indians; full freedom for outflows associated with inflows (i.e.principal, interest, dividend, profit and sale proceeds) gradual liberalisation of other outflows;The policy framework for the external sector based on the Rangarajan Committee Report wasimplemented along with policy changes in trade, industrial and financial sectors. Under tradepolicy, there has been a virtual elimination of licensing, a progressive shift of restricted items ofimports to Open General Licence (OGL), and lowering of tariff barriers. Industrial policy hasbeen characterised by delicensing, removal of monopoly clauses defining large industrial houses3and dissociation of Government in the intermediation of flow of external assistance.interPolicy Framework For Liberalisationgovernment owned enterprises or government owned financial institutions.and removal of most reservations for public sector enterprises.  The reforms in the area offinancial sector were guided by recommendations of the Narasimham Committee (1991)appointed by Government. Alongside the deregulation of the banking industry including entryfor new private sector banks, the general thrust of monetary policy has been towards reduction inpre-emptions, greater recourse to open market operations, deregulation of interest rates andwidening and deepening of financial markets.  Simultaneously, measures have been undertakento strengthen the institutional framework in banking, non-banking financial companies, financialinstitutions and stock markets through prudential norms, capital adequacy stipulations,improvements in payments and settlement mechanisms and strengthening of the supervisoryframework.  Institutional measures have also included recapitalisation of banks, improvements indebt recovery and most important, setting up of the Board for Financial Supervision andstrengthening Bank’s supervisory mechanisms.  A second Narasimham Committee (1998) hasgiven a road map for further reform of banking sector, and a number of recommendations onFiscal adjustment has been undertaken and a very significant measure is that the system ofautomatic monetisation of the fiscal deficit has been replaced by a system of Ways and MeansAdvances. In the recent Budget, the intention to promulgate a Fiscal Responsibility Act has beenIn brief, reform in the external sector was coordinated with reform in other related sectors andwithin the external sector reform, capital flows are managed keeping in view the needs ofefficiency and stability.  There was a fairly smooth movement from an administered exchangerate system to a market-determined exchange rate. Reserve Bank attempts to ensure thatThe Report of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments, while providing the basicframework for policy changes in external sector, encompassing exchange rate management and,current and capital account liberalisation also indicated the transition path. Accordingly, theLiberalised Exchange Rate Management System involving dual exchange rate system wasinstituted in March 1992, no doubt, in conjunction with other measures of liberalisation in theareas of trade, industry and foreign investment. The dual exchange rate system was essentially atransitional stage leading to the ultimate convergence of the dual rates made effective fromMarch 1, 1993. This unification of exchange rates brought about the era of market determinedexchange rate regime of rupee, based on demand and supply in the forex market.  It also marksan important step in the progress towards current account convertibility, which was finallyachieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of theThe appointment of a 14 member Expert Group on Foreign Exchange (Sodhani Committee) inNovember 1994 was a follow up step to the above measures, for the development of the foreignexchange market in India. The Group studied the market in great detail and in its Report of June,1995 came up with far-reaching recommendations to develop, deepen and widen the forexmarket as also to introduce various products, ensure risk management and enable efficiency in4International Monetary Fund.Process of Liberalisation and Framework of Controlsvolatility and speculative elements are curbed through both direct and indirect measures.announced. The Act is in advanced stages of drafting.prudential norms have been implemented.the forex market by removing restrictions, introducing new products and tightening internalcontrol and risk management systems. Many of the subsequent actions were based on thisReport.Tarapore Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, 1997, appointed by the Reserve Bank ofIndia, had recommended a number of measures while inviting attention to several preconditions.Among the various liberalisation measures undertaken in the light of these recommendations arethose relating to foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, investment in JointVentures/wholly owned subsidiaries abroad, project exports, opening of Indian corporate officesabroad, raising of Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) entitlement to 50 per cent,forfaiting, allowing acceptance credit for exports, allowing FIIs to cover forward a part of theirexposures in debt and equity market, etc.The current framework of controls need to be analysed from different angles for capturingoperational reality. First, there is a differentiation between current (convertible) and capitalaccount (subject to some controls) transactions.  Second, there is a distinction and asymmetricaltreatment between inflows (less restricted) outflows associated with inflows (free) and otheroutflows (more restricted). Third, residents are treated differently (more restrictive) than non-residents (less restrictive). Non-resident Indians have a well defined intermediate status betweenresidents and non-residents.  Fourth, there are also differences in treatment of individuals (highlyrestrictive), corporates (restrictive) and financial intermediaries such as Institutional InvestorsThe instruments of controls are also varied and applied individually or in conjunction.  Thus,some transactions are totally free, and some totally prohibited.  The intermediate category rangesfrom prior approval on a case-by-case basis or an automatic basis.  The application ofautomaticity of approvals or otherwise may be defined with reference to size of transactions, orpurpose, or activity or parties concerned.  The restrictions can also apply with reference to thefinancial instrument concerned.  In some cases price-based (tax or reserve requirements) oradministrative (interest rate ceilings) controls are used.  The process of liberalisation isoperationalised by the way the control framework is changed.  Thus, movements from morerestrictive to less restrictive take place from time to time based on both micro-experience andmacro-policy environment.  For example, in times of capital surges the pace of liberalisation ofBased on the policy frame and the projected financing requirement for each year, management ofthe capital account is operationalised through procedures for external debt, non-debt flows andAs regards inflows, it may be observed that the external debt on Government account is basicallyfrom bilateral and multilateral sources, with a long maturity. There are quantitative and severalend-use restrictions of external commercial borrowings, and access is mainly to corporates anddevelopment financial institutions.  There are severe quantitative restrictions on short-termborrowings also, excepting those strictly related to trade.  Banks have access under prescribed5foreign currency outflows.Management of  Capital Account : Proceduresoutflows is accelerated and vice-versa.(less restrictive) and banks (more restrictive).quantitative ceilings.  Deposits from non-resident Indians are accepted by banking system, andwhile non-repatriable ones are akin to domestic deposits, interest rates on repatriable ones aresubject to ceilings.  There is a more relaxed approach to Foreign Direct Investment, whichcontains two-routes, viz., a gradually expanding automatic approval route and a graduallydiminishing case-by-case approval.  There is a very short prohibited list.  Portfolio investmentsare restricted to selected players mainly for approved institutional investors.  The taxes on short-term gains are higher than long-term gain.  In addition, Indian companies are allowed to raiseresources through Depository receipts subject to approval.  There are no restrictions at all onoutflows associated with permitted inflows. In respect of outflows, direct overseas investment ispermitted through two routes, viz., a case-by-case approval, and automatic list generallyrestricted to export earners. Resident individuals are virtually prohibited from holding financialBetween 1993 and now, even with a managed capital account, there were  occasional bouts ofinflows and outflows.  In general, the short-term response to surges in inflows has taken anumber of forms, viz., raising of reserve requirements, reviewing the pace of removal ofrestrictions on capital inflows, relaxation of end-use specifications, liberalisation of capitaloutflows, partial sterilisation through open market operations, and deepening the foreignAt times of pressure on outflows, the RBI has resorted to both monetary and administrativemeasures to contain the pressure, apart from market operations to even out lumpy demand.These measures were undertaken mainly to even out the temporary demand supply mismatches.For instance, in order to encourage the faster realisation of export proceeds and to prevent anacceleration of import payments, the interest rate surcharge on import finance was raised, intereston overdue export bills was imposed, the scheme of post-shipment export credit denominated inforeign currency was scrapped. Monetary measures included increase in the Bank rate and reporates and tightening of liquidity by raising cash reserve ratio. In order to mitigate fluctuation inexchange rate on account of large payments, payments on account of oil imports have beenAn extraordinary situation arose in 1998-99 consequent upon imposition of sanctions and theissue of Resurgent India Bonds (RIBs) is an interesting example of management of capitalaccount in such a situation.  The RIBs were designed to compensate for the extraordinary eventsin 1998-99, which may have resulted in some shortfall in the normally expected level of capitalinflows in relation to the current account deficit which would continue to be well within 2 percent of GDP.  Due to the sudden developments in 1998-99, a temporary disruption in capitalflows, especially debt flows was anticipated.  Instead of dipping into currency reserves, whichmay affect sentiment adversely, or cutting the current account deficit through drastic import cuts,which would affect real economic activity, the alternative was to enhance debt flows at the leastpossible cost.  There was a need to offset the adverse negative market sentiment created in theinternational capital markets due to downgrading of India’s sovereign rating to non-investmentgrade.  This could be done by demonstrably raising debt resources at a cost lower than that anyorganised financial intermediary was prepared to provide in the context of the rating downgrade.6directly met out of reserves.exchange market by routing an increased volume of transactions through the market.Managing Volatility in Capital Flowsassets in foreign currency.Raising resources through sovereign borrowing was considered to be time consuming and in anycase inadvisable as a maiden offering under adverse circumstances.  At the same time, it wasnecessary to ensure that amounts so obtained were restricted quantitatively to meet essentialneeds as a replacement for normal debt flows by keeping an option for premature closure.Furthermore, it was necessary to ensure that the borrowing had appropriate medium-termmaturity, say, five years.  RIBs, which are essentially in the nature of foreign currency depositson par with FCNR (B), were devised keeping in view these considerations.  It was also necessaryfor RBI to ensure that these funds do not disrupt the money, forex or Government securitiesmarket. A total amount of $ 4.23 billion has been mobilised at a moderate cost in a difficultWhen India adopted current account convertibility in 1994, it was recognised, as emphasised bythe Rangarajan Committee, that there could be capital outflows from residents in the guise ofcurrent account transactions.  Hence, certain safeguards were built into the regulations relating toFirst, the requirement of repatriation and surrender of export proceeds was continued.  Exporterswere however, allowed to retain a portion of their earnings in foreign currency accounts in Indiawhich could be used for approved purposes, thereby avoiding costs of conversion andSecondly, all authorised dealers were allowed to sell foreign exchange for underlying currentaccount transactions, which could be readily identified and supported by some documentaryThirdly, indicative value limits were given for different kinds of transactions so that the amountssold were reasonable in relation to the purpose.  For higher amounts, the banks had to approachthe RBI. This operational framework for current account transactions strengthened theeffectiveness of management of capital account.On dollarisation, it was recognised that large scale dollar denominated assets within a countrycan disrupt the economy by creating potential for destabilising flows. No Dollar denominatedtransactions are generally allowed between residents. Exchange earners' foreign currencyaccounts can be used only for external payments and if such balances have to be used for localThe counterpart of dollarisation is internationalisation of domestic currency. For example, thereare instances when a currency of a developing country could be officially traded outside thecountry without any underlying trade or investment transactions.  When such currencies are heldincreasingly outside the country and there is multiplication of such holding, any expectation thatthere will be a fall in the currency due to fundamentals or contagion leads to widespread sell offwhich results in very sharp fall in the currencies especially when the local markets are not welldeveloped.  India does not permit rupee to be transacted offshore, i.e., Rupee is not allowed to be7payments, they have to be converted into rupees.evidence.reconversion.current account transactions.Link with Current Account and Dollarisationinternational environment and in the face of recent downgrading of our credit rating.officially used as international means of payment or store of value.  Indian banks are notA highly conservative approach is adopted with reference to dollarisation of domestic economyReserves have been steadily built up by encouraging non-debt creating flows and de-emphasisingdebt creating flows. It is recognised that a level of reserves that satisfies the need for liquidityand offers insulation against unforeseen shocks is reasonable. Foreign exchange reserves are keptat a level, which is adequate to withstand both cyclical and unanticipated shocks. The liquidityneeds are assessed over various time horizons viz. on a daily basis, on a weekly basis as well ason a monthly basis. The long run perspective on the liquidity is also under constant review byensuring that the reserves are adequate enough not only in terms of conventional norms likeimport cover, but also in terms of debt servicing, stock of short term debt and portfolioinvestment.The essence of reserve management being safety and liquidity and optimisation of returns, allinvestments made of reserves are of top quality and excellent liquidity. Liquidity risk is alsomitigated to a large extent by keeping a good proportion of reserves invested in thoseassets/deposits, which are of top credit quality and convertible into cash at short notice. There isa rigorous system of internal rating of the institutions and instruments in which reserves areinvested. The counterparties with whom deals are conducted are also subject to screening. Theseratings are reviewed on an on-going basis. Also, since capital flows are closely monitored andExchange Rate ManagementThe exchange rate is determined by the market, i.e., forces of demand and supply.  Theobjectives and purposes of exchange rate management are to ensure that economic fundamentalsare reflected in the external value of the rupee as evidenced in the sustainable current accountdeficit.   Subject to this general objective, the conduct of exchange rate policy is guided by threemajor purposes.First, to reduce excess volatility in exchange rates, while ensuring that the movements areorderly and calibrated.Third, to help eliminate market constraints with a view to the development of a healthy foreignexchange market.Basically, the policy is aimed at preventing of destabilising speculation in the market while8facilitating foreign exchange transactions at market rates for all permissible purposes.Second, to help maintain an adequate level of foreign exchange reserves.contacting of debt itself is controlled, there is an in-built safeguard.Policy on Reserve Accumulationand internationalisation of domestic currency.permitted to offer two way quotes to NRIs or non-resident banks.Reserve Bank of India makes sales and purchases of foreign currency in the forex market,basically to even out lumpy demand or supply in the thin forex market; large lumpiness indemand is mainly on account of oil imports and external debt servicing on Government account.Such sales and purchases are not governed by a predetermined target or band around theexchange rate.MonitoringThe RBI closely monitors the foreign currency mismatch and open foreign currency and goldpositions of banks. The foreign currency/gold maturity mismatch limits and open foreigncurrency positions are vetted by RBI. The open foreign currency position is applicable for allcurrencies put together using shorthand method, i.e. the higher of the total short or longpositions. No limits have been placed for individual currencies. While vetting these limits, RBIensures that these have a reasonable relation not exceeding an internally laid down limit to Tier IBesides vetting limits on open foreign currency and gold positions and maturity mismatches,RBI had prescribed capital requirements for market risk on open foreign currency positions.Banks are required to add the open position limit to total risk weighted assets and maintain therequired capital adequacy ratio.Dissemination of DataIndia is one of the earliest subscribers to the SDDS of the International Monetary Fund.  In thissection the focus is on state of transparency in regard to the external sector statistics. The RBIpublishes detailed data on external sector in its Annual Report and the Report on Currency andThe Balance of Payments data is published in the monthly bulletin on a quarterly basis with aThe Weekly Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin contains data on monetary and financialaspects as well as the external sector.  In the external sector, the daily exchange rates, spot andThe total external debt of India is compiled and published by the Ministry of Finance and theRBI at different frequencies. The Ministry of Finance publishes data annually in the form of"Status Report" and in the Economic Survey, which are public documents. These Reportsprovide information on multilateral, bilateral and commercial debt and identifies Governmentdebt separately. The data includes debt for defence purposes, rupee-denominated debt and NRIdeposits. Sources of data are reporting by Government, corporates concerned and banks,compiled by Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Since all externalborrowings need approvals, the quality of data is reasonably sound. Currently, the data is9reported on original maturity basis.forwards and the weekly forex reserves position are given.three-month lag.Finance, annually.capital funds of the bank.The data on foreign investments, both direct and portfolio, as well as data on outstandingbalances under various non-resident deposit schemes are published on a monthly basis in the RBIBulletin. This is in addition to trade data. The Reserve Bank of India disseminates data on forexreserves on a weekly frequency with a lag of one week. Data is given separately with regard toforeign currency assets and SDR and gold holdings. Information on sale and purchase of foreigncurrency by RBI as also information on forward liabilities of the central bank are disseminated tothe public on a monthly basis, with a lag of one month. The dissemination of data on forexreserves is through the Weekly Statistical Supplement and the monthly RBI Bulletin, which areThe RBI also publishes the 5-country and 36-country NEER and REER on a monthly basis withRecently, the Government of India has set up a National Statistical commission to examine thedeficiencies of the present statistical system in the country with a view to recommendingmeasures for a systematic revamping of the system. One of the subgroups is looking intofinancial and external sector statistics.  The subgroup has already identified aspects of externalsector data that require further refinements, and initiated follow-up action to bridge the data gaps.The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act (FERA) by Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA)with effect from the beginning of this month, i.e., June 2000. The philosophy of foreignexchange management has shifted from that of conservation of foreign exchange to one offacilitating trade and payments as well as developing financial markets.  This definitive shift inthe objectives of foreign exchange management will automatically get reflected in the operationsof the Reserve Bank.  There is a clear distinction between the current and capital account. Underthe new system, all current account payments except those notified by the Government areeligible for appropriate foreign currency in respect of genuine transactions from the AuthorisedDealers without any restrictions. The surrender requirements in respect of exports of goods andservices continue to operate.  The Reserve Bank however, would have the necessary regulatoryjurisdiction over capital account transactions.  To this extent, further action in regard to capitalaccount liberalisation appears to have been put by Government squarely in the court of theIt must be noted that the new legal framework keeps the option of reimposing controls, capital orcurrent account if it becomes necessary.  Thus, the Central Government is vested with the powerto suspend and revoke any permission granted if the Government is satisfied that circumstanceswarrant such actions, in public interest.The committee on Capital Account Convertibility (CAC), with Dr.S.S.Tarapore as Chairman,which submitted its Report in May 1997, observed that although there were benefits of a moreopen capital account, international experience showed that a more open capital account could10Capital Account Convertibility - Further StepsReserve Bank of India.Legal Frameworka lag of one month.also available on the RBI website.also impose tremendous pressures on the financial system. Hence, the committee indicatedThe three crucial preconditions were fiscal consolidation, a mandated inflation target and aboveall, strengthening of the financial system. The committee recommended a reduction in GrossFiscal Deficit / Gross Domestic Product ratio from 4.5 per cent to 3.5 per cent in 1999-2000 anda mandated rate of inflation for the period 1997-98 to 1999-2000 at an average of 3 to 5 per cent.In the financial sector, the time frame for signposts that were recommended was in terms of cashreserve ratio (CRR) and non-performing assets (NPAs). The recommendations were to reducegross NPAs of banks as a percentage of total advances from 13.7 per cent in 1996-97 to 9 percent by 1998-99 and to 5 per cent by 1999-2000, and the average effective CRR from 9.3 as ofThe process of convertibility on the capital account has been gradual and as the experienceshows there is a hierarchy to it. There is a differentiation between inflows and outflows andwithin this between corporates, individuals and banks.  Currently, the priority is to liberaliseinflows, and in particular on corporate account. The recent freedom given to corporates to raisefunds through ADRs/GDRs is a signal to this effect.  All outflows associated with inflows aretotally free. With regard to liberalisation of outflows the hierarchy is corporates, financialintermediaries and individuals, although Tarapore Committee preferred liberalisation of flows onindividual account earlier in the hierarchy.  It would, therefore, be reasonable to expect someliberalisation on outflows with regard to corporates in the near term, and in regard to banks andOn the path towards capital account convertibility, there is now a lot more stronger publicopinion and the issue is more of a technical judgement on sequencing rather than whether toopen up or not.  Between the preconditions and the time frame for CAC recommended by thecommittee, it is clear that the achievement of preconditions has emerged, as perhaps intended,the more important criterion for liberalizing the capital account, while the timetable itself haslesser significance. Thus, the pace of liberalisation of capital account would now depend ondomestic factors, especially the progress in financial sector reform and the evolving internationalfinancial architecture.The introductory part of the paper dealt with the importance of country context and hence, anyinferences based on the country experience described should be either totally eschewed orviewed with great circumspection.  With this cautionary note, some broad generalisations areattempted here.  The generalisations are somewhat narrowly focussed on the external sector andnot the broader macro-policy issues such as implications for monetary management andFirst, the current account deficit represents the use of external resources in a country. Capitalinflows to finance such deficits are welcome for their role in financing investment, and therebysustaining long-term development. At the same time, it should be apparent that a large currentaccount deficit implies correspondingly a large dependence on such capital inflows. The11exchange rate policy.Some Generalisationsother financial intermediaries after some progress in financial sector reforms.April 1997 to 3 per cent by 1999-2000.certain signposts or preconditions for capital account convertibility in India.developing countries are vulnerable in many spheres and hence such large dependence has apotential for destability. The issue is not whether there are inflows or outflows at a point of time,since a fall in inflows is enough to cause a crisis when there is large dependence. It is preciselywith this view that India resisted the urge to allow current account deficit to exceed around 2 percent of GDP in India. No doubt, the level of normal capital flows or sustainable current accountdeficit is contextual – to the country concerned, level of development, extent of external sectorand even geo-political considerations. Briefly stated, for developing countries, non-volatile flowsare ensured only if current account deficit is sustainable and policy makers need to constantlySecond, there is a trade-off in the short run between financial stability and efficiency which allpolicy makers are aware of. More the prudential regulations, greater is the cost of intermediation,though in the long-term it is the stability that imparts efficiency. In search of higher efficiencygains in one stage of development, a country may accept the risk of greater volatility. But, thetrade-off has to be viewed in a contextual sense in relation to both domestic policy stance and theinternational environment. There is an impression that in the light of the Asian experience, policychoice should in future tilt totally in favour of stability at the cost of efficiency. While the crisishas drawn attention to the risks, and inadequacies in international financial systems, there is agreater global awareness of the issues now.  In other words, the relative weights to efficiency andstability needs to be constantly reviewed with reference to both domestic and internationalThird, in the context of normal flows, one way of giving a greater weight to stability would beemphasising longer term flows. The issue would of course be how to distinguish between long-term and short-term. It is necessary to recognise the existence of a hierarchy, however, difficultto achieve. From a purist’s point of view, an efficient system of financial intermediation wouldrequire easy movements and transmission mechanisms. But, the cross border flows, with all theglobalisation, are not subject to the same logic as domestic flows. True, the presumed differencesbetween portfolio flows and FDI flows can be overdone as FDI flows can also be volatile.Longer maturity external liabilities may seem less vulnerable to volatility than short maturityones but if there are active secondary markets, long maturities may be highly liquid. Similarly,there are also different points of view regarding the risks involved in debt and equity. Foreignowners of equity can choose to exit although a falling market or depreciating currency shouldprovide a disincentive, but not if there is herding.  Yet experience has shown that FDI has atendency to be less volatile, because the original motivations for inflow is both financial andnon-financial. Further, there is also a gestation period, i.e., project completion, which is built intothe profit projection and thus imparting stability. Hence, there is merit in giving greater weight toFourth, the treatment of trade related flows for defining short-term debt assumes importance. It isimportant to distinguish between trade credit, which provides a rather stable source of financingeven though each individual loan has a short maturity and other types of short-term borrowing. Itis also essential to capture the leads and lags in trade related payments that affect the level ofshort-term debt.12FDI than portfolio in deciding what is relatively long-term.developments.review the sustainability.Fifth, while the size and maturity structure of debt are important, bunching of repayments iscritical. In this context, the impression that all long-term debt is a panacea may not be totallycorrect. The approach should not be merely to contain certain debt under all circumstances, butto moderate the size and changes in debt flows. Keeping the external debt within limits has a rolein avoidance of financial crisis, but bunching of repayments has a potential to create liquiditySixth, it would do well for authorities to continuously monitor the level of private sector debt andthe positions that are taken by them. Since large transactions have the potential to disrupt themarket, it is better to keep a tab on such transactions. Financial institutions have to be sensitisedfor monitoring unhedged positions of corporates.Seventh, there is need to be careful on dollarisation of the economy. It is now recognised thatlarge scale dollar denominated assets within a country can disrupt the economy by creating aEighth, the discipline of releasing timely data, compels the authorities to be lot more accountableand markets to be less prone to surprises. The data dissemination should be regular, relevant,timely and authentic though such transparency does not eliminate the risk of wrong inferences bymarket participants. Ninth, skills of market participants as well as regulators have to be continuously upgraded inorder to keep pace with developments in technology and innovations in market if both policychanges and responses are to be effective.  There is in some senses a big dilemma here.  Controlsare imposed because markets are imperfect and participants’ skills are inadequate; but marketsdo not get less imperfect and participants’ skills do not improve as long as controls exist.   TheTenth, the nature of relationship between different financial markets is important. It is nowrecognised that capital account liberalisation should not be undertaken without a strong financialsector since the strength of the financial sector has systemic implications. It is not appropriate toassume that since markets are developed they are integrated fully. There can be varying patternsof integration. Thus, opening of capital account should take into account specific countrycircumstances while establishing strong legal, regulatory and institutional framework. An addeddimension, of course is the developing international financial architecture. Thus, the pace andEleventh, whether the liberalisation of capital account should totally foreclose the option ofimposing controls? It is perhaps wise for many developing countries to have the legal frameworkfor reimposing controls in times necessity and keep the policy option open both for prudentialand ad hoc controls.  Such options for domestic actions are warranted as long as internationalfinancial system imposes unequal burdens between domestic economy and market participants inFinally, and an issue that is often raised relates to the speed with which a country should openup. As would be evident from the description in the paper, the issue of liberalisation of capital13the event of volatility.sequencing have to be determined by both domestic and international developments.interactive process is critical here.potential for destabilisation.problems.account cannot be approached in isolation. The degree of sustainable openness, in some ways,depends on productivity and prospects for improvements in productivity in the real sector. Evenmore important, it would depend on the size and structure of domestic economy, the politicaleconomy of the country concerned and the assurances of stability and support when needed,from international financial system. As of now, the burden of crises arising out of capital accountappears to be predominantly on the residents. In sum, capital account liberalisation has both a• Presentation by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Seminar on Capital Account14Liberalisation: The Developing Country Perspective, at Overseas Development Institute, London, on June 21, 2000.national and international context - a truism indeed.Jalan, Bimal (1999) International Financial Architecture: Developing Countries’ perspectives,Reserve Bank of India, Bulletin October.Darbha, Gangadhar (ed)(2000) “India’s Monetary Policy in the Crucible of Reform”.   S. Tarapore (1992-96)  Books.Fischer, S (1998), " Capital Account Liberalisation and the Role of the IMF", in (Ed.), Should the IMF Pursue Capital Account Convertibility ? Princeton : Essays in InternationalFinance, No.207.Kalyalya, H. Denni, et al. (1999) Survey of Private Capital Flows in Zambia , PCF2 CountryTeam Report, March 2000.Matale, Austin, et al. (1996) "Capital Inflows and Macro Economic Policy in Zambia", Bank ofNayyar, Deepak (2000), "Capital Controls and The World Financial Authority - What Can WeLearn from the Indian Experience", DSA Working Paper, Nils Bhinda, et al. (1999) Private Capital Flows to Africa : Perception and Reality , FONDAD,Rangarajan, C (2000), , UBSPD.Rangarajan, C and Prasad A. (1999), “Some Critical Issues in the East Asian Crisis – AnReddy, Y.V. (2000) Monetary and Financial Sector Policies in India : A Central Banker's, UBSPD.Tarapore, S.S (2000), , UBSPD15Issues in Financial Sector ReformsPerspectiveEvaluation”, ICRA Bulletin Money and Finance, October-December.Economy : A Collection of Essays Perspectives on Indian The Hague.Nehru University. Jawaharlal Zambia Fortnightly Statistics.P.B.KenenVisan Savak collected speeches of TheSelected Bibliography
