Autonomy of the Central Bank :Changing Contours in IndiaDear Dr. Saxena, distinguished faculty, respected visitors, and young friends,I am grateful to the organisers for giving me this opportunity to be here with youtoday to deliver the Second Foundation Day Lecture.  The IIM, Indore has acquired agreat standing and high stature within a short span of four years and the entire creditshould go to the support rendered by all, and in particular, the devotion and dedicationdisplayed by the faculty and students to academic excellence.It is not easy to select a topic for today’s lecture; a topic that would interest thebest and brightest of young persons, that would be of contemporary relevance and one onwhich something forward looking can be explored.  After some deliberation, the subject“Autonomy of the Central Bank : Changing Contours in India” has been chosen.During the ten years of economic reform, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) hasemerged as a respected and significant institution in public policy and its changing role asa central bank deserves to be appreciated.  In fact, a historic agreement in 1997 betweenGovernment of India and the RBI on the termination of the system of automaticmonetisation and introduction of a system of Ways and Means Advances constitutes awatershed in public policy governing their mutual relationship.  Amendments to thelegislation relating to the RBI and banking announced by Finance Minister in the budgetspeech for 2000-2001 and subsequent submission of draft legislations by the RBI areindicative of the evolving institutional changes.  The issues of transparency andaccountability governing their operations with each other have been addressed byAdvisory Groups on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies headed by theformer RBI Governor, Mr. M. Narasimham (September 2000) and on FiscalTransparency by former Finance Secretary, Mr. M.S. Ahluwalia (June 2001).  Therehave also been some deliberations on the issue of appropriate provisions relating to theRBI, in the context of ongoing review of Constitution of India by the Commissionappointed for the purpose a year ago.  Hence, there is merit in taking a view on thebroader issue of independence of the central bank in India, so that the process of changeis negotiated smoothly and in a consistent form, thus avoiding the danger of what may betermed as “disjointed incrementalism” in reform through ill-defined goals.The lecture will be in three parts.  The first one defines central banking, and itsindependence, while providing theoretical and empirical evidence for and againstindependence or autonomy (both words are used interchangeably in this lecture thoughautonomy and independence could have slightly different connotations) and explainingdifficulties in its measurement.  The second part reviews the Indian experience throughrecourse to periodisation and makes an assessment of the current situation.  The thirdsection focusses on the emerging issues in India and concludes with some randomthoughts on the autonomy of central banks.What is Central Banking?The central banking functions typically include not only creation of money ormore broadly monetary management, but, also often, management of public debt ofGovernment, regulation and supervision of banking entities, financing of developmentalactivities and other associated functions.While discussing the issue of autonomy, it is necessary to recognise that thefunction of debt management is essentially performed by a central bank as an agent ofGovernment and the issue of autonomy does not arise.  In fact, this function could be inconflict with autonomy in the conduct of monetary policy.As regards the function of regulation and supervision, the argument forinvolvement of a central bank emerges from the role of lender of last resort and theobligation to smoothly operate the payments system.  In this regard, the autonomy thatthe central bank exercises is no different from autonomy of any regulator in the financialsystem.As far as the developmental role is concerned, close coordination withGovernment necessarily arises, which in some ways impinges on autonomy as it is in away linked to money creation.What is uniquely relevant for a central bank’s independence is its exercise of thepower to modulate the creation of money and the price of money, which impacts on thevalue of money, both domestic and external. In this context, the critical issue relates tothe degrees of freedom the central bank has in deciding whether or not to fund theGovernment’s expenditure out of created money.The view that central banks should be largely independent of political power andthat the central bank credit to government should be formally limited is generallythbelieved to have emerged only in 20 century. It would, however, be inappropriate toconclude that the importance of central bank’s independence was recognised only asthrecently as 20 century since Napoleon Bonaparte is reported to have commented in1806, on Bank of France; “I want the bank to be in the hands of the Government, but nottoo much”.As a result of monetary consequences of deficit financing that had afflicted manycountries during the First World War, the international financial community, in a seriesof Conferences organised by League of Nations recognised such independence ascontributing to price stability.  The recent revival of interest in the subject is attributableto several factors viz. the reforms in centrally planned economies, the establishment ofnew European Central Banking arrangements and importance of price stability in a worldcharacterised by large cross border financial flows.What is Central Bank Independence?2Central bank independence generally relates to three areas viz. personnel matters;financial aspects; and conduct of policy. Personnel independence refers to the extent towhich the Government distances itself from appointment, term of office and dismissalprocedures of top central bank officials and the governing board.  It also includes theextent and nature of representation of the Government in the governing body of thecentral bank. Financial independence relates to the freedom of the central bank to decidethe extent to which Government expenditure is either directly or indirectly financed viacentral bank credits. Direct or automatic access of Government to central bank creditswould naturally imply that monetary policy is subordinated to fiscal policy. Finally,policy independence is related to the flexibility given to the central bank in theformulation and execution of monetary policy.Recent literature has stressed the difference between goal independence andinstrument independence. Goal independence refers to a situation where the central bankitself can choose the policy priorities of stabilising output or prices at any given point oftime, thus setting the goal of monetary policy. Instrument independence implies that thecentral bank is only free to choose the means to achieve the objective set by theGovernment. In a recent survey (Fry. M, et al 1999) of central banks, 40 of the total 56central banks across a broad range of economies defined independence predominantly interms of instrument independence. Of the remaining 16 responses, many highlightedfactors that had implications for the relationship between the Government and the centralbank.Pros and Cons in TheoryThree different theories, which are by no way mutually exclusive, have beenadvanced in support of autonomy of central banks, viz., dynamic or time inconsistencytheory, theory of political business cycle and the theory of public choice.First, the most prominent argument for central bank independence is based on thetime inconsistency problem. Time inconsistency arises when the best plan currently madefor some future period is no longer optimal when that period actually starts. In the contextof monetary policy, the time inconsistency problem arises because there are incentivesfor a politically motivated policymaker to try to exploit the short-run trade-off betweenemployment and inflation. Expansionary monetary policy may produce higher growthand employment in the short run, and, therefore, policymakers may be tempted to pursuethis policy, even in the short run although there is no guarantee that there would be afavourable output impact. In the long run, however, such an expansionary monetarypolicy will necessarily lead to higher inflation with deleterious consequences for theeconomy. In order to solve the time inconsistency problem, two distinct approaches havebeen advanced. The 'conservative central banker approach' postulates the appointment ofa conservative central banker whose aversion to inflation is well known which wouldresult in low inflation because of the economic agents' belief in the reputation of thecentral banker. The 'optimal contract approach' postulates the existence of an optimalcontract between the central banker and the Government. The central banker's tenure inoffice is conditional upon his performance of achieving low inflation, failure of which3would lead to the repudiation of the contract of tenure. Historically, there are successfulexamples of both types of models of central bank independence – while US is often seenas an example of conservative Central Bank, New Zealand is characterised as a followerof optimal contract approach.Second, the political business cycle theory studies the interaction betweeneconomic policy decisions and political considerations. The best known prediction of thetheory is that the business cycle mirrors the timetable of the election cycle. Incumbentgovernments, in general, will use restrictive policies early in their elected tenure raisingunemployment to reduce inflation, as the election approaches. The theory highlights thetendencies of incumbent governments to generate pre-election booms throughexpansionary fiscal policies. Once the incumbents get re-elected, the policy prioritiescould change towards inflation control rather than employment generation.  In thisrespect, the theory in a way highlights the time inconsistency behaviour of governments.As monetary policy affects the economy with long and variable lags, even if the centralbank nullifies the fiscal stimulus through monetary tightening, its impact would typicallybe felt during the post-election period when the incumbents may happen to be back inpower.Finally, the fusion of politics and economics over the last thirty years has resultedin the theory of public choice, establishing itself as an important proponent of centralbank independence. In the context of reducing budget deficit, the primary solutionoffered in public choice theory is a constitutional amendment for a pre-specifiedstipulation on central bank credit to government. Nevertheless, in recent years, as asecondary solution to the deficit problem, some public choice theorists put forward thecase of an independent central bank. The basic contentions of these economists are:unless there are constitutional or institutional constraints to the contrary, a democracycontains a bias towards deficit finance; thus they operate within the premise thatpoliticians do not necessarily pursue public interest but are more concerned with theirpersonal or political agenda. In this context, some economists explicitly talk about centralbank independence by providing a solution which will ensure not only low inflation butalso act as an effective institutional constraint.While the above arguments build up a strong case for central bank independence,the issue has not been decisively settled and there are powerful forces aligned againstaccording such independence to central banks.First, detractors of autonomy argue that an independent central bank lacksdemocratic legitimacy. Curiously, such detractors derive strength from MiltonFriedman’s statement that money is too important an issue to be left to the whims ofcentral bankers.Secondly, independence may lead to frictions between the fiscal and the monetaryauthorities and the resulting costs of these frictions between monetary and fiscal policymay be somewhat costly for society, thus inhibiting the development process.4Thirdly, there may be significant divergence in the preference pattern ofindependent central banks and the society at large. A strong central bank may impose itsoutlook on society resulting in a sub-optimal state in terms of economic welfare.Adequate sources of accountability can, however, counteract and circumvent theseproblems.  In fact, the opinions in this context differ widely on the relative importancebetween growth vis-à-vis inflation as objectives of monetary policy.At a pragmatic level, the basic issue is one of reconciling adequate independencewith appropriate accountability to ensure that central banks are responsive to societalconcerns.Measures of Central Bank IndependenceIt is difficult to measure the degree of independence of various central banks. Ithas pointed out that actual, as opposed to formal independence, hinges not only onlegislation but also on several factors such as informal arrangements with governments,the quality of the personnel in the bank as well as Government and the personalcharacteristics of key individuals. Obviously, some other factors are virtually impossibleto quantify. Existing research has, therefore, generally focused primarily on legalindependence, mostly in the industrialised countries. Legal independence measures maybe a better proxy for actual independence in some countries where informal relations arenot dominant. Thus, various proxies may be useful to get a complete picture, since theycapture different aspects of independence.In quantifying the degree of independence, economists typically assign scorecardson different aspects of central banking. The final degree of independence is measured asthe weighted sum of 'marks' obtained under different heads such as indices of politicaland economic independence; index aggregated from a number of basic legalcharacteristics of central bank charters; index based on issues relating to composition ofboard members, frequency of transfers of central bank governors, etc. Recent attemptsmade to construct measures of central bank independence using different criteria andexamine correlations among them reveal that the factors that affect central bankindependence are highly diverse and the importance of each of these factors may haveweights that vary markedly across countries, time and circumstances.The existing indices of central bank independence are clearly incomplete and atbest noisy indicators of actual independence, though this does not mean that they areuninformative. In brief, it is possible to differentiate between legal independence,informal independence and contextual independence of central banks.Central Bank Independence and Economic PerformanceAn inverse relationship between central bank independence and the level ofinflation is supported by most empirical studies during the post Bretton-Woods period.The proponents for central bank independence generally cite empirical evidences ofnegative cross-country correlation between average inflation and the degree of central5bank independence. It is, however, possible to question the veracity of this relationship.As already mentioned, there are significant measurement problems relating to centralbank independence. Furthermore, researchers argue that the causal relationship observedbetween central bank independence and low and stable inflation might be influenced bysome other common factors such as the extent of inflation averseness and the credibilitythat the central bank enjoys. While many Latin American countries changed the legal andoperational framework, the change was prompted by people's aversion to high andchronic inflation. The causality between the rate of inflation and the degree ofindependence of the central bank may be viewed as bi-directional, since it would beargued that persistent high inflation led to changes in the operational framework in manycountries.It needs to be emphasised that central bank, independence by itself cannot ensuremonetary policy credibility, which, to an extent, depends on the overall credibility ofGovernment policy as a whole. Central bank independence is a means, the end being anappropriate division of responsibility between the monetary and the fiscal authority andpolicy coordination. There is a need to articulate the division of responsibility and policypriorities to the economic agents. Such articulation reduces uncertainties often inherent ineconomic decisions. If an institutional structure is not in place, there is a chance thatpolicy coordination would depend entirely upon the personal equations amongpolicymakers and the risk of it breaking down subsequently with changes in the personsat top can not be ruled out.Indian Situation : A ReviewThe evolving relationship between the Government and the RBI can be broadlydivided into four distinct phases.The legislation to set up the RBI was first introduced in January 1927. Theenactment, however, was made after seven years in March 1934. The RBI was set up as aprivately owned and managed entity. The preamble of the Act focused on monetarystability and operations on currency and credit system in India. During this phase, whichmay be called infancy and uncertainty, the RBI was virtually subservient to the dictatesof the Government and measures were taken to curb its capacity for independent actions.In fact, threats were issued to supersede the Bank’s Board should it recommend monetaryand exchange rate policies incompatible with the Government’s scheme of actions. Nodoubt, the outbreak of war also added to the uncertainties.Shortly after India’s independence in 1947, the RBI was nationalised in 1948. Theearly years were characterised by a good degree of fiscal rectitude and harmony inmonetary and fiscal policy with areas of potential conflict being minimal. The fact thatthe rate of inflation was modest compared to other developing countries during thisperiod is indicative of the success of macro-policy management and facilitated the task ofthe RBI in pursuing other developmental activities. During this period, the RBI wasvigorously involved in promoting the institutionalisation of credit to agriculture andindustry in pursuant to the overall objectives of the respective Five-Year Plans. Apart6from helping to channelise credit to agriculture and industry, an important objective ofthe RBI was the promotion and mobilisation of savings by reinforcing the foundations ofthe banking system. This, however, does not mean that differences between the RBI andthe Government over economic policies were totally absent. For example, the RBI didnot approve of the substitution of financial planning by a kind of ‘physical planning’.Once it awoke to the consequences of physical targeting during the course of the SecondPlan, the RBI strove to trim the size of the subsequent Plans to match visible resources.Another illustration of differences between the Government and RBI culminating in theresignation of Governor Rama Rau in 1957 is well documented (Balachandran G, 1998).Another major area of discord between the RBI and the Government in the late1950s related to the financing of the cooperatives and the pattern of organisation of thelending agencies. Interestingly, during the early 1960s, Governor Iengar identified fourareas of potential conflict between the Bank and the central government. These wereinterest rate policy, deficit financing, cooperative credit policies and management of sub-standard banks. It may be of interest to note that currently, in the year 2001, these fourareas are still on the top of RBI’s concerns.This phase, from nationalisation of the RBI in 1948 till nationalisation of majorcommercial banks in 1969, may be considered as maturing of the RBI into a full-fledgedprofessionally managed central bank, perhaps one of the foremost in developingcountries. The mid-fifties, however, did see the beginnings of serious erosion ofautonomy in the monetary policy function due to the emergence of the system of ad hocTreasury Bills and automatic monetisation. It was agreed that RBI would replenishGovernment’s cash balances by creation of ad hoc Treasury Bills in favour of the RBI.The ad hoc Treasury Bills, which were meant to be temporary, gained a permanent aswell as a cumulative character. Indeed, it became an attractive source of financingGovernment expenditures since it was available at an interest rate pegged at 4.6 percentper annum since 1974, i.e., actually at a negative real interest rate.The third phase that changed the contour of this relationship started with thenationalisation of major banks in 1969. While the problems experienced earlier by theRBI persisted to some extent, the change brought about a curious situation where theGovernment became owner of a number of banks, but the supervision of these banks was,in turn, conducted by the RBI which was also owned by the Government. The situation,however, was not unique to India and was somewhat similar to that of France. Thefundamental factor affecting the relationship was the combined effect of Government’sownership of major commercial banks and the persistence of high fiscal deficits, whichposed serious problems for prudent monetary management. For easy access of marketborrowing, the interest rates were administered and the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR)requirements of the banking sector were periodically hiked. In this regard, thenationalisation of banks and transfer of ownership to Government provided a captivemarket for the government. Simultaneously, recourse to the RBI credit was also high,leading to high levels of monetisation. To neutralise the effect of monetisation on theprice level, the RBI, in turn, had to intermittently increase the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR)7requirements of the banking sector. This phase was charaterised by several features toindicate considerable influence or dominance of Government over the RBI.On the basis of one of the criteria (Cukierman, 1992) to measure the degree ofindependence of various central banks during the ‘eighties, the RBI was rankedmarginally below the median level of a list of about seventy countries (including twenty-one industrialised countries). This represented a limited degree of statutory autonomybecause in general, central banks in developing countries enjoyed little independencefrom the Government at this time. As such, the measurements seem to reflect the intent ofthe 1948 nationalisation of the RBI, which was to ensure a greater coordination ofmonetary, economic and financial policies.The fourth phase or the reforming phase in the changing contour of thisrelationship approximately starts from 1990-91. Major changes in the monetary policyframework took place in many countries around this time.  While people in manydeveloped countries were tired of persistent and high inflation during the earlier years,the journey of the centrally planned economies towards a market determined system alsobegan around this time. As a result, the relationship between the central bank and thegovernment took a new turn in many countries, resulting in the genesis of inflationtargeting framework in a number of economies.While radical changes were taking place worldwide, the Indian economy during1990-91 experienced a severe balance of payments crisis. The crisis was clearly a falloutof the fiscal profligacy during the Eighties. During the post-reform period, therelationship between the central bank and the Government took a new turn through awelcome development in the supplemental agreement between the Government and theRBI in September 1994 on the abolition of the ad hoc treasury bills to be made effectivefrom April 1997. The measure eliminated the automatic monetisation of Governmentdeficits and resulted in considerable moderation of the monetised deficit in the latter halfof the Nineties. At the same time, with gradual opening up of the economy anddevelopment of domestic financial markets, the operational framework of the RBI alsochanged considerably with clearer articulation of policy goals and more and more publicdissemination of vast amount of data relating to its operations.Partly as a result of such institutional changes in recent years, inflation in Indiahas been moderate relative to other developing countries despite high fiscal deficit, andmost inflationary episodes have been caused by exogenous supply-side factors. As far aspublic finances are concerned, the Government generally relied on domestic sources tofinance the deficit. It has been pointed out by some experts that the RBI, though notformally independent, has enjoyed a high degree of operational autonomy during thepost-reform period. In fact, during the recent period, the RBI enjoys considerableinstrument independence for attaining monetary policy objectives. Significantachievements in financial reforms including strengthening of the banking supervisioncapabilities of the RBI have enhanced its credibility and instrument independence.8Current StatusIn terms of redefining the functions of the RBI, enabling a movement towardsmeaningful autonomy, Governor Jalan’s statement on Monetary and Credit Policy onApril 19, 2001 is a landmark event.  First, it was decided to divest RBI of all theownership functions in commercial banking, development finance and securities tradingentities.  Secondly, a beginning was made in recommending divestiture of RBI’ssupervisory functions in regard to cooperative banks, which would presumably beextended to non-banking financial companies and later to all commercial banks.  Thirdly,the RBI signalled initiation of steps for separation of Government debt managementfunction from monetary policy. These measures would enable the RBI to primarily focuson its role as monetary authority and enhance the possibility of a move towards greaterautonomy.Three other developments in recent years are expected to have far reachingramifications in the operational framework of monetary policy in India. The first was thetabling of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Legislation, which aims atthe medium-term management of the fiscal deficit. The objective of the legislation is toimpose fiscal discipline on Government spending and ensure a transparent andaccountable fiscal system.The second development was the coordinated endeavour of the Government ofIndia and the RBI to consider the implementation of International Financial Standardsand Codes. Among the ten Advisory Groups constituted for this purpose, the AdvisoryGroup on Fiscal Transparency (Chairman : Mr. M.S. Ahluwalia) and the Advisory Groupon Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies (Chairman : Shri M. Narasimham)have suggested some important changes in the operational conduct of monetary and fiscalpolicies and highlighted the need for better coordination between them.The third relates to the budget speech in February 2000, wherein the FinanceMinister had noted that in the fast changing world of modern finance, it has becomenecessary to accord greater operational flexibility to the RBI for the conduct of monetarypolicy and regulation of the financial system and that accordingly, he intends to bring toParliament proposals for amending the relevant legislation.In this regard, the RBI constituted an Internal Committee to review the existinglegal provisions in both the Reserve Bank of India Act and the Banking Regulation Actso as to bring about suitable amendments in them to provide sufficient operationalflexibility to the RBI for conducting monetary policy, guiding the development of thefinancial sector and securing the stability of the financial system as a whole. TheCommittee made a host of recommendations that include providing the RBI theflexibility in respect of monetary policy instruments, supervisory effectiveness,prudential deregulation and governance of financial markets. It has also recommendedfurther strengthening of institutions in the light of structural changes due to ongoingreforms and encourage transparency and integrity of operations. Furthermore, in aliberalised environment, maintaining financial stability is an important additional9objective of policy and the RBI should have the operational maneuverability to manageand limit the damage on account of volatility/contagion transmitted via the internationaleconomy.Emerging IssuesThe emerging issues relating to autonomy of RBI can be addressed at severallevels.First, at the level of the Constitution, the RBI finds a place in Entry 38 of List 1 ofSchedule VII of the Constitution of India “subjecting the Bank’s policies to the wisdomof the executive and legislative wings of the Union” (Prasad. R, 2001).  There are only afew instances of references to autonomy of central bank in the Constitution and obviouslysuch a reference is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for ensuring appropriatelevel of autonomy.  Yet there is an influential view such as that expressed by Dr. N.L.Mitra, formerly Director, National Institute of Law in favour of an appropriate provisionin the Indian Constitution.Second, at the level of legislative framework, several suggestions have been madeto ensure appropriate autonomy and many of them are under consideration.  In particular,proposed Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill and other amendments toReserve Bank of India Act would cover significant ground.  Several other suggestionsrelating to legal framework, particularly those relating to defining the objectives of andimparting transparency in monetary policy as recommended by the Advisory Groups areyet to be taken up.Third, at the policy level, there are three important constraints on the operationalautonomy even within the existing legal framework.  One, the continued fiscaldominance, including large temporary mismatches between receipts and expenditures ofGovernment warranting large involuntary financing of credit needs of Government by theRBI. Two, the predominance of publicly owned financial intermediaries and non-financial public enterprises, which has created a blurring of the demarcation betweenfunding of and by Government vis-à-vis public sector as a whole. Three, the relativelyunderdeveloped state of financial markets partly due to legal and institutional constraints,which blunts the effectiveness of instruments of monetary policy.  These issues need tobe resolved to enhance genuine autonomy.Fourth, at the operational and procedural level, there is a problem of “old habitsdie hard”.  In a deregulated environment, there is considerable scope to reduce micro-management issues in the relations between the Government and the RBI.Fifth, at the level of degree of transparency, there is a temptation to continue,what has been termed as the “joint-family approach”.  The approach ignores basic tenetsof accounting principles in regard to transactions between RBI and Government. It givessatisfaction to all participants that all of them are working together for growth andstability.  In the process, however, the integrity of the respective balance sheets of10Government and RBI gets eroded making both autonomy and accountability difficult toassess.Random ThoughtsIn the light of theory, practice and the Indian experience I would like to share withyou some of my thoughts on the subject.  These are structured around emerging newrealities, issues of coordination, transparency, accountability and credibility.Generally, independence of central bank is discussed in terms of independence, orin a broader sense, from political, executive and legislative power.  With emergence ofpowerful economic interests in the form of multinationals or dominant domesticcorporates and their large stakes in capital markets, in the larger context of powerfulinfluences outside of the executive wing of Government, it may be necessary to alsoensure independence of central bank operations.While price stability and availability of credit to meet the needs of the growingeconomy continue to be the twin objectives on a year to year basis, as a longer term andprimary responsibility, the RBI concerns itself with price stability.  There is, however,need to recognise the criticality of financial sector stability, especially of financialmarkets for which the RBI is assuming increasing responsibility and should exercise itsindependence from governmental priorities in that direction, whenever warranted.  Inother words, while the issue of the central bank’s independence and accountability weredebated in the past in the context of price stability and money creation, the emergingissues warrant a broader view of exercise of independence from several sources to meetemerging challenges like financial sector and markets stability while enlarging theconcept of accountability through greater recourse to transparency.With the possible emergence of digital money, significant questions would arisein regard to the power that central banks would continue to exercise in future and hencethe whole issue of its role in creation of money and consequently its independence mayneed to be revisited.In view of the trends towards globalisation of capital flows and consequentemphasis on internal financial stability, standards, codes, etc., the central banks may gainindependence from their respective governments but in practice may tend to becircumscribed by the compulsions of international financial community.The traditional argument, at a philosophical level, in favour of an independentcentral bank is that the power to spend money should be separated from the power tocreate money.  Given the complexities in separating the two too rigidly and given theadvantages of co-ordination, a minimum requirement should be that their relationshipsand transactions be reported as transparently as possible, and the integrity of the twoseparate balance sheets be maintained.At an operational level, it is possible to ensure co-ordination between fiscal andmonetary policies while maintaining operational autonomy if interaction and consultation11is ensured in three important areas namely (i) evolving macro-economic objectives; (ii)likely consequences of various options available for fiscal and monetary actions to realisethe evolving objectives; and (iii) sharing and use of the respective forecasts of the likelystate of the economy in the absence of policy interventions under consideration.  Indeed,this interaction calls for a reasonable degree of intellectual integrity, professionalcompetence and mutual respect in both the central bank and the Government.Accountability can be narrowly defined or approached in a broader as well aslonger term perspective.  In a narrow sense, it can be argued that a central bank isaccountable to the Ministry or to the Parliament through the Ministry.  In a broader sense,it can be argued that central bank, as a significant public institution should be accountableto the public at large, unless there is a constitutional or legal hurdle.  In this sense ofbroader accountability, in a way transcending political cycles, a central bank has to be notonly transparent but should also effectively articulate its policy.  It must be recognisedthat such a broader approach to accountability will depend on the public awareness ofeconomic issues and the priority that political leadership accords to public articulation ofissues as compared to closed door consideration of such issues.Liberalised and developed financial markets, certainly, contribute to greaterpublic-awareness and in this regard efforts to promote financial markets also contribute togreater accountability.  In the final analysis, accountability is a basic principle ofdemocracy.At a pragmatic level there are two important arguments in favour of autonomy inaddition to transparency.  First, if superior technical competence is demonstrable, there ismerit in according operational autonomy to the central bank.  Furthermore, to the extent acentral bank is likely to carry greater credibility with the public opinion when it makes acommitment, there is merit in entrusting it with autonomy.  In the years to come, thesheer need to improve the efficiency of operations will thrust upon the RBI a greaterdegree of autonomy and, therefore, a greater degree of accountability.  In such a milieu itis essential that the setting of goals and the policy processes will need to evolve in atransparent manner.  For the central bank, these will be difficult times but alsoexhilarating times.Thank you !Selected References12Alesina, A. (1989), ‘Politics and Business Cycles in Industrial Democracies’, EconomicPolicy, 8, April 55-98Alesina, A. and L. H. Summers (1993), ‘Central Bank Independence and MacroeconomicPerformance : Some Comparative Evidence’, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 25(2), May, 151-62Balachandran, G. (1998), ‘The Reserve Bank of India : 1951-1967’, Oxford UniversityPress, Delhi.Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983), ‘Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model ofMonetary Policy’, Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, 101  -21Buiter, W. H. (2000), 'Targets, Instruments and Institutional Arrangements for anEffective Monetary Authority', Seventh L. K. Jha memorial lecture, Reserve Bank ofIndia.Cukierman, A. (1992), 'Central bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence : Theoryand Evidence', MIT Press.Cukierman, A., S. B. Webb and B. Neyapti (1992), ‘Measuring the Independence ofCentral Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes’, World Bank Economic Review, 6, (3),September, 353-98.Cukierman, A. (1993), ‘Central Bank Independence, Political Influence andMacroeconomic Performance : A Survey of Recent Developments’, Cuadernos deEconomia, 30 (91), December, 271-91Cukierman, A., P. Kalaitzidakis, L. H. Summers and S. B. Webb (1993), ‘Central BankIndependence, Growth Investment, and Real Rates’, in Allan G. Meltzer and Charles I.Plosser (eds), Carnegic-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 39, December, 95-140Cukierman, A. (1994), ‘Commitment ‘Through Delegation, Political Influence andCentral Bank and Central Bank Independence in J. Onno De Beaufort Wijnholds,Sylvester C.W.Eijffinger and Lex H. Hoogdium (eds), A Framework for MonetaryStability, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 55-74Cukierman, A. and S. B. Webb (1995), ‘Political Influence on the Central Bank :International Evidence: World Bank Economics Review, 9 (3), September, 397-423Debelle, G. and S. Fischer (1994), ‘How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?' InJeffrey C. Fuhrer (ed). "Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing MonetaryPolicymakers", Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No. 38, 195-22113De Haan, J. and G. Jan Van’t Hag (1195), ‘Variation in Central Bank IndependenceAcross Countries: Some Provisional Empirical Evidence’, Public Choice, 85, 335-51Eijffinger, S. and E. Schaling (1993a), ‘Central Bank Independence in Twelve IndustrialCountries;, Banca Naxionale del Lavoro Quarterly Review, XLVI, (184), March 49-70Eijffinger, S. and E. Schaling (1993b), ‘Central Bank Independence: Theory andEvidence’, Center Discussion Paper Series, 9325, May 1-32Eijffinger, S. (1997) (Ed.), Independent Central Banks and Economic Performance, ElgerReference Collection, London.Fischer, S.  (1965), 'Modern Central Banking', The Foundations of Monetary EconomicsIII, October, Page 262-514.Fry, M., D. Julius, L.  Mahadeva, S. Roger and G. Sterne (1999), ‘Monetary PolicyFrameworks in a Global Context,’ Central Bank Governors’ Symposium at the Bank ofEngland, June.Grilli, V., D. Masciandaro and G. Tebellini (1991), ‘Political and Monetary Institutionsand Public Financial Policies in the Industrial Countries’. Economic Policy, 13, October,341-92Hossain, A. and A. Chowdhury (1996), 'Monetary and Financial Policies in DevelopingCountries : Growth and Stabilization', Routledge, London.Kydland, F. E. and E. C.  Prescott (1977), ‘Rules Rather than Discretion : TheInconsistency of Optimal Plans’, ‘Journal of Political Economy, 85 (3), June, 473-91Lippi, F. (1999), ‘Central Bank Independence, Targets and Credibility,’ Edward ElgarPublishing Ltd., UK.Mboweni, T. T. (2000), 'Central Bank Independence', Reuters Forum Lecture,Johannesburg, October 11, 2000, BIS Review 88/2000.Meyer, L. H. (2000) : 'The Politics of Monetary Policy – Balancing Independence andAccountability', Lecture at the University of Wisconsin, LaCrosse, Wisconsisn, October24, 2000, BIS Review 94/2000.Mishkin, F. S. (2000), ‘What Should Central Banks Do?’, Federal Reserve Bank of St.Louis, November/December, 1-12.Neumann, M. J. M. (1991), ‘Precommitment by Central Bank Independence’, OpenEconomies Review, 2, 95-112Posen, A. S. (1993), ‘Why Central Bank Independence Does Not Cause Low Inflation :There Is No Institutional Fix for Politics’, in Richard O’ Brien (ed), Finance and the14International Economy, 7: The Amex Bank Review Prize Essays, Chapter 3,  Oxford :Oxford University Press 41-65Prasad, V. R. (2001), 'The Modern Face of a Central Bank – A Comparative Study on theConstitutional Status of Central Banks under Various Constitutions of the World', RBILegal News and Views, 5, 26-33.Rangarajan, C. (1993),  ‘Autonomy of Central Banks’, Fifty Years of Central Banking :Governors SpeakRay, P. (1993), 'Central Bank Independence and Effectiveness of Monetary Policy : ASurvey', RBI Occasional Papers, 14, No.4, 267–295.thReddy, Y.V. (2000), 'Changing Role of RBI: Agenda for Attention', 18 B. F. MadonMemorial lecture, IMC Economic Research and Training Foundation at the IndianMerchants Chamber, Mumbai, June 13, 2000, RBI Bulletin July, 2000.Reddy, Y.V. (2001), 'Central Banking in the New Millennium', Valedictory Address atthe Bank Economists' Conference by the Oriental Bank of Commerce, New Delhi,January 17, 2001, RBI Bulletin, March 2001.Rogoff, K. (1985), ‘The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate MonetaryTarget; Quarterly Journal of Economics, C., November, 1169-89Venkitaramanan, S., ‘Central Bank Independence,” Central Banking, Vol. 3, No.1,(Summer 1992).Walsh, C. E. (1995), ‘Optimal Contracts for Central Bankers’, American EconomicReview, 85 (1), March, 150-67* The Second Foundation Day Lecture by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, ReserveBank of India, at Indian Institute of Management at Indore on October 3, 2001.  Dr.Reddy is grateful to Shri Indranil Bhattacharyya, Shri Kaushik Bhattacharya, and Dr. A.Prasad for their valuable assistance.15
