January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Banking and Trade Finance*K.J. UDESHII am indeed privileged to be invited to open and India has become much moreinaugurate this conference and especially so, integrated with the world economy. Theas this is the first time that the International economy has also become more resilient toChamber of Commerce Banking Commission shocks, both domestic and external.Meeting is taking place in India. TheThe Indian economy has emerged ascontribution made by ICC in standardisationone of the fastest growing emerging marketis well-known but perhaps what is not so well-economies and the Indian banking sector isknown is that the ICC also contributes toperceived, as being the best performer inmaking business policy by publishing policyAsia. The robustness of the banking sector isstatements and reports and laying downwitnessed by a consistent rise in Return onguidelines, goals and rules. This conferenceEquity, strong earnings momentum, improvedwould, therefore, provide a forum forloan book quality and unrealised gains oninteraction between Indian bankers andtreasury portfolios. There are some structuralcorporates and their counterparts from otherfactors that could drive credit growth, namely,parts of the world. It is also an excellentthe emergence of consumer loans, theopportunity to project India’s potential in theshrinking of spreads on alternate assets andbanking and financial sector. Kudos toa higher risk appetite because of strongerMr. Kanwar for having arranged thisforeclosure norms and statutory support forconference in India.enforcement of creditor rights.The Indian financial sector reformsThe Reserve Bank has initiated a hostlaunched a decade ago have transformed theof measures to liberalise the financial system.operating environment of the financial sectorThe movement has been on four broadfrom an administered regime to a competitiveparameters – reducing if not eliminating pricemarket based system. The reforms are an on-controls, reducing quantity prescriptions,going process. There is increasing evidencereducing barriers to entry and increasingof strong inter-linkages between markets. Incompetition and moving to internationalthe macro economic and financial spheres,standards of income recognition andinflation has been contained, external debtaccounts.indicators have vastly improved, the exchangerate is flexible and the country is free ofIt may be of interest to the ICC Bankingfinancial repression. The trade account isCommission that India has been closely* Inaugural Address by Smt. K.J. Udeshi, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India organised by International Chamberof Commerce, at New Delhi on December 9, 2003.107January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004The Narasimham Committee on Bankingassociated with various standard settingSector Reforms (1998) had observed that abodies and has been taking active part in thelegal framework that clearly defines the rightswork of several key international institutionsand liabilities of parties to contracts anddevoted to the task of developing andprovides for speedy resolution of dispute is apromoting implementation of financialsine qua non for efficient trade andstandards and codes. Although we are not acommerce, especially for financialmember of the Financial Stability Forumintermediation. Several legislative initiatives(FSF), we were one of the countries speciallyhave been undertaken in the banking andrequested to help its Task Force on thefinancial sector.Implementation of Standards andsubsequently, the Follow Up Group onThe bills introduced in Parliament forIncentives for Implementation of Standards.amendment of the Banking Regulation Act willencourage foreign banks to set upThe Reserve Bank’s Standingsubsidiaries and attract foreign investors.Committee on International FinancialHistorically, foreign banks have always beenStandards and Codes (Chairman: Dr. Y.V.allowed to operate in India and have enjoyedReddy) has assessed Indian regulationsnational treatment and a level-playing field.against international best practices in orderWith a view to developing trade and paymentto facilitate positioning of international financialrelationship, we have encouraged foreignstandards and codes in relevant areas of thebanks from other countries which did not havefinancial system in India and to guide thehistoric links to establish branches in India. Ioverall process of implementation ofmay add that the WTO commitment onappropriate changes in respect of variousbanking services has been fulfilled.segments of the financial system. India is oneof the countries that has sought participation A critical issue of increasing internationalin the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector concern is the question of money laundering.Assessment Programme (FSAP). As part of The impact of money laundering is nowthe Reports on Observances of Standards beginning to extend from economic crimes toand Codes (ROSCs), India’s compliance in international terrorism. As financialrespect of standards and codes has already transactions grow more complex, it becomesbeen assessed in respect of six codes, viz., more difficult for banks to maintain a customerMonetary and Financial Policy Transparency, profile. The challenge, therefore, is to ensureFiscal Transparency, Banking Supervision, that banks know their customers withoutSecurities Market Regulation, Payment and hindering the smooth flow of financialSettlement System and Corporate transactions.Governance. Currently, assessment is beingThe Reserve Bank has issued severalundertaken with regard to Special Dataguidelines to banks and non-banking financialDissemination Standards.companies to implement the ‘Know Your108January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004Customer’ principle. The basic aim is to post-shipment credit above 90 days. In theprevent banks being unwittingly used as the context of globalisation, however, what onechannel of funds derived from criminal activity needs to keep in mind is that even thoughor financing terrorism. The guidelines relate finance is a critical ingredient of production,to identification of depositors and institution what matters even more is the demand forof systems and procedures to control financial the product and its competitiveness on qualityfrauds, identify money laundering and considerations. Finance can only act as asuspicious activities and scrutinise / monitor facilitator when these two preconditions arelarge-value cash transactions. satisfied. This is vindicated by the recentsurge in growth of exports of automotiveIn India, recognising the paramount rolecomponents and C.D. Roms.of exports in the overall growth process of theeconomy, the Government of India and theThe initiative with regard to the settingReserve Bank of India have, over time, takenup of an Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) inseveral measures to ensure adequate flow ofthe banking sector for the benefit of thecredit towards export related activities. Theexporters and importers bears mentioning.important measures include rationalisation andEDI provides several benefits to theliberalisation of export credit interest rates,corporates such as operational efficienciesflexibility in repayment/pre-payment of pre-and cost savings by elimination of paperwork,shipment credit, simplification of procedureslogistical benefits by better scheduling andrelating to exports (like direct despatch ofreduced stockholding etc., and strategicshipping documents and enhancement inbenefits through competitive advantage andnormal period for realisation of exportaccess to new markets. Under the EDI project,proceeds), flexibility to banks to source foreignone of the major benefits for the exporters iscurrency funds for granting pre-shipmentthat the RBI has abolished GR forms forcredit in foreign currency (PCFC) and exportexport transactions. The exporters can nowbill rediscounting (EBR) scheme andfill up a common Statutory Declaration Formintroduction of a transparent reporting system(SDF) for the customs from where the datafor export credit interest rates.relevant to the banks and the RBI can beextracted. Presently, EDI is working at 23 portsAt present, exporters have the optioncovering 80 per cent of exports. Under theto avail of pre-shipment and post-shipmentEDI project, bank branches at 114 exportcredit in foreign currency from banks in India.intensive centers identified by the Ministry ofIn order to encourage competition amongCommerce are to be provided connectivitybanks and also to increase flow of credit towith the customs authorities.the export sector, the Reserve Bank of Indiahas liberalised interest rates on local The Reserve Bank has provided thecurrency export credit effective May 1, 2003 enabling conditions for promotion of trade andfor pre-shipment credit above 180 days and investment, both domestic and international,109January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004by ensuring adequate liquidity, a competitive As the Indian economy opens up, thereinterest rate regime measures to encourage is general need for better risk managementdecentralised decision making and ease through proactive building of investmentprocedures in the credit delivery systems and fluctuation reserve (IFR), provisioning inmost importantly financial stability in the midst respect of problem assets, putting in placeof a world economy beset by uncertainty and systems that monitor unhedged externalrecessionary trends. It is now necessary for liabilities along with measures to contain suchmarket participants to have enough risks, active use of available derivatives andconfidence to make investment decisions. the development of markets for riskmanagement products.And what would banks need to do ?Along with the risk-based internal audit,Banks need to continue to adequately financethe banks must also put in place proper riskactivities that are of crucial importance tomanagement architecture, strengthen the MISgrowth. The fostering of entrepreneurship inand Information Technology, address HRDnew industrial activities, in the emergingissues and set up compliance units. Theseservices sector and other non-traditionalsteps will enable a smooth transition to theactivities, will all require proactive financing.risk-based supervision which is currently beingBanks need to bear in mind that risk isimplemented in India. The risk-basednot merely compliance with regulatorysupervision provides incentives to the banksguidelines. The regulatory guidelines can atfor adoption of more sophisticated riskbest represent the minimum requirementsmanagement techniques and this togetherwhich the Supervisor expects each bank towith sound corporate governance should leadachieve. Through efficient risk managementto the creation of a banking system which issystems they can create value for themselvesworld class.by making the best use of their capital whichThe Reserve Bank, on its part, wouldwould by itself be a source of competitivecontinue to ensure financial stability,advantage to them besides generatingstrengthening of prudential norms with thepositive externalities for a sound and stablestrategy of convergence of international bestbanking system. The sophisticated bankspractice, consistent with our specific needs, ashave to set their own standards for riskalso progressive strengthening of themanagement depending on their risk appetite,supervisory framework. Accordingly, the focusthe products, the portfolios and the marketsof our policy initiatives would be on streamliningin which they operate. While Reserve Bankbanking operations in order to reducewould like banks to optimally manage credittransaction costs, infusing flexibility into theand market risks, operational risks should besystem, upgrading risk management systems,eliminated totally. As Walter Wristan saidenhancing the level of compliance by banks“Banking is the business of accepting,with accounting standards, operationalisingmanaging and transforming risk”.110January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004consolidated accounting practices and last and has been set up by Governor Dr. Y.V.Reddymost important of all, providing the public with which, through a consultative process, willa financial system they can trust. endeavour to simplify and rationalise theregulatory regime to move towards a clearWhile there is substantial progress in theand unambiguous framework.financial sector reforms initiated in 1991, theaccent at the present time is onIn another initiative, Standingimplementation of the reforms at the grassCommittee on Procedures and Performanceroots level. In this context, the endeavour isAudit on Public Services provided by theto facilitate ease of transactions by theReserve Bank is being set up to bench markcommon person, further broadening of thethe current level of services and to enhanceconsultative process and continued emphasisthe timeliness and quality of these services.on the institutional capacity to support growthThe Committee will also coordinate with theconsistent with stability. Furthermore, the creditAd hoc Committee on Customer Servicesdelivery system is being strengthened tobeing set up by each bank. These initiativesensure that financing gaps do not constrainwould, it is expected, bring about athe acceleration of growth.significant improvement in customer servicein the financial sector.In line with the philosophy underpinningthe Basel Accord, it is our attempt to moveThe central objective of financial reformsbanks to a risk-based supervisory systemis to attain a significant improvement in thewhere we enforce a certain discipline onefficiency of financial intermediaries and themarket players with strong self governanceendeavour of the Reserve Bank would be tostandards which are transparent to theprovide a regulatory framework in whichmarket, their investors and customers.economic agents can perform their activitiesTo face the increasing challenges and in an optimal manner. In this endeavour, thecomplexities in the context of globalisation Reserve Bank would approach issues in aand risk management, a Standing Technical collaborative manner, and in this, seek theAdvisory Committee on Financial Regulation hand of market participants.111
