Indian Banking Sector:Role in Triggering Future GrowthGood evening, Ladies and Gentlemen!2. It is both an honour and a privilege to attend this importantConference at the Indian Chamber of Commerce (ICC) in Kolkata. Fromhumble beginnings in the early 1920s, the ICC has come a long way andhas presently evolved into a leading national chamber operating fromKolkata. With banks being the mainstay of the financial system, I amsure that the deliberations in the Conference would have providedimportant insights to all attendees on how the banks' role is getting re-oriented in the new milieu. The Conference has a healthy mix ofparticipants spanning not only representation from the Government andeminent commercial bankers, but also people from auditing firms andgeneral audience. I am sure that this diversified representation wouldhave provided a varied perspective to each of the issues being debatedand thrown up possible solutions.Financial Sector and Economic Growth3. Banks' primary purpose is to mobilize otherwise idle savings for thepurpose of lending to productive investments. A lot of research work hasbeen undertaken to study the relationship between the financial sectorand real sector economic growth. The old model of economic growth asa function of land i.e. capital, labour, technology and entrepreneurshiphas been modified. The new paradigm of economic growth is that it is afunction of savings rate, return on investment and cost of intermediation.We can easily see the role and importance of the financial sector withregard to all of these three factors. Thus while there is consensus aboutfinance having significant impact on the quantity, quality ie productivitythValedictory address delivered by Shri R. Gandhi, Deputy Governor at 6 ICC Banking Summit on June 14, 2014 at Taj Bengal,Kolkata. Assistance provided by Ms Rekha Misra, Director, Dr. Saibal Ghosh, Assistant Adviser  & Shri Radheshyam Verma,Research Officer is gratefully acknowledged.and the efficiency of capital, jury is still out in determining whether it isthe banks or capital market which drives economic growth. Researchopinions and conclusions are equally divided. Very often the examplesof the United States of America and the United Kingdom are quoted toprove that it is the capital market which drives growth. To counter that,the examples of Germany and Japan are quoted to establish that it isthe banks which drive the growth.4. Banks constitute the backbone of a nation’s financial system,performing manifold functions through liquidity, maturity and risktransformation. Indeed, it needs no gainsaying that the health of theeconomy is, in a way, the mirror reflection of the banking system,especially in bank-based financial systems such as ours. Of course, thereverse is also equally true. I am reminded of a saying that a bank is likeheart of the human body and the capital it provides is akin to the blood init. So long as the blood circulates seamlessly, the organs remain soundand healthy. However, if for any reason, the blood were not supplied toany organ, then that part would be rendered useless. Not surprisinglytherefore, there is always a conscious attempt on the part of theReserve Bank to provide adequate liquidity and credit to all productivesectors of the economy.Indian Experience5. India has the distinction of long history of both banks and capitalmarket. Economic history of India narrates how both have been vibrantin many important cities, though Mumbai did dominate all others.However, slowly and steadily, especially in the last twenty five years or2so after the financial sector reforms, the banking sector has emerged asTHE source for investment funding.6. What has been the actual contribution of banks for engineeringinvestments in the Indian economy? Bank credit increased from ` 5billion as at end March 1951, to ` 13 billion by March 1961, ` 47 billionby March 1971, ` 254 billion by March 1981, ` 1164 billion by March1991, ` 5114 billion by March 2001, ` 39420 billion by March 2011 and` 52604 billion by March 2013. What has been the contribution of capitalmarket in these years? During the 1970s, while capital market helpedraising ` 10 billion worth of equity, bonds and debentures, banksextended credit worth ` 207 billion in that period. During the 1980s, thecorresponding figures were ` 233 billion and ` 910 billion. In the 1990s,they were ` 1172 billion and ` 3950 billion respectively and in 2000sthey were ` 2115 billion and ` 34206 billion respectively. In the fiscal2011 and 2012, ` 318 billion by the capital market and ` 13284 billion bybanks.7. Actually banks do extend funds by way of investment in the bondsand debentures. As these are heavily in government bonds, rather thanin those issued by corporates and the split figures are not readilyavailable, I have not included them here.8. While we can lament the lackluster performance of the capital market,a redeeming feature has been the growth of private placement market inthe past twenty years. Though the issues thereat had beenpredominantly in the form of bonds and debentures, the growth in size3has been very reassuring. It gained popularity from mid 1990s; from1995-96 to 2000-01, this market raised ` 752 billion, in the next tenyears, it helped raise ` 7614 billion and in fiscal 2011-12 and 1012-13,this market raised ` 2009 billion.9. While we are happy that banks have been doing such a wonderfulyeoman service for the growth of the economy, will we be happy tocontinue to depend on bank financing as the predominant mode? Arewe compelling the banks take too much risk, thereby endangering thedepositors’ money?10. However, taking note of the predominant position of banks in theIndian financial system and taking a realistic view, can we expect thebank finance to comprehensively cater to all types of investment needs?Irrespective of whether it is short, medium or long term, or whether it isloan, debt or equity financing, or it is with low, medium or higher riskpropositions? Should we turn our banks like the universal banks inGermany, catering to every type of investment demand of the entireeconomy?11. Or, alternatively, should we develop capital market so that it cancater the increasing need for investment and also risky investments?Like those in the USA?12. These are sets of questions that we need to ponder over and takestrategic decisions.Twelfth Plan413. 12th Five Year Plan aims to usher in faster, more inclusive andsustainable economic growth. It notes that today, India can sustain aGDP growth of 8 percent a year. Increasing this to 9 or 10 percent willneed more mobilization of investment resources; better allocation ofthese resources through more efficient capital markets; higherinvestment in infrastructure through both public and PPP routes; andmore efficient use of public resources.14. Twelfth Plan has ambitious target for investments to usher in highgrowth rate of 8 percent during 2012-17. It aims to mobilise resourcesworth ` 5.4 trillion. The total public sector investment in infrastructureenvisaged in the Twelfth Plan is ` 16 trillion by the Centre and ` 12.89trillion by the States. Investment by the private sector, which includesPPP projects, makes up the balance of ` 26.83 trillion, which is 48.14percent of the required investment during the Twelfth Plan, a muchhigher share than the anticipated 36.61 percent during the EleventhPlan. Accordingly the Plan aims for an eclectic mix of development ofcapital market, more specifically debt market, besides exhorting bankfinance.15. Being from the Reserve Bank, let me ponder more over banks' rolein the coming years.Banking Sector Reforms16. Leading economists most often cite the importance of soundfinancial sector reforms as being central to a healthy banking systemthat aids economic growth. India is the largest country in South Asia withan extensive financial system characterized by varied financial5institutions, comprising of both banks and non-banks. Banks are themainstay of the financial system with bank assets comprising, onaverage, around 70 percent of GDP during the post-reform period. Thecommercial banking segment comprises of 26 public sector banks inwhich government has majority equity stake, 20 private sector, including7 de novo (which became operational after initiation of economicreforms in 1991) private banks, although RBI has recently done awaywith this distinction and over 40 foreign banks, which operate asbranches.17. Prior to the inception of financial sector reforms in 1991, the Indianfinancial system can best be characterized as highly regulated andfinancially repressed. The prevalence of high reserve requirements,interest rate controls and allocation of financial resources to pre-designated sectors adversely affected banks’ resource mobilization andallocation.18. The period 1992-97 laid the foundations for reforms in the bankingsystem. The reforms comprised of five major planks: cautious andproper sequencing, mutually reinforcing measures, complementaritiesbetween banking reforms and other associated policies (e.g., monetary,external, etc.), developing financial infrastructure and nurturing anddeveloping financial markets. Some of the salient reforms undertaken inthe financial system, included, among others, lowering of statutoryreserve requirements; liberalizing the interest rate regime, first on thelending side and later, on the deposit side; infusing competition byallowing more liberal entry of foreign banks and permitting theestablishment of de novo private banks; institution of prudentialmeasures (capital adequacy requirements, income recognition, asset6classification and provisioning norms for loans, exposure norms,accounting norms) and enhanced disclosures and levels of transparencyin their annual audited statements to promote market discipline.19. Over the period of reforms beginning 1992 through 2013, real bankassets have grown at a compound annual rate of about 10%; the growthrate of deposits and credit both in real terms, during the same periodhas been roughly of the order of 10% and 12%, respectively.20. I am happy to note that the issues deliberated today are those thatare likely to shape the future of the industry, going forward. I would liketo take this opportunity to share with you my views on some of theseand other related concerns, which, as I see it, will shape the contours ofthe industry in the years ahead.Financing of infrastructure21. The first issue, which immediately comes to my mind, is the issue ofinfrastructure financing. I am sure that this issue will also be uppermostin your minds as well. Inadequate infrastructure exerts a cascadingimpact on the economy, negatively affecting productivity, employment,personal income and international competitiveness and costs. The 12thFive Year Plan as mentioned earlier has estimated the infrastructurerequirement at around INR 56 trillion, with a gradually increasing role forthe private sector. Given the limited fiscal headroom and the longgestation lags involved in its fructification, there is a need to rope inlong-term providers of funds.Can banks chip in? Yes and in fact has already done so. As the capitalmarket's significance has been waning, bank finance for infrastructure7steadily grew. The outstanding bank credit to the infrastructure sector,which stood at ` 72 billion in 1999-2000, has increased to ` 7860 billionin 2012-13, registering a compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) ofover 40 per cent against an overall CAGR of bank finance to allindustries at 20 percent during the same period. However, this kind ofgrowth and the general economic downturn and policy conundrum haveresulted in concentration risk for banks (Infra funding is as high as 15%in the banking books); banks are saddled with large scale stress assetsin the infra segment. Further, there is the structural problem of usingshort term nature of the bank funds for very long term funding. Banks didevolve a midway solution, of medium tenor funding for 12 to 15 years.This, though solved the initial problems, is fundamentally a weakarrangement and the recent stress period has brought the cracks intoopen.   Banks will have to appropriately structure their infrastructurelending keeping in view their asset-liability mix; they also may have toraise long term resources. They should develop long-tenor fixed rate orfloating rate products or develop appropriate hedging instruments totackle counterparty and other risks. Takeout finance is another possiblesolution, as do Infrastructure Debt Funds (IDFs). These initiatives arepresently at a nascent stage, but hold long-term promise.22. Over the longer-term, an efficient and vibrant corporate bond marketis a sine qua non for ensuring viable financing of infrastructure. Byfacilitating long-term funding for the sector, it can provide much-neededdebt capital that will be beneficial to both borrowers and investors alike.This will also ensure deep and broad financial markets, one of the keypillars of RBI’s financial sector policies.Financing of SMEs823. A second issue I would like to touch upon is the financing of micro,small and medium enterprises or MSMEs, as we call them. In 2011-12,the sector accounted for a significant proportion of manufactured outputand over 12 per cent of our GDP. In addition to their strong exportorientation, they also have a strong employment potential, providingbread- and butter to nearly 100 million people, perhaps next only to theagricultural sector. With a big chunk of them being located in rural areas,it also offers tremendous potential for rural development. Given theirforward and backward linkages with the corporate sector, I view them as"silent" engines of growth, especially in slow economic cycles.24. Numerous studies have documented that, given the lack ofreputation and tangible collateral, debt financing, mostly from informalsources, comprises the primary source of external funds for theseentities. Given the often onerous documentation requirements for banks,these entities tend to get a raw deal when it comes to bank finance. TheFourth Census of MSME revealed that only 5.2 per cent of the units(both registered and unregistered) had availed of finance throughinstitutional sources; the majority of units - 93% of them in fact - hadeither no finance or depended on self-finance. A World Bank EnterpriseSurvey in 2011 also reinforces these conclusions. The moot point is thatthe credit flow to MSMEs from institutional sources is not commensuratewith the economic activity undertaken by them.25. A RBI Discussion Paper in 2013 had propounded an innovativecombination of banks and private equity, with a potential role of state inproviding credit enhancement mechanisms/ solutions as a way out ofthis credit constraint. It also put forth the proposal that small banks canprovide a useful role by catering to the needs of this segment, forexample, through relationship banking.926. There is also an oft-heard complaint from bankers that MSMEs areoften quite lackadaisical when it comes to settling their dues. It needs tobe recognised that MSMEs often act as ancillaries to large industries,and their cash flows are lumpy. The business orientation of largeindustries often affects the MSMEs directly, in turn hampering therecycling of funds and business operation of MSME units. Banks need totake a proactive view, carefully analyzing the linkages of the MSMEunits, when sanctioning funds. The existing provisions of the Interest onDelayed Payment Act, 1998 for these entities have been suitablymodified taking on board their unique characteristics. In addition,  bankshave been advised to sanction separate sub-limits within the  overalllimits  sanctioned  to  the  corporate  borrowers  for  meeting  paymentobligations in respect of purchases from MSME sector. The Parliamenthas passed the Factoring Regulation Bill that is expected to addressdelays in payment and liquidity problems of micro and small enterprises.I am sure that these measures will contribute in no small measuretowards alleviating the extant constraints that plague this sector.Mobilising Resources27. As we have seen, country needs enormous resources for itsdevelopment. How do we raise them? Banking sector has a major rolehere, in mobilizing the savings of the people. As at end March 2014, thescheduled commercial banks had mobilized deposits to the tune of ` 76trillion. There are 146 scheduled commercial banks (including theRegional Rural Banks) in the country, with more than 1.2 lakh branchesundertaking this activity. However, to support economic growth, we needto reach out more and hence there is a need for more banks to befunctioning in India. Not just more banks, perhaps we need more variety10of banks. I am not talking about public, private, foreign bank varietyhere. I am talking about the variety of functions that they will undertake,the niche in which they want to excel. Accordingly, the Reserve Bankhas decided to license more banks. Two licenses we have givenrecently. We intend to offer this on tap basis. We are working on new setof guidelines for both full service commercial banks and differentiallylicensed banks. We hope that with more number of players, the bankingsector will mobilize more resources for funding faster economic growth,will bring in financial inclusion and thereby support inclusive growth in asustainable way.Conclusion28. I have touched upon several issues that are of contemporaryrelevance and are expected to remain important for quite some time inthe near future. Conferences such as these offer a platform forinterchange of views in a structured and systemic manner, whilst takinginto consideration the regional-specific concerns as well. I hope that theorganizers will not stop at this one-off Conference and instead, willarrange follow-up discussions to further brain storm the issues andensure that the discussions reach their logical conclusion.29. Thank you.11
