*Demystifying Basel IIFriends, it gives me great pleasure to share my thoughts on someof the elements of Basel II implementation in India with this augustgathering.  I firmly believe that periodical sharing of thoughts andviews by us on issues of topical relevance with bankers - bothdomestic and foreign; eminent bank regulators and supervisorsfrom abroad; and above all - the users of the banking system, isfundamental for promoting greater transparency andunderstanding of the intent and purposes of various regulatoryinitiatives. I, therefore, would like to thank the organizers for givingme this wonderful opportunity to take this process forward.2. Reserve Bank’s association with the Basel Committee onBanking Supervision (BCBS) – the owner of the Basel II framework- dates back to 1997 as India was among the 16 non-membercountries that were consulted in the drafting of the Basel CorePrinciples. Reserve Bank of India became a member of the CorePrinciples Liaison Group in 1998 and subsequently became amember of the Core Principles Working Group on Capital. Withinthe Working Group, RBI has been actively participating in thedeliberations on the Basel II framework and had the privilege tolead a group of six major non-G-10 supervisors which presented aproposal on a simplified approach for Basel II to the Committee.3. The subject matter for our discussion today is “DemystifyingBasel II”. All of you will agree that we would be able to demystifysomething which is a mystery in the first place. I am not sure howmany will agree that Basel II is a mystery. Since I personally_______________________________* Special address by Shri V.Leeladhar, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the FICCI-IBAConference on 'Global Banking: Paradigm Shift', Mumbai on September 26, 20062believe that Basel II is not a mystery, my assignment becomesmore challenging.  At the outset we may agree that while Basel II -as a framework - might not be a mystery, some elements of theframework might be a mystery for some people.  I, therefore,propose to deal with certain specific elements of the Basel IIframework, which has been a challenge to us - and we might notbe alone in that respect.  I believe a better understanding of therelevant perspectives among banks, regulators, users of thebanking system and other market players would be useful for aneffective and meaningful implementation of Basel II.Approach to reforms4. With the commencement of the banking sector reforms in theearly 1990s, the RBI has been consistently upgrading the Indianbanking sector by adopting international best practices.  Theapproach to reforms is one of having clarity about the destination,deciding on the sequence and modulating the pace of reforms tosuit Indian conditions. This has helped us in moving ahead with thereforms in a purposeful but non-disruptive manner.Basel I5. I would like to briefly mention the progress made by theIndian banking system with regard to Basel I implementationbefore we discuss Basel II implementation. Adopting our generalapproach of gradualism, we implemented the Basel I frameworkwith effect from 1992-93 which was, however, spread over 3 years– banks with branches abroad were required to comply fully by endMarch 1994 and the other banks were required to comply by endMarch 1996. Further, India responded to the 1996 amendment to3the Basel I framework which required banks to maintain capital formarket risk exposures, by initially prescribing various surrogatecapital charges for these risks between 2000 and 2002. Thesewere replaced with the capital charges as required under the BaselI framework in June 2004, which become fully effective from March2005. With the successful implementation of banking sectorreforms over the past decade, the Indian banking system hasshown substantial improvement on various parameters.  It hasbecome robust and displayed significant resilience to shocks.There is ample evidence of the capacity of the Indian bankingsystem to migrate smoothly to Basel II norms.Why Basel II?6. I now propose to discuss a fundamental issue which hasbeen raised and addressed in the context of Basel IIimplementation not only in India but elsewhere – “Why implementBasel II?”  Many of us who are from the financial sector are awareof the main incentives for adoption of Basel II.  These are– it is more risk sensitive;– it recognizes developments in risk measurement and riskmanagement techniques employed in the banking sector andaccommodates them within the framework;– it aligns regulatory capital closer to economic capital.These elements of Basel II take the regulatory framework closer tothe business models employed in banks.  Further, the Basel Iframework can be seen as a “one size fits all” model whichmeasures risk broadly and it is necessary for the regulator todiscriminate among banks on the basis of their risk profiles. Whilethese reasons are generally available from the vast amount of4literature available in public domain, I would like to share with youhow the Reserve Bank views the Basel II framework and this mayalso be the perspective which other regulators might share.7. In India, we have 88 commercial banks, which account forabout 82% (total assets) of the financial sector; over 2000cooperative banks, which account for about 5%; and 133 RegionalRural Banks, which account for about 3%. The policy approach toBasel II in India is such that external perception about Indiaconforming to best international standards remains positive.Taking into account the size, complexity of operations, relevanceto the financial sector, need to ensure greater financial inclusionand the need for having an efficient delivery mechanism, thecapital adequacy norms applicable to these entities have beenmaintained at varying levels of stringency. On the first track, thecommercial banks in India will start implementing Basel II witheffect from March 31, 2007. They will initially adopt theStandardised Approach for credit risk and the Basic IndicatorApproach for operational risk. After adequate skills are developed,both by the banks and also by the supervisors, some banks maybe allowed to migrate to the Internal Rating Based (IRBA)Approach and Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA). Thecooperative banks, on the second track, are required to maintaincapital for credit risk as per Basel I framework and throughsurrogates for market risk; the Regional Rural Banks, on the thirdtrack, have a minimum capital requirement which is, however, noton par with the Basel I framework. Consequently, we will have amajor segment of systemic importance on a Basel II framework, aportion of the minor segment partly on Basel I framework, and the5smallest segment on a non-Basel framework. One might say thatwe are adopting a three-track approach with regard to capitaladequacy rules. Further, we are approaching Basel II as a meansto achieve an end – the goal being vastly improved riskmanagement systems in the Indian banking sector.  Even thoughthe commercial banks will be adopting the simpler optionsavailable under the Basel II framework, the supervisory focus willbe primarily on enhancing the quality of risk management systemsin these banks.8. Notwithstanding the above, in contrast to Basel I, the revisedframework is highly complex and makes its understanding andimplementation a great challenge to not only the regulatorycommunity but also to the regulated community. Much of thecomplexity stems from the variety of available options, the likelyimpact of diversity in exercise of national discretions, lack of clarityon regulatory approach to various implementation issues -especially in a cross border situation and the likely unintendedscope for regulatory arbitrage. In addition to the complexity ofBasel II, there have been other issues which have been raised atvarious fora suggesting that the revised framework, as designed, islikely to pose other threats/ challenges to some economies. Someof these issues are procyclicality, herding behaviour, likely adverseimpact on emerging market economies.Basel II Challenges9. I would now like to discuss some of the challenges which wehave faced in our journey to Basel II implementation and how wehave attempted to address these challenges.  I am sure the6regulators in other jurisdictions would also have faced similarissues and they would have devised their own strategies foraddressing them. As a part of the consultative process and with  aview to ensuring smooth migration to the new framework, we haveconstituted a ‘Steering Committee’ comprising of representativesfrom fourteen select private sector banks, public sector banks andforeign banks, the Indian Banks’ Association and the ReserveBank of India. The Steering Committee has examined variousissues of the Basel II framework and made its recommendations tothe Reserve Bank for consideration. Hence, we might say that thebanks and the Reserve Bank have worked together to address thechallenges. Some of these are discussed below:(a) Which level / approach?10. When Basel II framework was being finalized and even soonafter its finalization the general indications were that many banksin major jurisdictions would aim at implementing Internal RatingsBased Approach (IRBA) for credit risk and AdvancedMeasurement Approach (AMA) for operational risk straightaway.  Itwould be seen that the main incentive for this stance might havebeen that adoption of IRBA / AMA would reduce the capitalrequirements for banks and thus, enable them to achieve bettercapital efficiency.  This stance of the banks / regulators in otherjurisdictions seemed to put some pressure on banks in India alsoto adopt IRBA / AMA directly.  There were some thoughts in somequarters that if the banks in India do not adopt IRBA / AMA, theyrun the risk of being viewed as inferior banks and consequently thesystem might be branded as a secondary citizen in the global7financial markets.  As mentioned earlier, our approach to reformshas been to align with the international best practices but adoptthem in a manner and pace as suitable to our economy andenvironment.  Therefore, we have consciously decided to mandatethe Standardized Approach and Basic Indicator Approach to allscheduled commercial banks in India as the first step in migrationto Basel II.  We also observe that as compared to the initialindication, the number of international banks which are looking todirectly adopt IRBA / AMA at the first instance has reduced. Manyjurisdictions require only a few banks to adopt IRBA / AMA whileall the other banks would be on the simpler approaches. Weobserve that our approach to Basel II implementation has beenwidely appreciated and there is a general element of cautionadvocated while allowing banks to adopt the IRBA / AMA.(b) External Ratings11. Since our banks are required to adopt StandardisedApproach for credit risk, it is incumbent upon the Reserve Bank toaccredit the external rating agencies whose ratings the banks mayrely upon for capital adequacy purposes.  In India, we have 5domestic agencies – the oldest commenced ratings in 1987 andyoungest one was established last year.  We are confronted with asituation where it is likely that only about 10% of banks’ corporateexposures are rated by these external rating agencies.  One might,therefore conclude that the banks in India would be effectivelyapplying the Basel I risk-weight (viz. 100 per cent) for most of theircorporate exposures even after adopting Basel II. This may beseen as a major disincentive for banks to migrate to Basel II. Our8interactions with the domestic rating agencies indicate that theyare equipped to scale their resources, in case of need, to cater to ahigher demand for ratings consequent upon implementation ofBasel II. At present, the ratings in India are issue specific and notissuer specific. The rating agencies are also putting in placemethodologies for undertaking issuer ratings, if required by themarket.  Hence it is expected that, with the implementation ofBasel II in India, the proportion of rated entities is likely to increaseover a period – providing the appropriate basis for riskdiscrimination in the system.12. In the light of the level of rating penetration at present, one ofthe suggestions was that until a significant proportion of corporateexposure of banks is covered by external ratings, banks may beallowed to use their internal ratings in respect of those exposureswhich do not have an external rating.  While the intent behind thesuggestion is clear, it would be necessary to appreciate that bankswould have to go through a rigorous process under the Basel IIframework before they are allowed to use their internal ratings forcapital adequacy purposes. Further, the Basel II framework doesnot envisage the use of internal ratings to supplement the externalratings under the standardised approach. Hence, the suggestionwas not accommodated.13. Another issue which keeps coming up at various fora is theissue of assigning a lower risk-weight of 100 per cent for unratedentities and higher risk-weight of 150 per cent for entities ratedbelow “BB(-)”, thereby providing the corporates a perverseincentive to remain unrated.  Since it might not be fair to assume9up-front that all unrated entities are high risk entities, we havedecided to presently adopt the 100 per cent risk weight for unratedexposures – as prescribed in the Basel II framework.  However, wepropose to review the health of unrated exposures in banksthrough the pillar II process as well as the other onsite and offsitefeedback mechanisms and revise the risk-weights for unratedexposures, if warranted.14. The domestic rating agencies are also placed in a uniquesituation, which impacts their default statistics.  Two significantfactors in this regard are: (a) they have a small base of ratedentities and (b) they lack the geographical diversification benefitswhich the international rating entities enjoy.  Interaction with therating agencies have indicated that the processes andmethodologies adopted by them were generally in alignment withthose of the international rating agencies and despite the abovetwo constraining factors their default statistics may not be out ofsync with the Basel trigger ratios.(c) National Discretion15. The Basel II framework offers the national supervisors anelement of discretion in several areas to enable them to adopt theframework to suit their respective banking systems. It is likely thatthe discretion available under the framework might induceapprehension / expectation in some quarters that nationalsupervisors might adopt the most lenient options – thus diluting therigour of the Basel II framework.  In India, we have adopted anobjective approach while deciding on the items of national10discretion. Consequently, we have taken a conservative view oncertain areas of national discretion.  Some of the areas where thediscretion exercised by us is on a more conservative level are: State Government guaranteed exposures attract a higherrisk weight of 20 per cent, though the framework allows azero per cent risk weight. Exposures to public sector enterprises are treated on parwith corporate exposures though the framework allowsthem to be treated on par with bank or sovereignexposures. While, under option 1, we have discretion to apply 20%risk weight for exposures to all banks we have decided toextend this concessionary risk-weight only to exposures toscheduled banks.  Exposures to non-scheduled banks willbe treated separately and assigned a risk-weight of 100%. Though the Basel II framework allows lower risk-weight of35% for residential mortgage and 75% for personal loans(as part of retail) we have opted to assign a higher risk-weight of 75% for residential mortgage and 125% forpersonal loans.These are hard decisions which we, as a regulator, have takenwith a view to capturing the true level of underlying risk knowingfully well that this might cast a burden on the banks in India.(d) Internal Capital Adequacy Assessment Process16. The internal capital adequacy assessment process whichforms an important element of Pillar II is an integral and importantpart of the Basel II framework.  Yet, some doubts are being raised11with regard to its relevance for banks adopting StandardisedApproach and Basic Indicator Approach. I would like to mentionhere that though Pillar II is not a formal part of Basel I framework,the Reserve Bank has been discharging some of the Pillar IIresponsibilities even under the current framework. The Basel IIframework takes this a step forward by making it a formalrequirement. The additional element which casts some formalresponsibility on the banks under the new framework is that banksare required to put in place an effective internal capital adequacyassessment process (ICAAP) which should not only address the 3major risks (viz. credit risk, market risk, and operational risk) butalso other risks for which explicit capital has not been prescribedunder Pillar I. Further, banks are also required to address suitablyother dimensions of the three Pillar I risks. A professionallymanaged bank would suo moto strive to plan for and achieve mostefficient use of capital even if there were no formal regulatoryrequirement. The ICAAP merely attempts to formalise these effortsof bank managements as a part of the capital adequacyframework. I am sure this would clarify the relevance of includingICAAP as an integral part of Pillar II.(e) Stress testing17. Stress testing has become an integral part of banks’ riskmanagement systems and is used to evaluate their potentialvulnerability to certain unlikely but plausible events or movementsin financial variables.  The supervisory review process under Pillar2 of Basel II framework is intended not only to ensure that bankshave adequate capital to support all the risks in their business, but12also to encourage banks to develop and use better riskmanagement techniques in monitoring and managing their risks.Banks must demonstrate, under the internal capital adequacyassessment process prescribed by Pillar 2, that they have enoughcapital to not only meet the minimum capital requirements but alsoto withstand a range of severe but plausible shocks.  In the abovebackground, the need for banks in India to adopt ‘stress tests’ as arisk management tool has been emphasised in the Annual PolicyStatement announced by the Governor in April 2006. The draftguidelines in this regard were issued and the same are underfinalisation on the basis of the feedback received from marketparticipants. I would therefore urge banks to approach stresstesting as an integral part of the Basel II framework.(f) Data requirements18. The general reaction is that ‘Basel II is data intensive andpaucity of acceptable data is a challenge to meaningful Basel IIimplementation”. As I understand, the data requirements for banksimplementing Standardised Approach and Basic IndicatorApproach under Basel II are not very significant. It is largely similarto the data captured under Basel I. However, banks need tocapture more granular details of their credit risk exposures toenable them to assess the capital requirements accurately. Thisplaces a demand on their MIS, which might require a certaindegree of fine tuning, to capture exposure-wise details of (i) creditrisk mitigants, (ii) availability of external ratings, (iii) specificprovisions held in the case of non performing assets etc. Manybanks have attempted to achieve this by opting for core banking13solutions while others have attempted to achieve this through abetter reporting framework.(g) Operational risk19. The capital charge prescribed for operational risk under theBasic Indicator Approach – viz. 15 per cent of the average grossincome for the preceding three years – is considered by some astoo high, especially because most of the commercial banks aresimple traditional banking entities. In some quarters the 15 percent norm is considered to be relevant only for sophisticated,complex, tech-savvy global banks in developed economies.Another point put across in support of this argument is that the losson account of frauds in banks in India is only a fraction of thecapital requirement specified for banks adopting BIA, which isseen to be in the range of 1 to 5 percent of the gross income.Therefore, Basel II is considered as a burden on banks. Here, Iwould like to mention that it would be inappropriate to assume that(a) operational risk losses manifest only in tech-savvy and complexbanks and (b) that in other banks it manifests only as frauds.Operational risks are assumed by all banks and further operationalrisk losses manifest in other forms, which banks ought to reckon tohave a wholesome picture of their exposure to operational risk.  Iwould, therefore, urge banks to put in place sound and efficientoperational risk management framework since this will be a focusunder the Pillar 2 framework. Further, we would encourage banksto compile comprehensive operational loss data – over a period –to enable them to establish beyond doubt the actual level of theiroperational risk losses.14Conclusion20. As I mentioned earlier, “flexibility” has been the hallmark ofour reform process, which was evident in our Basel Iimplementation. Taking into account the concerns that may ariseduring the course of Basel II implementation, it may be necessaryfor us regulators, especially in the emerging economies, to adopt aflexible approach while implementing Basel II.21. As I mentioned at the outset, I had set out to demystifysomething which I thought was not a mystery in the first place. Ihave tried to share some of my thoughts on certain elements of theBasel II framework – as we have approached them in ourimplementation efforts. I am sure this exchange of thoughts andviews would have added greater clarity to our implementationefforts and placed some of the important elements of Basel II inthe right perspective.22. While, I have focused to a large extent on the challenges thatwe, as a system, face in the implementation of Basel II, I would liketo balance this with the thought that Basel II does not pose justchallenges, it also offers considerable opportunities to banks toupgrade their risk management systems and thus become moreefficient and competitive.Thank you.
