Recent Developments in India*I am thankful to the organisers, especially Dr. Ramakrishnan for persuading me tojoin you and share my thoughts and experiences on fiscal and monetary developments inIndia.  Clearly, the main focus of the workshop is on fiscal management, and theparticipants are drawn from several countries with divergent sizes, structures and stagesof development of their economies.  Therefore, in this presentation, a judicious mix ismade of general observations, experience of India and some issues on the interfacebetween fiscal and monetary policies.  Of course, the subject is viewed essentially fromthe perspective of a central banker.  The first part provides a broad framework forappreciating the interface between monetary and fiscal policies.  The second part relatesto India and describes the pre-reform status, the consequences, the reform measures, acritique and the current status, concluding with outlook and features.  The third part posesseveral issues that appear to be of general interest to policy makers, especially inFrameworkAt the outset, it must be recognised that both fiscal and monetary policies areessential components of overall macro-economic policy and thus cannot but share theimplying equity considerations also, a reasonable degree of price stability and a viablebalance of payments situation.  However, all these objectives may not always be inharmony, and major concerns of each component may be different apart from thedifferences in time horizon of the concerned policy focus.  For policy makers, one of thechallenges is the coordination between the fiscal and monetary policies and undoubtedlythe nature of interaction between them depends on country- specific situation.  Yet, thereare a range of issues involved in monetary and fiscal coordination which can beaddressed within a broad common framework.In c onsidering the issues of coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, itwould be useful to clarify what constitutes fiscal policy and what monetary policy isabout.  A clear statement on this, useful for policy makers, is available in the IMFbasic objectives such as high economic growth on a sustainable basisdeveloping and transition economies.Friends,Interface : Fiscal and Monetary Policy publication “Government Budgeting and Expenditure Controls : Theory and Practice”, byMr. Premchand.  Thus, fiscal policy consists “of the use of taxes, government spending,and public debt operations to influence the economic activities of the community indesired ways and is concerned with the allocation of resources between the public andprivate sectors and their use for the attainment of stability and growth”.  The use of theterm fiscal policy here is limited because, as mentioned by Mr. Premchand, it excludesdebt management which has been viewed as part of monetary policy.  The point is furtherelaborated when it is stated that “Government action can be considered to be purely afiscal policy matter only when the effect of borrowing is neutral in terms of theavailability of money to the private sector.  Pure fiscal policy is, however, rare, becauseany change in revenues and expenditures involves changes in the financing of the budgetsurplus or deficit and, hence, always has an interface with monetary policy.  Managementof the debt – particularly, the composition of the instruments, the timing of their issue,Very briefly stated, for policy purposes, the most critical link or even overlapbetween the two policies relates to public debt operations and debt management.In the academic literature, the optimal mix of monetary and fiscal policies hasbeen analysed with respect to different exchange rate regimes.  In the abstract academicworld of perfect capital mobility and no non-traded goods for a country with a smallshare of world output, apparently the issue of an optimal mix between monetary andfiscal policies simply does not exist. In this academic approach, fiscal policy is effectiveif the exchange rate is fixed while monetary policy is effective when exchange rate isflexible.  However, in the real world, choices are not clear for the policy makers thoughAt an applied level, the relationship between fiscal and monetary policies may beanalysed in the context of public debt, especially in terms of choice between bondfinancing and money financing of fiscal deficit.  There has been a theoretical debate onthe subject and there is a view point that under certain specific conditions, monetisationof government deficit may not have an adverse effect.  At the same time, it is clear thatmonetisation beyond a certain level could have adverse consequences over a period. A2theory does provide some clues to practice.and their duration – are aspects more closely associated with monetary policy”.distinction also needs to be made between direct monetisation and monetisation throughoperations in the secondary market.Fiscal deficit, defined to be on cash basis for this discussion, can be financedeither through bond issuance or money creation.  Bond financing entails  net placementof government debt in financial markets, either in domestic or in foreign markets.  Moneyfinancing, on the other hand, involves change in the monetary base arising out of changesin net central bank credit to government and thus is a combined effect of central bank’sFurthermore, such financing of the fiscal deficit may be non-voluntary orvoluntary.  Thus, a central bank may be obligated to extend credit to government throughwhat has been described as “automatic monetisation”.  Similarly Government securitiesmay be placed in captive market by legal stipulations, say on Provident Funds, insuranceand  banking.  Moreover, the financing of fiscal deficit may be at market determined ormarket related rates or at highly concessional rates, the latter being a byproduct of non-It should be obvious that each form of financing of fiscal deficit has its ownconsequences, and does impact on monetary policy.  While reliance on domestic credithas implications for credit availability for commercial sector, interest rates and monetarybase, reliance on foreign borrowing additionally impinges on management of externalsector.  Non-voluntary financing may also result in crowding out of the private sector.The analytics of fiscal-monetary policy interface is thus not confined only to the quantumof monetisation of fiscal deficit, but extends to optimal financing mix for the fiscal deficitthat stabilises inflation, interest rates and exchange rates at  levels conducive forWhile monetisation of government deficit could provide primary liquidity to themarket, liquidity creation could take place through other channels also, namely; thecentral bank enlarging its holding of foreign currency assets; expanding its lending to thecommercial sector; and conducting open market operations divested from the3government’s budgetary considerations.macroeconomic stability.voluntary financing.contribution to primary issues, open market operations and clean advances.Pre-reform StatusAfter independence, a nd as part of planned development, the macro-economicpolicy in India, as was the case in many other developing countries moved from fiscalneutrality to fiscal activism.  Such activism meant large developmental expenditures,much of it to finance long-gestation projects requiring long term finance.  The sovereignwas also expected to raise funds at fine rates, and understandably at below the marketrates for private sector.  A large borrowing programme with a strong preference for  lowinterest rates added to the demand for increasing monetisation of fiscal deficits. Reserve Bank of India had to manage the effects of large scale monetisation throughpreemption of commercial bank’s resources by hiking Statutory Liquidity Ratios andCash Reserve Ratios well beyond the limits warranted by genuine prudentialrequirements, while Government also preempted resources from other captive institutionssuch as provident funds, and nationalised insurance.  At one stage, well over one-half ofthe total resources raised by the banking system was preempted and as much as 15-16 percent was impounded under the cash reserve ratio at extremely low rates of remuneration.Under these circumstances, it became necessary to allocate credit and fix interest rates forboth deposits and credit, leading to a complex administered interest rate regime withAt the same time, as part of developmental initiatives, Reserve Bank providedfunds for development of industry, agriculture, housing, etc. through developmentfinancial institutions.  Reserve Bank also had to ensure successful borrowing of mandatedamounts at mandated uniform interest rates, by States and Public enterprises as part of thenational planning effort.Fiscal activism descr ibed above was expected to result in a virtuous cycle ofdevelopment.  No doubt, it served many useful purposes. However, the financial returnsto government out of its investments, either directly or through its enterprises turned outto be far lower than the cost of debt.  Hence, while liabilities in terms of public debt wereexpanding, assets created out of such borrowings failed to yield commensurate results.Such a gap between the cost of borrowing and the return continued to widen over time. Itis this imbalance between returns and cost of borrowing that resulted in gradual4Consequencescomplicated cross-subsidisation.Thedeterioration into a ‘soft budget–constraint’, particularly on account of easy monetisationand artificially low cost of debt.  Many efforts to improve financial returns of investmentsmade by government did not yield adequate results.  Hence, while assessing theconsequences of pre-reform status, it is essential to recognise that in all likelihood, it wasnot the fiscal activism per se but the soft-budget constraint enabled by the pattern offinancing of debt coupled with persistent inadequate returns on investments that causedIn view of soft-budget constraints, the fiscal deficits persisted, and over a period,deficits on the revenue account surfaced.  The automatic monetisation of deficits at lowinterest rates mounted through recourse to issue of ad hoc treasury bills at low interestrates at much less than half the market related rates.  The temporary mismatches betweengovernment receipts and expenditures during the year also became larger over time, sincePreemption of a large proportion of bank deposits and an administered interestrate regime resulted in high cost and low quality financial intermediation.   The spreadsbetween deposit and lending rates of commercial banks increased, while the administeredThere were inadequate incentives to state governments to ensure fiscal prudence,since the quantum and terms of borrowing were not related to fiscal promise orperformance.  Many public enterprises also tended to become beneficiaries of preemptioncern.Monetary policy was constrained by large and persistent fiscal deficits.  Reserve Bank’srole as a debt manager often dominated its role as monetary authority. The Reserve Bankas regulator of commercial banks used to some extent, regulations to subserve fiscalobjectives. The market for government securities and in fact for debt segment could notbe developed since a large part of government's borrowing was financed through non-voluntary mechanisms.  Monetisation of deficits required the Reserve Bank to seekseveral rearguard actions affecting the financial system, and over a period, led to macro-5For the Reserve Bank, fiscal dominance became the single largest area of coneconomic imbalances.of banks’ resources and directed lending.lending rates did not factor in credit risk.there was no compulsion towards cash management.macro imbalances.The impressive growth performance of the ‘eighties’ with reasonable stabilityshould be assessed in the light of severe macro-economic imbalances, partly attributableto the fiscal monetary interface.  The imbalances were evident from persisting revenuedeficits, large current account deficits and weaknesses in the financial sector.  Theeconomy was thus vulnerable to a crisis, which in fact was triggered by the Gulf war of1990-91.The reform measures initiated in the nineties, which were relevant to the fiscalFirst, the system of issuance of ad hoc treasury bills and automatic monetisationwas replaced with a system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA). The quantumavailable to government as WMA to meet temporary mismatches between receipts andexpenditure is now annually agreed upon between Reserve Bank and Government.  Theinterest rate is also agreed upon and is currently at Bank Rate.  There is a Cash and DebtManagement Group consisting of officials from the Government of India and the ReserveBank to coordinate cash and debt management.Second, an increasing pro portion of the fiscal deficit of the government is beingfinanced by borrowings at market related rates of interest.Third, there has been a reduction in preemptions of commercial banks’ resourcesfrom well over one-half to about a third of their resources.  Thus, the mandatoryFourth, the administered interest rate regime has been dismantled and there arevery few prescriptions of interest rates.  Consequently, the spread between deposit andlending rates of banks has come down.  Furthermore, the difference between the rate atwhich creditworthy corporates are able to raise debt and the rate at which the sovereign isborrowing has also narrowed.Fifth, Bank Rate has been activated and o pen market operations, including repoactivities have been intensified.  In the conduct of monetary policy, the emphasis now isSixth, a policy decision has been taken by Reserve Bank to eliminate its long termlending operations to commercial sector and to moderate other forms of monetisation by6moving towards indirect instruments.component of market financing of government borrowing has decreased.monetary policy interface can be summarised as under :Reform MeasuresSeventh, an appropriate legal,institutional and technological framework has been put in place for regulation anddevelopment of money, government securities and forex markets.  Both, the primary andsecondary segments of government securities market have exhibited more participants,larger turnover and greater depth.Eighth, most public enterprises have been moved out of what is described as“approved market borrowing programme” and thus the enterprises are encouraged toborrow from market through voluntary subscriptions.  Furthermore, States are alsoencouraged to access markets on a stand-alone basis for a part of their borrowingNinth, transparency in most of these operations is emphasised and data arereleased to market participants on all aspects of Reserve Bank’s operations, includingFinally, there have been several initiatives and measures in the fiscal arena tocontaining fiscal deficit as also the revenue deficit.  Reform of public sector enterprises have been subject to several doubts and criticisms, and themore important of them need to be reckoned.First, several analysts have pointed to the puzzle in India of high fiscal deficits inthe recent years without any spillover or adverse effects of higher inflation, higherinterest rates and larger current account deficit on the external front.  It will be useful toexplore several features of the situation that could explain this puzzle.  The level of fiscaldeficit should be viewed both as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product and thedomestic private savings.  Furthermore, private investment demand has been somewhatsubdued in the recent years because corporates faced with domestic and internationalcompetition seem to have concentrated more on capacity utilisation and productivityincreases.  There has also been a decline in the extent of monetised deficit.  It has alsobeen observed that a significant part of output growth in these years was on account ofthe services sector, which did not require large private investments.  With liberalisationof trade, there has been competitive pressure on prices of internationally traded goods,7These reform measuresCritiquehas also been initiated.  Public sector banks now have the brief of diversified ownership.those that impinge on fiscal issues.programme.reducing direct funding of developmental activity.especially manufactured goods, resulting in lower inflation rates.  These apart, thegovernment's borrowing programme was conducted with what analysts described as‘outstanding skills’ by resorting to several new institutional arrangements and innovativeinstruments but these are certainly not inexhaustible.  The current account in balance ofpayments was also characterised by strong inflow of private remittances and softwareexports, which moderated the trade deficit.  Clearly, as analysts point out, thisSecondly, it has been argued that the WM A and market related borrowingprogramme have not imparted the sensitivity and hard budget constraint that wereexpected.  Hence, it is opined that the new arrangements have had no beneficial impactother than hiking interest costs to Government and increasing its revenue deficits.  In thisregard, it should be obvious that quite possibly the system of automatic monetisationcould have resulted in even higher deficits than were noticed, especially due to theunprecedented political uncertainties. Furthermore, on all accounts, there is greatersensitivity and transparency to the whole process than hitherto, and this is evidenced byclear statements on fiscal containment incorporated in the electoral manifestos of majorpolitical parties.  Most important, development of debt markets is critical to efficientfinancial intermediation, especially for financing infrastructure and that would beinconceivable without a vibrant market for government securities. The governmentsecurities market also provides benchmarks for interest rates and is critical fortransmission of monetary policy, especially for use of indirect instruments. The system ofautomatic monetisation and concessional finance would be difficult to reconcile withefforts towards such vibrant markets for government securities.  It should also be notedthat a significant part of government debt is through small savings, etc. the real cost (thatis grossed for tax treatment) of which works to be out higher than the market borrowingprogramme.  Above all, as brought out clearly by Professor Vivek Murthy of IndianInstitute of Management, Bangalore in a recent study on the subject, the marketorientation of government borrowing programme had a significant favourable impact onthe cost of borrowings by the corporate sector.  In other words, recourse to automaticmonetisation and concessional resources to finance fiscal deficit is some sort of a burdenor tax on the non-governmental sector. The benefits of the new framework governing8extraordinary constellation of factors cannot be expected to last for long.monetary-fiscal interface go well beyond the simple quantum or cost of monetisation ormarket borrowing programme of government.  The proponents of consolidated balancesheet approach to government and central bank do, sometimes, ignore the dynamics ofThirdly, some observers argued that the Reserve Bank even in the new frameworkof fiscal-monetary mix has done little either to ensure fiscal discipline or pursueindependent monetary policy.  Reserve Bank has on several occasions articulated theimplications of fiscal dominance and Governor Dr. Jalan has been quite explicit on thissubject in his recent statements on Monetary and Credit Policy.  The final decisions onfiscal deficit are essentially the outcomes of dynamics of political economy expressedthrough sovereign will of Parliament.  It is only through an accord between a governmentand a central Bank that fiscal discipline can be brought about.  One of the notableachievements of Governor Dr. Rangarajan has been in bringing about such an accordthrough formal agreements to end automatic monetisation.  However, once a finaldecision is taken on the fiscal deficit by the government, Reserve Bank’s endeavour is toensure that it is financed in a way that is least disruptive to the macro economic stability,and is conducive to growth.  In fact, exercise of monetary policy without sensitivity to theCurrent StatusObviously, it would be inappropri ate to conclude that the reform process in thisrespect is anywhere near being complete.  However, distinct improvements in macrobalance and performance can be noticed.  Thus, there is evidence of greater degree ofoperational autonomy for monetary policy now than before. There is also increasingrecourse to indirect instruments of monetary policy and greater effectiveness intransmission channels of monetary policy.  Greater flexibility in interest rates is nownoticeable,  both for government and corporate sectors.  There is a widespread awarenessof the long term implications of a large borrowing programme on fiscal sustainability andmacroeconomic stability.  Government is receiving relatively high profit transfer from theReserve Bank.  There are signs of a more competitive and less inefficient financial sector.Finally, there are clear signs of developments towards deeper and dynamic financialmarkets.9reality of fiscal dominance will be counterproductive.financial markets and the macro economy while focussing on mere accounting aspects.The overall positive impact of the reform measures may be discerned from thefact that India has maintained impressive growth rates during recent years, withreasonable price stability, and stable interest and exchange rate regimes.  It must berecognised that this overall performance has been exhibited alongwith several bouts ofadverse exogenous factors in the late nineties.  The adverse factors include, surges incapital inflows, East-Asian crisis, sanctions imposed by U.S.A., border conflicts with aneighbouring country, electoral uncertainties, and more recently, steep increases in oilprices.  There is, therefore, reason to believe, that monetary-fiscal interface in India hasbeen improving, which is exhibited in the resilience to withstand external shocks while atOutlookWhile the policy mix and progress of reform has served the country well so far,First, while structurally the framework for coordination between fiscal andmonetary policies has been put in place with the introduction of WMA system, fiscaldominance is persisting.  Operational autonomy for monetary policy, critical for longerterm price stability and improved state of financial sector, demands rapid, qualitative andsustainable fiscal adjustment.Second, the systems and operating procedures in some of the public sector banksand of the larger enterprises operating in financial markets may have to be reviewed andThird, further progress in development of various segments of financial markets iscritical to enhance the policy effectiveness.  The major challenge here is to both regulateFourth, while pursuing with initiatives taken with State governments, the issue ofFifth, overall progress in both fiscal and monetary fronts would critically dependon the reform in not only publicly owned entities but also the real sector.Major features of reform in fiscal-monetary policy interface are not significantlydifferent from other areas of reform in India though reform of financial sector10Featuresseparation of debt management functions from monetary authority needs to be addressed.and develop markets without being intrusive while recognising the imperfections.changed to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy initiatives.the medium term outlook, however, is conditional upon several hard policy initiatives.the same time maintaining impressive growth and macro stability.commenced early in the cycle of reform process. First, has been `ownership` of reform inthe sense, the reform is designed and detailed by expert committees such as NarasimhamCommittee on financial sector and Rangarajan Committee on external sector. Second,various steps have been taken in a gradual manner and not as a big bang. Third, apragmatic approach is adapted in the sense that some elements of non-change is acceptedfor a while to win over opinion in favour of the desired change. Fourth, a consultativeprocess has been instituted; and for example, even draft guidelines or circulars of ReserveBank are circulated widely by putting them in the public domain before finalising.Standing Committees with membership from market participants and academics meetperiodically to advice the Reserve Bank in financial market reforms. In the consultativeprocess, care is taken to ensure confidentiality on specific proposals for action, whenevera potential for anticipatory actions is expected.Finally, trust and coordination, especially between Government and Reserve Bankis given a high priority.  Apart from continuous consultations on legislative, policy andoperational aspects of reform, there is a continuous dialogue in various matters ofOn earlier occasions in my presentations, the developments in monetary policyhad been characterised, as three C’s, ontinuity, ontext and hange.  In the context ofmonetary-fiscal interface, three more Cs need to be added, namely, It is inappropriate to draw any general lessons from the Indian experience, since,as mentioned early in the presentation, monetary-fiscal policy interface, like most otherpolicies is country specific.  However, in this regard, there seems to be merit in clarifyingsome broad issues, which are often debated and sometimes misunderstood.  These issuesare : How are monetary and fiscal impacts of debt policy different?  How do actions ofmonetary authority affect management of public debt, and how does management ofpublic debt affect conduct of monetary policy?  What are the various aspects of11coordination between monetary and fiscal actions?Issuesredibility. C onsistency and Coordination, CC C Ctechnical analysis and research between Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank.As mentioned alread y, there is no ideal level of fiscal deficit, and critical factorsare : How is it financed and what is it used for?  However, the fact remains that it is thefiscal policy that determines the size of debt and government debt is the most criticalthough not the only link with monetary policy.  While the size of public debt isdetermined by fiscal policy, the composition of debt is decided by debt managementpolicy.  The monetary impact depends on who holds the debt and how the holdingchanges rather than by who initially issues or subscribes to the debt.  The fiscal effectdepends on the rate at which the size of debt is changing and the cost of servicing thedebt.  The monetary effect is determined by the effect of public debt on aggregateThe actions of monetary authority affect public debt mainly in two ways.  Theinitial financial cost to government of placing debt depends, to some extent on the stanceof monetary policy, i.e. whether expansionary or restrictive.  The choice, design andoperation of monetary policy instruments also impact the debt service costs.  Forexample, liquidity of government securities may be enhanced by monetary authorityThe management o f public debt affects the conduct of monetary policy, especiallythe operational autonomy of the central bank in at least three different ways.   Theperceived sustainability of public debt often affects interest rates.  The public debtmanagement affects the demand for money.  Above all, the management of public debt,in countries like India, plays a critical role in development of domestic financial marketsIn vi ew of the complex nature of interface, coordination between fiscal andmonetary policies has to be considered from several angles.  As mentioned at the veryoutset of this presentation, both are aspects of shared overall macro-economic policyobjectives.  Hence, at the first level, the question is whether the relevant fiscal-monetarypolicy mix is conducive to the macro objectives.  The relevant policy mix relates to the12through open market operations and reserve requirements.Interactions in ManagementCo-ordinationand thus on conduct of monetary policy, especially for effective transmission.demand.Impact of Debt Policylevel of fiscal deficit, the pattern of financing especially the extent of monetisation andSecondly, whether operating procedures of monetary and fiscal authorities,especially debt and cash management are consistent and mutually reinforcing.  Theinteractions between operations of monetary authority and public debt managementThirdly, whether credibility of both monetary and fiscal policies is achieved in adesirable direction.  Thus, a credible monetary policy can help moderate interest ratesFourthly, whether due cognizance has been taken of the fact that monetary andfiscal policy adjustments operate in different timeframes.  Monetary policy as is wellknown, can be adjusted to alter monetary conditions at a shorter notice than fiscal policy.Monetary policy changes can be undertaken at any time, unlike fiscal policy changesFinally, harmonious implementation of policies may require that one policy is notunduly burdening the other for too long.  Mutual respect and reinforcement is Presentation by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at “Workshop on Budgetingand Financial Management in the Public Sector”, in John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard13University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A. on August 10, 2000.*undoubtedly the ideal to which both policies and authorities should subscribe.most of which are generally associated with the Annual Budget.provided the fiscal authority does not give rise to a different set of expectations.described earlier in this part of the presentation are obviously relevant.the dependence on external savings.
