Indian Banking : Paradigm Shift in Public Policy*Chairman, distinguished participants and friends,I am thankful to the organisers for inviting me to deliver this address. It is good to see thatthe focus on paradigm shift did not extend to shifting the traditional speaker at the ValedictoryAddress. Today’s address will be divided into five sections. The first section would capture theparadigm shift in the environment in the Indian banking as presented in the Conference and thedeliberations as captured by the Rapporteurs’ presentations. In the second section, I would like tohighlight the general achievements of public policy in the financial sector and in particular thebanking sector during the last ten years, so that we recognise our strengths. The third sectionwould be in the nature of critical introspection of public policy. It is meant to share somedilemmas and issues that might not have been highlighted so far or some aspects of policy thatcould have been misconstrued. The fourth section attempts a bold technical vision, unconstrainedby the existing policy framework and the possible political economy implications. The purposeof the bold technical vision is to provoke a debate for substantial paradigm shift in public policyin banking. The final section presents select actions under contemplation in the Reserve Bank ofIndia (RBI) which would enhance the scope for a paradigm shift in public policy.Paradigm Shift in the Indian Banking EnvironmentI am glad to note from the summary of the inaugural section that there is  a formalrecognition of the closeness between Indian Banks’ Association (IBA) and BECON and also thata holistic approach to industry is being considered as part of such closeness. In particular,Governor Jalan’s suggestion about setting up a group of 4-5 middle level officers is extremelyrelevant for operationalising not only capital adequacy requirement, but to do further work oncoping with the inevitable paradigm shift on the structural aspects.The most important point made in the first session is that mergers and acquisitions in thebanking sector must be market-led rather than prompted by Government or regulator, exceptperhaps where there is a systemic crisis. At the same time, there must be close monitoring andsupervision of merging institutions to preclude threats to systemic stability. Second, advancedrisk management systems, sophisticated information technology infrastructure, human expertiseand a comprehensive database are pre-requisites for Indian banks to adopt the New Basel CapitalAccord.  Indian banks must also improve their internal audit, loan review and internal ratingsystems. Third, capital requirements must be supplemented by adequate provisioning for non-performing assets. While capital adequacy constitutes an important part of supervision, unlessoverall economic reforms are pushed forward, problems of the real sector would spill into thebanking sector as well. Fourth, human resource management has assumed ever-greaterimportance, particularly in the post-VRS scenario. The measures should include retraining ofstaff, performance linked compensation packages, transparent promotion and transfer policies,etc. Fifth, regulatory issues relating to conversion of banks and Development FinancialInstitutions into universal banks should include enforcing corporate governance, transparency,consolidation of accounts, risk management and firewalls to prevent conflicts of interest relatingto the operational aspects.In the second session, there is a broad consensus on several issues relating to operationalaspects.1First, factors like market positioning, cost of intermediation and service delivery willdetermine the efficiency of banks with respect to their competitiveness. Indian banks need toreorient their business strategies to meet the challenges of a ‘buyer’s market’ and in this regard,public sector banks have certain core strengths which they can utilise to make the best of newopportunities. Second, given their size and customer base, the opportunities for PSBs in retailbanking and micro-credit are immense. However, a systematic and calculated approach is a pre-requisite for success in the long run. Third, in respect of risk management, areas yet uncharted byIndian banks include dynamic estimation of cash flow profile and risk profiles, adoption of risk-adjusted return on capital framework of pricing, etc. Fourth, in respect of directed credit, there isa consensus on using the conduit of self-help groups for credit delivery and the adoption of aparticipatory approach to development.Somewhat surprising was the enthusiasm on the part of some papers for infrastructurefinancing at a time when many issues relating to regulatory reform and full cost recovery are stillto be resolved and also at a time when even a specialised institution for the purpose likeInfrastructure Development Finance Company (IDFC) finds it difficult to achieve itsdisbursement intentions. However, I am glad to notice some caution from the Rapporteurs reportand it clearly shows that when securitisation, takeout financing, sound debt markets dominatedby public issues are in place, banks could proceed with such financing, especially at the shorterend. It is very satisfying to see some serious effort to improve financing of priority sector - a lessfashionable, but more legitimate area for banks.Governance aspects covered in the third section are somewhat tricky to be handled forseveral reasons, but some of the distinguished speakers seem to have made telling points such asthe need for arms-length to be maintained by owners with the Board, and the fact that bestcorporate governance exists when ownership is widely distributed. I wonder Government istreated as a single owner for this purpose !. There appears to be some broad consensus on reformin this area.  First, effective corporate governance arises out of responsible and vigilantsimultaneous actions by the managers, the board of directors and the shareholders of a company.Second, the essence of corporate governance relates to a system in which the interests of thewhole gamut of stakeholders of an organisation are recognised and conflicts among them aresought to be reconciled. Third, Indian banks will have to enhance the transparency of theiroperations and make greater disclosures to the public to attain international standards ofcorporate governance. Fourth, one may expect to see governance rating of institutions along thelines of credit rating.Some issues relating to cooperative banks, especially urban cooperative banks have beendiscussed, particularly on regulatory matters relating to access to capital funds from the capitalmarket, lending rate stipulations, evolution of a credit rating system, giving a level-playing fieldwith commercial banks, etc. A significant point raised though perhaps not debated extensivelyrelates to the conflicts of interests among various stake holders. It is heartening to note that aparadigm shift in banking recognises the need for resolving the complexities of cooperativebanks, especially urban cooperative banks, regional rural banks and perhaps local area banks.Critical to appreciating these issues is perhaps the appropriate framework of corporate2governance for institutions, which are under the cooperative fold at their current stage of legaland regulatory framework.It is also interesting to note that public sector banks have made legitimate points about thelevel-playing field and the need to consider public sector banks fully owned by the governmentand others where there is shareholding by public. The external constraints imposed on them, therestrictions on internal consolidation due to work practices need to be addressed in any debate onparadigm shift, while the distinction between fully-owned and others is critical to issues relatingto corporate governance. The broader issue of the case for or against privatization shouldrecognize the new insights provided by one of the papers – a paper backed by significant data.Governor Jalan’s poser in the latest annual meeting of the National Institute of BankManagement (NIBM) is a relevant starting point to discuss paradigm shift: “The crucial issuethat the country has to debate is whether Corporate Governance is compatible with publicownership, which makes the system accountable to political institutions and not to the economicinstitutions or even regulators. This is a big and fundamental issue which our country has todebate and decide. Is a ‘via media’ possible? Could we have public ownership withoutGovernment or political control or do we need to change to a corporate structure?”While this is one type of challenge, Governor Jalan makes a telling point when referringto non-public sector banks in the banking system (i.e. co-operative and private). “One thingwhich is common to all is that Corporate Governance is highly centralized with very little realcheck on the CEO, who is generally also closely linked to the largest owner groups. Boards orauditing systems are not very effective”.In brief, my view is that the paradigm shift in banking sector has to be seen in terms of twodimensions: one relates to operational aspects especially risk-management system. There is somesensitization on these issues when the participants discussed technology, customer-centricapproach, motivation of workforce, performance incentives, outsourcing, off balance-sheetitems, etc. Many of these have overlap with regulatory regime which has also displayedsignificant progress. The second dimension relates to structural and external environment orexogenous aspects, and these can be tackled only with a paradigm shift in public policyaddressed to ownership, form of organization, regulation and competition. My address would,therefore, concentrate on the second dimension and select aspects of public policy.Achievements of Public Policy in Financial SectorIt is necessary to recall our achievements in the filed of public policy.First, public policy has ensured the development of multi-institutional structure in thefinancial system. The Asian crisis demonstrated the risks of a single institution dominated systemand underscored the importance of a well-diversified financial system in maintaining systemicstability. The diversification of ownership of public sector banks is a welcome form ofdiversification.3Second, public policy has changed the system’s flexibility to manage credit. Progressivereduction in the pre-emptions has accorded greater flexibility to banks to lend based on genuinecredit decisions. By deregulating interest rates both on the deposits (barring saving deposit) andlending side, the banking system has also been accorded the flexibility to price their loans asneeded, keeping in view the cost of funds and the appropriate credit and term premia.Third, it is absolutely essential to ensure adequate credit flows to meet emerging needs.Thus, even as banks have greater flexibility to lend and price their loans, RBI has urged thatcredit to sectors such as agriculture and small and medium industries are critical for the overalldevelopment of the economy. Policies over the years have attempted to ensure adequate flow ofcredit to these sectors, but based on commercial terms and in a non-micro regulated manner.Fourth, public policy has infused greater competition in the banking system by permittingentry of private sector banks. This has given a wider choice to customers (both lenders andborrowers) to approach their bank of choice. At the same time, it has created an incentivemechanism for banks to enhance their efficiency.Fifth, at the same time, public policy has, by and large, preserved the branch network ofthe banking system to ensure that banking services continue to reach the remote corners of thecountry.Sixth, prudential standards are being imposed on banks to bring them on par withinternational best standards. Thus, while banks have greater freedom to take credit decisions,capital adequacy norms, exposure norms, income recognition rules, asset liability managementsystems in banks not only help to identify risks but also contain risks thereby contributing tofinancial stability.Seventh, the system is more transparent now than before both in terms of disclosure ofaccounts by banks and data/ information disseminated by the central bank. Looking at the dataon the banking system, there is a contention that the banking system is more vulnerable now thanbefore. My response has been that it is not so. There is a degree of transparency that ensuresawareness and corrective action today. The Indian banking system is not unstable or vulnerable,but there are problems of efficiency.Eighth, in most areas, be it deposits or credit or investment or risk management, publicpolicy has moved away from micro-regulation to macro-management. While RBI issues generalguidelines, it is now more often left to individual Boards of banks to implement these measuresand set internal rules and guidelines.Ninth, initiatives have also been taken to develop financial markets in a gradual mannerand integrate them cautiously. By developing the money market, it is ensured that the signals ofthe central bank are transmitted to the system without friction. For pricing of loans to be market-based, development of Government securities market is crucial since all the rates in the rest ofthe markets are priced off the zero-risk yield curve, i.e. Government Securities. Impressiveprogress has bee made in Government securities market.4Tenth, on macro-policy side, RBI has ensured stability in interest rates, exchange rates andreined in inflationary expectations to a reasonable level and contained the threats of externalcontagion and domestic uncertainties, thus making it easier for the banking system to cope upwith competition in a deregulated environment. To quote from Dr. Jalan’s inaugural address: “…despite a turbulent year and many challenges we have made progress towards this goal” and bygoal he means the vision of a sound and well-functioning banking system.Thus, public policy has contributed to an efficient transitional path of the banking systemto move from a regulated focus on predetermined objectives to a more and more liberalisedregime. Public policy is ensuring non-disruptive gradual changes with intensely participativeapproach providing some flexibility in the pace but not the direction of overall objectives.Governor Jalan said in the inaugural address to this Conference: “There is greater awareness nowof the need to prepare the banking system for the technical and capital requirements of theemerging prudential regime and a greater focus on core strengths and niche strategies.”IntrospectionIntrospection is seldom structured and not really conclusive. Perhaps introspection revolvesaround the questioning of assumptions or values rather than the logic. In many cases, it may belooking at facts which one failed to notice before. Briefly stated, there will be an element ofrandomness in the focus of such introspection.First and foremost relates to the foundation of reform viz., promoting efficiency throughcompetition, which involves some objective criteria in assessing performance. RBI’s annualstatutory report on banking attempts to do it by categorising the banks into public sector, privatesector, etc. How appropriate is that?(a) Given the size and variety of public sector banks and in particular the varied ownershippattern, aggregating their performance as a category can be questioned. After all, a categoryaccounting for over 70 per cent of all activity may not be clubbed together and compared withtwo other small segments. Sub-dividing them into, say, those closer to private sector banks’ interms of performance, like Corporation Bank, or very weak banks could have been attempted.Are there insights on why some public sector banks are able to cope up better than others? Arethere no lessons for the owner who owns several units that perform differently?(b) Are facts of market segmentation on both demand and supply recognized whilecomparing prices and spread between the categories of banks? There is a relationship betweeninterest spreads and market segments, e.g., with regard to food credit, the interest charged is theaverage of participating banks’ PLR. Similarly, government business, pension business etc. arewith PSBs. Is it possible that the real competition among the three different categories is only ona small part of the balance sheet?(c) Time dimension is also critical in any analysis on net interest income. In other words,legacy problems can distort the current picture. Further developments in financial markets overthe last few years are unique.  For example, in a rising interest rate scenario, it is possible thatpublic sector banks might have done better. When interest rates are falling, it does have anadverse impact on the net interest margins of public sector banks. Should that also be reckoned?5(d) To what extent do macro-factors have an impact on the net interest margins of differentcategories is perhaps an area requiring closer attention. In the last three to four years, there hasbeen some decelerating of growth, especially in traditional brick and mortar type manufacturingsector where public sector banks are heavily exposed. They have been opened to internationalcompetition and are subject to domestic restructuring. These affect the portfolio of older bankswhich are mostly PSBs, disproportionately.(e) As regards staff costs, new private sector banks have enormous flexibility of entry andexit. The public sector banks simply do not have the freedom. If such a freedom, genuinefreedom is given to public sector banks, would the benefits be more or less, to all concerned, i.e,owner and work force?(f) Public sector banks have an element of public sector accountability and institutionalfactors operate differently for different banks. For instance, public sector banks have a largenumber of branches in backward areas and hence it may not be feasible in a socio-economicsense to permit closure or sale of these branches. If 20 per cent of branches of public sectorbanks account for 80 per cent of business and if the only objective is profitability, could theyclose the 80 per cent?Second, on Asset Reconstruction Companies (ARC) as a solution to current problems facingpublic sector banks several issues arise:(a) Normally ARCs are conceived when there is a collapse of financial systems and may not betreated as a substitute for poor credit-recovery processes. There is an existing mechanismthrough Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT) which provides for expeditious recovery of dues bybanks and financial institutions. The question is whether the proposed framework should givemore power for recovery than the DRT mechanism. If it gives more powers and if it is to be aprivate or semi-private company is it justifiable?  If such enhancement of powers is possible,then why not enhance the powers of the banks themselves?(b) If there is no Government guarantee, the ARC will have to have better ways of collecting thedues than banks. If there is an assumption that in view of its professional expertise, the proposedARC will be superior to the bank in this respect, it is an assumption at this stage. Hence anydecision to transfer the distressed assets of a bank to the proposed ARC may have to be left toeach bank in respect of each asset; either to transfer or not.(c) Government is only one of the owners in regard to many public sector banks and hence theissue of transfer of an asset from the books of a bank to a proposed ARC would presumably bethe decision of the Board and the Management and not that of the owner or one of the owners.(d) Is it possible to have several ARCs on an ongoing basis to create an enabling competitiveenvironment for recovery of dues in respect of their assets so that the banks will have optionsfrom time to time to choose among ARCs and decide on individual assets?6Third, there is a view that priority sector lending generally generates higher non-performingassets than non-priority sector lending. Is that a fair comparison? When food credit, which is alarge part of non-priority sector and credit to public enterprises are netted to arrive at non-performing assets for private sector in non-priority sector and a comparison made, would thatdifference get reduced? Would that get further reduced if subsidised lending under government-sponsored programmes is also netted?Fourth, there is a demand for disclosure of defaulters. What purpose has disclosure of suit-filedcases served? Similarly, there is a demand for punishing ‘wilful defaulters’ but has severepunishment prescribed in law served a purpose if there is a perception that the probability ofbeing caught is less, being punished is remote and being severely punished promptly even moreremote? Have centrally-directed one-time settlements and somewhat unclear basis ofdispensations of BIFR helped in improving credit-recovery process?Fifth, because of unwillingness to change structural rigidities, distortions in governancestructures may be possible. For example, the organization of IDFC as a private company whilethe financial participation by Government and RBI is relatively large, represents a compromiseto enable flexibility in view of rigidities of majority public sector ownership. Is it better to havein-built flexibility in the structures?Finally, and this indeed is a troubling thought. In a regime where the governance structures areyet to be fully strengthened and contract-enforcement through legal means difficult as well asdelayed, the preference for dominant private-ownership should be accompanied by intensiveefforts to strengthen efficiency and autonomy of public ownership. In other words, shouldprivatisation be a credible threat to ensure reform of public sector and movement between thepublic and private be a more dynamic process than unidirectional or rigid ? In other words, arethe choices only in terms of centrally decided nationalisation or privatisation? Is it possible foreach bank to evolve into different ownership patterns to meet the challenges of paradigm shift ?Technical VisionA technical vision is, and for that matter any vision is generally clear in terms of broadcontours and certainly vague in respect of detail. A vision is not necessarily feasible buthopefully possible. A technical vision is, above all, one that transcends existing policyframework and is exploratory. Having identified the crux of the paradigm shift as one relating tostructural aspects, a brief outline of such a technical vision is presented below in respect of eachsegment of banking, mainly to provoke a discussion and definitely, it is not RBI view, but atechnical vision.(a) All public sector banks could be converted into companies, to accord flexibility for changesin ownership, mergers, acquisitions, sound corporate governance and motivation for workforceto compete effectively.(b) To professionalise the ownership functions and ensure that portfolio is shuttled around tooptimise public interest, a holding company of public sector banks can be formed to which allshares held by Government and RBI are transferred. The mandate for holding company can bethree-fold, viz., fiscal neutrality, protecting the interests of those banks that are serving special7public purpose by infusing resources and enhancing bank-wise, genuine board management andworker motivation to cope with paradigm shifts occurring in banking industry. The criticalelement for success here is manning of holding company, but Government will be able to devotesignificant attention to a focussed task compared to several tasks of many institutions.(c) To ensure genuine corporate governance and protect a private shareholder, even if theGovernment owns a majority, a Government company should be one where 100 per centownership vests with Government directly and not 51 per cent or above.(d) The provisions of central vigilance, CBI, etc., would be applicable to a public servant, but notto any person employed in an organization that is substantially competing with private sectororganizations, procedures similar to private sector should apply.(e) Cooperatives as a genuine peoples movement should be differentiated from a cooperative as amere form of organization.  Cooperatives should also be distinguished between those who acceptpublic deposits and those who do business with only members in a restricted area. In otherwords, a distinction should be made between a bank and a credit union. A bank should becovered under the Banking Regulation Act, irrespective of whether it is registered underCompanies Act or Cooperatives Act. The rest will have to be credit unions of some form or theother.(f) Regional Rural Banks (RRBs) should be revamped so that ownership of Centre and State isalso made optional. They could be brought under Companies Act and flexible ownershippromoted through National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). RRBshave the unique capabilities to enhance credit delivery in rural areas if the overhang problem issorted out.  (g) The Development Financial Institutions (DFIs) should be similarly corporatised where theyare not and they should formally be brought under the regulatory framework of NBFCs as adistinct category.(h) Above all, a national consensus must be attempted among all the stakeholders to seek abanking system that is flexible, dynamic, fair and truly national - where the owners, workers,depositors, borrowers and regulators commit themselves to a real paradigm shift in public policy.It is pragmatism and not ideological extremes that has made India strong in external sector andperhaps a similar approach will work in financial sector also.Select Actions under Contemplation with RBIIn this concluding section, I will mention a few actions under contemplation in RBI that wouldenable paradigm shift in banking.With respect to ownership of the RBI in banks and other refinancing institutions, the Monetaryand Credit Policy of April 2001 had expressed the RBI’s intentions to divest its holdings in StateBank of India, NABARD and National Housing Bank through transfer to Government. The RBIhas also sent proposals to the Government to transfer its loan portfolio in respect of IDBI, IDFC,etc.8I understand that you have had lively discussions on International Standards and Codes. Asyou are aware, a Standing Committee on International Standards and Codes was set up tobenchmark Indian practices against international standards. The Standing Committee had set upten advisory Groups in key areas of the financial sector. The Groups have completed theirReports, which are available on the RBI website. I would like to draw your attention to tworeports which have a direct bearing on the banking system – Advisory Group on BankingSupervision (Chairman: Shri. M.S.Verma) and Advisory Group on Corporate Governance(Chairman: Dr.R.H.Patil). The Group on Corporate Governance emphasized the strengtheningthe rights of shareholders in banks and financial institutions, appointment of risk managementcommittees, withdrawal of special status of Government directors, withdrawal of RBI Directorsand improvement in regard to disclosure of information. The Group on Banking Supervisionrecommended on issues such as independence of supervisor, capital adequacy, management ofcredit risk, connected lending, functioning of Board of Directors etc.Currently, the Standing Committee is in the process of consolidating the reports of the tenAdvisory Groups and identifying the legal, procedural and policy changes required inimplementing the recommendations. A number of recommendations would need amendments tothe Banking Regulation Act, Companies Act, RBI Act, etc. Following the Finance Minister’sBudget speech last year, the RBI had already indicated a number of legal changes that would berequired to give more flexibility to monetary policy. In the financial markets, the GovernmentSecurities Bill is at the final stages of consideration.  A Working Group in the RBI has alreadyproposed a draft bill on securitisation, to Government.An important issue in regard to banks’ operational area relates to the sharing of creditinformation. Currently, banks are sharing information on an informal basis. However, the RBIhas been collecting and disseminating information on the list of suit filed defaulters, includingwilful defaulters. Formalising the system of sharing information would require amendment tosecrecy laws. In order to overcome this aspect in the short run, pending legislative amendment,the RBI has constituted a Working Group to operationalise the process of collection anddissemination of data on credit information by the Credit Information Bureau. The Group is alsoconsidering the suggestion given by bankers that information regarding the defaults of StateGovernments be collected and widely circulated and published.Yet another area critical for financial stability relates to several international initiativeswere undertaken over the last couple of years with the goal of maintaining financial stability bystrengthening the financial infrastructure. The RBI and SEBI were members of one such TaskForce on Securities Settlement Systems constituted by Bank for International Settlements. Thereport has since been finalised and released by BIS. An Expert Group is being set up by the RBIto examine the adherence to the recommendations in regard to Government securities market inimportant areas such as legal risk, pre-settlement risk and settlement risk.Efficient payment system is also very critical to meet the new challenges. The RBI hasbeen engaged in the design and development of the payment system in India as part of thefinancial sector reforms. The broad objective of this process is to ensure the setting up of arobust, efficient, secure and integrated payment and settlement system for the country. The9ultimate aim to be achieved in this regard is to ensure quick settlement of financial transactions,especially in an electronic environment based on a sound legal foundation. The RBI isaddressing the task of drafting the Indian payment system legislation considering among othersissues, finality of payment/settlement in an electronic environment, issues of failure frombankruptcy and the formulation of the framework for the Payment System Act, the Netting Actand other related issues. To bestow focused attention, a Payments Systems Department is beingcontemplated within the RBI by appropriate restructuring and retraining of the existing officersand staff. The functions of this department will include among other things, formulation ofpayment system policies, regulation of payment system, implementation of Core Principles ofthe BIS relating to payment system, etc.Finally, with regard to the financial sector, banks have always been concerned at theregulatory burden on them due to the CRR requirement. RBI desires to move to a 3 per centCRR regime, but at the current stage, early movement can be considered only if it is a packageand one of them relates to the present way of maintenance of cash balances by banks with theRBI. Apart from this, as mentioned in an address yesterday, the time has come to take a hardlook at the access of banks to call money. The call money window should be used to iron outtemporary mismatches in liquidity and not on a sustained basis as a source of funding theirnormal requirements. An option to be discussed is reducing banks’ access to the non-collateralised call market to about 2 per cent of aggregate deposits as in the case of urban co-operative banks, or, as an alternative to 25-50 per cent of their net owned funds. Simultaneously,in order to gain greater effectiveness in money market operations of RBI through LiquidityAdjustment Facility, the automatic access of refinance facility from the RBI to banks would alsohave to be reassessed. Thus, as CRR gets lowered and repo market develops, the refinancefacilities may have to be lowered or altogether removed, and the access to the non-collateralisedcall money market restricted with the objective of imparting greater efficacy to the conduct ofmonetary policy. After all, for a central banker, the paradigm shift in public policy has tomention monetary policy.Thank You.* Valedictory Address by Dr. Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Twenty-Third BankEconomists’ Conference organised by Indian Banks’ Association and hosted by Allahabad Bank at Kolkata.10
