Parameters of Monetary Policy in India *FriendsIt is a great honour to be asked to deliver an invited lecture at the annual conference of theIndian Econometric Society and I am grateful to the organisers for this opportunity.  For obviousreasons, including the growing interest in monetary policy, I intend presenting before you theparameters of monetary policy in India.  In the first part of this lecture, I propose to give a generaloverview of the parameters of monetary policy. In the second part, I would touch upon theinternational experience in this regard with a particular focus on changing contours.  The third partcontains a description of evolving parameters of monetary policy in India beginning with a briefdescription of the process of policy making.  The fourth part would highlight the impressive gainsmade dring the reform period so far, in regard to statutory preemptions, deregulation of interestrates, financial and external stability despite the persisting fiscal deficits and large marketborrowing programmes.  The concluding part sets forth immediate tasks before the Reserve Bankof India in its conduct of monetary policy.Parameters of Monetary PolicyObjectivesIt is generally believed that central banks ideally should have a single overwhelmingobjective of price stability.  In practice, however, central banks are responsible for a number ofobjectives besides price stability, such as currency stability, financial stability, growth inemployment and income.    The primary objectives of central banks in many cases are legally andinstitutionally defined. However, all objectives may not have been spelt out explicitly in thecentral bank legislation but may evolve through traditions and tacit understanding between thegovernment, the central bank and other major institutions in an economy.Of late, however, considerations of financial stability have assumed increasing importancein monetary policy. The most serious economic downturns in the recent years appear to begenerally associated with financial instability.  The important questions for policy in the context offinancial instability are the origin and the transmission of different types of shocks in the financialsystem, the nature and the extent of feedback in policy and the effectiveness of different policyinstruments.Transmission MechanismMonetary policy is known to have both short and long-term effects. While it generallyaffects the real sector with long and variable lags, monetary policy actions on financial markets,on the other hand, usually have important short-run implications. Typical lags after whichmonetary policy decisions begin to affect the real sector could vary across countries. It is,therefore, essential to understand the transmission mechanism of monetary policy actions onfinancial markets, prices and output.  Central banks form their own views on the transmissionmechanism based on empirical evidence, and their monetary strategies and tactics are designed,based on these views. However, there could be considerable uncertainties in the transmissionchannels depending on the stages of evolution of financial markets and the nature of propagationof shocks to the system.The four monetary transmission channels, which are of concern to policy makers are:  thequantum channel, especially relating to money supply and credit; the interest rate channel; theexchange rate channel, and the asset prices channel.  Monetary policy impulses under the quantumchannel affect the real output and price level directly through changes in either reserve money,money stock or credit aggregates.  The remaining channels are essentially indirect as the policyimpulses affect real activities through changes in either interest rates or the exchange rate or assetprices. Since none of the channels of monetary transmission operate in isolation, considerablefeedbacks and interactions, need to be carefully analysed for a proper understanding of thetransmission mechanism.The exact delineation of monetary policy transmission channels becomes difficult in the2Strategies and TacticsIt is important to distinguish strategic and tactical considerations in the conduct ofmonetary policy. While monetary strategy aims at achieving final objectives, tacticalconsiderations reflect the short run operational procedures. Both strategies and tactics formonetary management are intricately linked to the overall monetary policy framework of a centralbank. Depending upon the domestic and international macroeconomic developments, the long runstrategic objective could change, leading to a change in the nature and the extent of short runliquidity management.The strategic aspects of monetary management crucially depend on the choice of a nominalanchor by the central bank. In this regard, four broad classes of monetary strategies could bedistinguished. Two of these, viz., monetary targeting and exchange rate targeting strategies, use amonetary aggregate and the exchange rate respectively as an explicit intermediate target. Thethird, viz., multiple indicator approach, does not have an explicit intermediate target but is basedon a wide range of monetary and financial indicators. The fourth, viz., inflation targeting, alsodoes not have an intermediate target, but is characterized by an explicit final policy goal in termsof the rate of inflation.In the 1970s when monetary policy came into prominence, many countries adopted eithermoney supply or exchange rate as intermediate targets. During the late 1980s, these paradigmsstarted to change following globalization, technological advancements and large movement ofcapital across national boundaries.In view of difficulties in conducting monetary policy with explicit intermediate targets, oflate, some countries are switching to direct inflation targeting, which works by explicitlyannouncing to the public the goals for monetary policy and the underlying framework for itsimplementation. In this framework, the monetary authorities have the freedom to deploy theinstruments of monetary policy to the best of their capacities, but are limited in their discretion ofpolicy goals.  The framework is advocated on the ground that it clearly spells out the extent ofcentral bank accountability and transparency.In reality, monetary policy strategy of a central bank depends on a number of factors thatare unique to the country and the context. Given the policy objective, any good strategy dependson the macroeconomic and the institutional structure of the economy. An important factor in thiscontext is the degree of openness of the economy. The more open an economy is, the more theexternal sector plays a dominant role in monetary management. The second factor that plays amajor role is the stage of development of markets and institutions: with technological developmentas an essential ingredient.  In a developed economy, the markets are integrated and policy actionsare quickly transmitted from one sector to another. In such a situation, perhaps it is possible for thecentral bank to signal its intention with one single instrument.Operating ProceduresOperating procedures refer to the choice of the operational target, the nature, extent and thefrequency of different money market operations, the use and width of a corridor for market interestrates and the manner of signaling policy intentions.   The choice of the operating target is crucialas this variable is at the beginning of the monetary transmission process. The operating target of acentral bank could be bank reserves, base money or a benchmark interest rate. While actions of acentral bank could influence all these variables, it should be evident that the final outcome isdetermined by the combined actions of the market forces and the central bank.The major challenge in day-to-day monetary management is decision on an appropriatelevel of the operating target. The success in this direction could be achieved only if the nature andthe extent of interaction of the policy instruments with the operating target is stable and is knownto the central bank. As the operating target is also influenced by market movements, which onoccasions could be extremely volatile and unpredictable, success is not always guaranteed.Further, success is also dependent on the stability of the relationship between the operating targetand the intermediate target. In a monetary targeting framework, this often boils down to thestability and the predictability of the money multiplier. In an interest rate targeting framework, onthe other hand, success depends upon the strength of the relationship between the short-term andthe long-term interest rates. Finally, the stability of the relationship between the intermediate and3eliminate an element of surprise, which is useful on occasions with respect to the central bank’soperations in financial markets. International ExperienceIn the conduct of monetary policy, although the experiences and the choices made byindividual countries vary, recent surveys highlight a number of common features, viz.,? First, at the macro level, there is now widespread concern about the potential harmfuleffects of persistently high fiscal deficits as it may lead to excessive monetisation.? Second, there have been  significant reductions in the reserve ratio to relieve the pressureon the banking sector and reduce the costs of intermediation.  In fact, a number ofcountries now have no reserve requirement;. And, in  some countries,  the level ofminimum deposit at the central bank has fallen to such low levels that it is no longerconsidered an active monetary instrument.? Third, the deepening of financial markets and the growth of non-bank intermediation haveinduced the central banks to increase the market orientation of their instruments.  Aconsequence of this is a greater activism of central banks in liquidity management.? Fourth, the greater activism through indirect instruments led to a more intensive use ofopen market operations (OMO) through flexible  instruments like repo. The OMO can beused for net injection or absorption of liquidity and can be resorted to irrespective ofwhether the operating target works through the rate channel or quantity channel.? Fifth, the market environment has induced many central banks to focus more on theinterest rates rather than bank reserves in trying to influence liquidity.? Sixth, increasing evidence of market integration implies that  central banks can concentrateon the very short end of the yield curve. There is growing evidence in favour of co-movements of interest rates of different maturity. This has simultaneously increasedmonetary policy challenges, as central banks have to keep a watchful eye on all marketsand be cautious of any cascading effect or contagion emerging in the domestic economy ororiginating in a foreign economy.? Seventh, at an operational level, while there is increasing transparency on the long-runstrategic objective, central banks may not disclose their tactical considerations as somemaneuverability in influencing the market is required. However, in many cases informationis revealed to the market with a lag.  Many central banks also attempt to estimate marketexpectations directly through surveys. While market expectations play a major guidepostin formulating monetary strategies, information management plays a crucial role for short-run stabilisation.? Eighth, a notable consequence of recent financial and currency crises has been theincreasing emphasis on the quantity and quality of data dissemination, i.e., adequate,timely and reliable information in a standardized form.? Ninth, a number of central banks now also disseminate the minutes of the meetings ofmajor monetary policy decisions, which help to gain credibility and in building areputation of the central bank in achieving the objectives of monetary policy.? Tenth, an important issue is policy coordination between the fiscal and the monetaryauthorities.  The stance of fiscal policy is important as it has a much broader spectrum ofobjectives. If fiscal authorities are the dominant players, monetary policy instruments arerendered less effective. As monetary policy evolves from a transitional setting of fiscaldominance, issues like direct access of government to central bank credit becomesimportant and crucial for fiscal-monetary coordination.? Eleventh, policy coordination is also an important issue facing economies linked by tradeand capital flows. In an increasingly synchronised business cycle environment,international policy coordination becomes extremely important.? Twelfth, internationally, there has been more awareness that policy effectiveness isconstrained by uncertainty. In fact, in many countries, the central bank projections are nowpublished in the form of a fan chart rather than point estimates.Monetary Policy in India4The stance of monetary policy and the rationale are communicated to the public in avariety of ways, the most important being the annual monetary policy statement of Governor Jalanin April and the mid-term review in October. The statements have become over time moreanalytical, at times introspective and a lot more elaborate. Further, the statements include not onlymonetary policy stance or measures but also institutional and structural aspects. The monetarymeasures are undertaken as and when the circumstances warrant, but the rationale for suchmeasures is given in the Press Release and also statements made by Governor and DeputyGovernors unless a deliberate decision is taken not to do so on a contemporaneous basis. Thesources for appreciating the policy stance encompass several statutory and non-statutorypublications, speeches and press releases. Of late, the RBI website has become a very effectivemedium of communication and it is rated by experts as one of the best among central bankwebsites in content, presentation and timeliness. The RBI’s communications strategy andprovision of information have facilitated conduct of policy in an increasingly market-orientedenvironment.Several new institutional arrangements and work processes have been put in place to meetthe needs of policy making in a complex and fast changing world. At the apex of policy process isGovernor, assisted closely by  Deputy Governors and guided by deliberations of  a Board ofDirectors. A Committee of the Board meets every week to review the monetary, economic,financial conditions and advice or decide appropriately. Much of the data used by the Committeeis available to the public with about a week’s lag. There are several other standing and adhoccommittees or groups of the Board and Board for Financial Supervision plays a critical role inregard to institutional developments. Periodic consultations with academics, market participantsand financial intermediaries take place through Standing Committees and Ad Hoc Groups, inaddition to mechanisms such as resource management discussions with banks. Within the RBI, thesupervisory data, market information, economic and statistical analysis are reoriented to suit thechanging needs. A Financial Markets Committee focuses on a day-to-day market operations andtactics while a Monetary Policy Strategy Group analyses strategies on an ongoing basis. Periodicconsultations with the Government, mainly with Ministry of Finance do ensure coordination. Inbrief, there are significant technical, analytical, institutional and dynamic inputs that go into theprocess of making monetary policy.ObjectivesAlthough there has not been any explicit legislation for price stability, the major objectivesof monetary policy in India have been those of maintaining price stability and ensuring  adequateflow of credit to the productive sectors of the economy. The relative emphasis between theobjectives depends on the underlying economic conditions and is spelt out from time to time.Compared to many other developing economies, India has been able to maintain a moderate levelof inflation. Historically, inflation rates in India rarely touched double digit and when they did, inmost cases, they were the result of supply shocks either in the form of increase in agriculturalcommodity prices or in the form of increase in international prices of crude oil.Transmission MechanismThe monetary policy framework in India from the mid-1980s till 1997-98 can, by andlarge, be characterized as a monetary targeting framework on the lines recommended byChakravarty Committee (1985). Because of the reasonable stability of the money demandfunction, the annual growth in broad money (M ) was used as an intermediate target of monetary3policy to achieve monetary objectives.  Monetary management involved working out a broadmoney growth through the money demand function that would be consistent with projected GDPgrowth and a tolerable level of inflation.   In practice, however, the monetary targeting approachwas used in a flexible manner with a 'feedback' from the developments in the real sector.While the monetary system in India is  still evolving and the various inter-sectoral linkagesin the economy are undergoing changes, the emerging evidences on transmission channel suggestthat the rate channels are gradually gaining importance over the quantum channel.  Theeconometric evidence produced by the Third Working Group on Money Supply (1998) indicatedthat output response to policy operating through the interest rate was gaining strength.  Similarly,5important indicator, information pertaining to other monetary and financial indicators should alsobe taken into account seriously while formulating monetary policy, especially in view of thesweeping changes in the financial sector in India in recent years.  From the year 1998-99, RBIannounced that henceforth it would follow a multiple indicator approach. In this approach, interestrates or rates of return in different markets along with movements in currency, credit, fiscalposition, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange rate, refinancing and transactions in foreignexchange – available on high frequency basis – are juxtaposed with output data for drawing policyperspectives. In a way, such a shift was a logical outcome of measures taken over the reformperiod since the early 1990s.Operating ProceduresIn the pre reform period prior to 1991, given the command and control nature of theeconomy, the Reserve Bank had to resort to direct instruments like interest rate regulations,selective credit control and the cash reserve ratio (CRR) as major monetary instruments.  Theseinstruments were used intermittently to neutralize the monetary impact of the Government'sbudgetary operations.The administered interest rate regime during the earlier period kept the yield rate of thegovernment securities artificially low. The demand for them was created through intermittenthikes in the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR). The task before the Reserve Bank of India was,therefore, to develop the markets to prepare the ground for indirect operations.As a first step, yields on government securities were made market related. At the sametime, the RBI helped create an array of other market related financial products. At the next stage,the interest rate structure was simultaneously rationalized and banks were given the freedom todetermine their major rates. As a result of these developments, RBI could use OMO as an effectiveinstrument for liquidity management including to curb short-term volatilities in the foreignexchange market.Another important and significant change introduced during the period is the reactivationof the Bank Rate by initially linking it to all other rates including the Reserve Bank's refinancerates (April 1997). The subsequent introduction of fixed rate repo (December 1997) helped increating an informal corridor in the money market, with the repo rate as floor and the Bank Rate asthe ceiling. The use of these two instruments in conjunction with OMO enabled RBI to keep thecall rate within this informal corridor for most of the time.  Subsequently, the introduction ofLiquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) from June 2000 enabled the modulation of liquidityconditions on a daily basis and also short term interest rates through the LAF window, whilesignaling the stance of policy through changes in the Bank Rate.Gains from ReformIt has been possible to reduce the statutory preemption on the banking system. The Cashreserve Ratio (CRR), which was the primary instrument of monetary policy, has been broughtdown from 15.0 per cent in March 1991 to 5.5 per cent by December 2001. The medium-termobjective is to bring down the CRR to its statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent within a shortperiod of time. Similarly, Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) has been brought down from 38.5 percent to its statutory minimum of 25.0 per cent by October 1997.It has also been possible to deregulate and rationalise the interest rate structure. Exceptsavings deposit, all other interest rate restrictions have been done away with and banks have beengiven full operational flexibility in determining their deposit and lending rates barring somerestrictions on export credit and small borrowings. The commercial lending rates for primeborrowers of banks has fallen from a high of about 16.5 per cent in March 1991 to around 10.0per cent  by December 2001.In terms of monetary policy signals, while the Bank Rate was dormant and seldom used in1991, it has been  made operationally effective from 1997 and continues to remain the principalsignaling instrument. The Bank Rate has been brought down from 12.0 per cent in April 1997 to6.5 per cent by December 2001.  It is envisaged that the LAF rate would operate around the BankRate, with a flexible corridor, as more active operative instrument for day-to-day liquiditymanagement and steering short-term interest rates.A contrasting feature in the positions between 1991 and 2001 is India’s foreign exchange6foreign currency assets, on the other hand,  completely altered the balance sheet of the ReserveBank.Large capital inflows have been accommodated by the Reserve Bank while its monetaryimpact has been sterilized through OMO.  This has helped in reducing the government’s relianceon credit from RBI. Consequently, there has been secular decline in monetised deficit, and in theprocess net foreign exchange assets of RBI have become the principal contributor to reservemoney expansion in the recent period.Tasks before RBIThese are impressive gains from reform but there are emerging challenges to the conductof monetary policy in our country. Thus,  while the twin objectives of monetary policy ofmaintaining price stability and ensuring availability of adequate credit to the productive sectors ofthe economy have remained unchanged, capital flows and liberalization of financial markets haveincreased the potential risks of institutions, thus bringing the issue of financial stability to the fore.Credit flow to agriculture and small- and medium-industry appears to be constrained causingconcerns. There are significant structural and procedural bottlenecks in the existing institutionalset up for credit delivery. The pace of reforms in real sector, particularly in property rights andagriculture also impinge on the flow of credit in a deregulated environment. The persistence offiscal deficit, with the combined deficit of the Central and State Governments continuing to behigh, draws attention to the delicate internal and external balance.It is necessary to recognize the existence of the large informal sector, the limited reach offinancial markets relative to the growing sectors, especially services, and the overhang ofinstitutional structure that tend to constrain the effectiveness of monetary policy in India. The roadahead would be demanding and the Reserve Bank would have to strive to meet the challenge ofsteering the structurally transforming economy from a transitional phase to a mature and vibrantsystem and increasingly deal with alternative phases of the business cycle. Some of the immediatetasks before RBI are presented to provoke debate and promote research.Modeling ExercisesIn addressing a gathering of elite econometricians assembled here, a mention should bemade about  developments in monetary modeling.  It is well recognized that monetary policydecisions must be based on some idea of how decisions will affect the real world and this impliesconduct of policy within the framework of a model.  As Dr. William White of Bank forInternational Settlements (BIS) mentioned in an address recently in RBI,  “the model may be assimple as one unspecified equation kept in the head of the central bank Governor, but one mustbegin somewhere.  Economics may not be a science, but it should at least be conducted accordingto scientific principles recognizing cause and effect”.  While reliance on explicit modeling wasrather heavy in some central banks, particularly in the 1960 and 1970s, there has been increasingawareness among the policy markers of the limitations of such models for several reasons.  It isdifficult to arrive at a proper model for any economy with the degree of certainty that policymakers want especially in view of observed alterations in the private sector behaviour in responseto official behaviour.  Further, data to monitor the economy are sometimes inadequate, or delayed,and often revised.  It is said that in regard to modern economies, not only the future but even thepast is uncertain, due to significant revisions in data. The process of deregulation coupled withtechnological progress  has led to increasing role for market prices and consequently morecomplexities for establishing relationships in an environment where everything happens very fast,and in a globally interrelated financial world.  In brief, there is need to recognize the complexitiesin model building for monetary policies and approach it with great humility and a dose ofskepticism but ample justification for such modeling work certainly persists.      It is felt that this is an appropriate time to explore more formally the relationship amongdifferent segments of the markets and sectors of the economy, which will help in understandingthe transmission mechanism of the monetary policy in India.  With this objective in mind, RBI hadalready announced its intention to build an operational model, which will help the policy decisionprocess.  An Advisory Group with eminent academicians like Professors Mihir Rakshit, DilipNachane, Manohar Rao, Vikas Chitre and Indira Rajaraman as external experts and a team fromwithin the RBI were set up for developing such a model.7implications of the monetary policy measures on the real economy.  On the basis of the advice ofeminent experts in the Advisory Group, it has been decided to modify the approach.The current thinking in RBI is broadly on the following lines:  the short term liquiditymodel making use of high frequency data will be explored. Accordingly, the interaction of thefinancial markets with monetary policy have been examined with weekly data focusing mainly onpolicy measures and different rates in the financial markets.    Observations in the operationalframework of the model is limited as the LAF has been operationalised only a year ago.  A crucialaspect in an exercise is the forecast of currency in circulation.The intention of RBI is to expedite the technical work in this regard and seek the advice ofindividual members of Advisory Group on an ongoing basis both at formal and informal levels.  Itis expected that the draft of the proposed model would be put in public domain shortly. RBI wouldseek the active participation of the interested econometricians in the debate on the draft model andgive benefit of advice to RBI for finalizing and adoption.Reduction in CRRAmong the unrealized medium-term objectives of reforms in monetary policy, the mostimportant is reduction in the prescribed CRR for banks to its statutory minimum of 3.0 per cent.The movement to 3.0 per cent can be designed in three possible ways, viz., the traditional way ofpre-announcing a time-table for reduction in the CRR; reducing CRR as and when opportunitiesarise as is being done in recent years; and as a one-time reduction from the existing level to 3.0 percent under a package of measures.In the initial years, the first approach was effective but had to be abandoned when thetimetable had to be disrupted to meet the eruption of  global financial uncertainties and pressureson forex market.  Hence, the second approach of lowering CRR when opportunities arise has beenadopted, and now it has been brought down to 5.5 percent.    However, if it is felt that thisapproach takes a longer time and a compressed time-frame is desirable to expedite development offinancial markets, it is possible to contemplate a package of measures in this regard.  The packagecould mean the reduction of CRR to the statutory minimum level of 3.0 per cent accompanied byseveral  changes such as in the present way of maintenance of cash balances by banks with RBI.With the lagged reserve maintenance system now put in place, banks can exactly know theirreserve requirements.  With the information technology available with banks and with theoperationalisation of Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) shortly and with the developmentof repo market, it would be appropriate if CRR is maintained on a daily basis.  However, tillbanks  adjust to such changes in the maintenance of CRR,  a minimum balance of 95 per cent ofthe required reserves on a daily basis  may have to be maintained when CRR is reduced to 3.0  percent. The other elements of package have to be worked out carefully.Access to Call Money MarketAn important related component of ongoing reform relates to restricting the call moneymarket to banks and Primary Dealers (PDs).  Several measures have been initiated in this regardbut in view of the growing importance attached to stability in the financial system and the growingalternatives to access liquidity management through activation of repos facilitated by CCIL, thereis a strong case to impose some limits on access to non-collateralised borrowing through callmoney even under the dispensation of restricted  participation only to banks and PDs.   The callmoney window should be used to iron out temporary mismatches in liquidity and banks should notuse this on a sustained basis as a source of funding their normal requirements. A beginning hasbeen made by prescribing for access to call money a ceiling of 2.0 per cent of aggregate depositsin respect of urban co-operative banks (UCBs).  Such a stipulation can be extended to allcommercial banks and with some modifications such as, an alternative of 25.0 to 50.0 per cent oftheir net owned funds.  If any bank has any temporary need to go beyond the ceilings prescribedfor  access to call money, RBI could consider such requests to alleviate possible shocks toindividual banks. Similarly, once the repo market develops, PDs should reduce and in factconsider eliminating their access to the call money market.  There is an opinion that suchrestrictions of access to call money in Indian conditions would add to stability in financial marketsand help develop term money market. A final decision would no doubt be taken after discussions8operationalisation of CCIL and attracting non-banks also into an active repo market. Theeffectiveness of LAF thus will be strengthened with a pure inter-bank call/notice money market inplace coupled with growth of repo market for non-bank participants.  The LAF operationscombined with judicious use of OMOs are expected to evolve into a principal operating procedureof monetary policy of RBI. To this end, RBI may have to reduce substantially the liquiditythrough refinance to banks and PDs. For example, if RBI intends to tighten the money marketconditions through LAF, the automatic access of refinance facility from the RBI to banks and PDsmay reduce the effectiveness of such an action and thereby cause transmission losses of monetarypolicy.  It may be appropriate to note that in most of the developed financial markets, the standingfacilities operate at the margin.At present RBI provides standing facilities comprising the support  available to banksunder Collateralized Lending Facility (CLF) and export credit facility to banks, and liquiditysupport to PDs.  One way of reducing the standing facility will be to eliminate CLF from thestanding facilities and reducing the present ratio of normal and back-stop facilities. The existingmethodology of calculating eligible export credit refinance continues till March 2002 and  RBI hasexpressed its intention of moving away from sector specific refinance. As CRR gets lowered andrepo market develops, the refinance facilities should also be lowered giving more effectiveness tothe conduct of monetary policy.Towards International StandardsAs part of the ongoing process of reforms, it is necessary to improve our standards, codesand practices in matters relating to financial system and bring them on par with international ones.One of the Advisory Groups with Shri M. Narasimham as Chairman  and Shri S.S. Tarapore as amember, assessed the extent of India’s compliance with international standards and codes in thearea of ‘Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies’.  Noting that RBI’s policies andoperations largely conform to the IMF Code, the Group offered a set of recommendations formaking India fully compliant with the Codes.First, the Group recommended that the objective of monetary policy should be set out bythe Government, as part of its overall economic policy package, and the Government should beobliged to seek parliamentary debate on these objectives as also any changes in these objectivesthereafter. The Group further suggested that the Government should also consider prescribing tothe RBI single objective such as a medium-term inflation  while the Government would have foritself a clearly set out hierarchy of objectives for which it could use its other instruments of policy.However, RBI is of the view that at the current stage of institutional development and fiscalstance, coordination and harmony are of paramount importance though there is need for clearerdemarcation of responsibilities and accountability between RBI and the Government withappropriate degrees of transparency. Moving in this direction, RBI is divesting all  ownershipfunctions as also term lending functions, subject to approvals by the Government.Second, the Group recommended amendments to relevant legislation to accord greateroperational flexibility to the RBI for the conduct of monetary policy and regulation of financialsystem.  In the light of the Finance Minister’s budget statement, RBI has transmitted proposals forlegislative changes in the Reserve Bank of India Act, which is under the consideration of theGovernment.  These proposals if endorsed by the Parliament would accord greater operationalflexibility to the RBI  for conduct of monetary policy.Third, it was suggested that the Government should set up its own independent  debtmanagement office to take over the present functions discharged by the RBI, and thus avoidconflict of interest in conduct of monetary policy. RBI in its annual monetary policy of 2001, hasannounced progress made in this regard and its intention to divest itself of the debt managementfunction.  An enabling  proposal to delink the function of  debt management of the Governmentfrom the Reserve Bank has been made in the RBI (Amendment) Bill 2001.  The Government hasalso decided, in principle, to delink these functions.Fourth, the Group recommended that RBI should set up  Monetary Policy Committee(MPC) as a committee of the Board, by regulation, requiring no specific changes in the law.However, at present, no view has been taken in the matter of either setting up such a Committee ordisclosing the deliberations leading to monetary policy actions. In this context, it needs to be noted9Research AgendaIt is useful to identify a research agenda where both the academic community  and  policymakers could engage productively. For example, some academic work has been done on inflationtargetting in India.  Considering that inflation targetting is in no case a panacea but a sensiblepossible option, many central banks have adopted this strategy and in India also, this issue ofinflation targeting is being debated. Before taking a view on this, some related issues likemeasurement of inflation, core inflation, choice of price variables (to include asset prices or not)may have to be addressed. Similarly, with RBI pursuing the twin objectives of monetary policyand operating on short-term interest rates, it is essential to properly study the transmissionmechanism of monetary policy. Related issues include measurement of potential output,.assessment of the lag structure of different variables with respect to monetary policy decisions.Some light on these crucial areas will help the policy makers.  At the present juncture ofsegmented money market lacking in depth and width, development of yield curve and termstructure of interest rates may not appear to be critical, but as we move along with development offinancial markets, these important areas have to be explored. Moreover, the relationship betweenbank credit and output may also require indepth analysis.  Finally, the last chapter of the Report onCurrency and Finance 2000-01 attempts to present the estimated characteristics of sectoralbehaviour, inter-linkages and the underlying dynamics of the overall economy in the form of astructural macroeconomic model. This model is the result of the on-going research work amongthe professionals of RBI. This provides a basis for further research work in the academiccommunity also. These are some illustrative items of significance for further research in the realmof monetary policy.Concluding RemarksIn this lecture, I have attempted to focus on the conduct of monetary policy andhighlighted some of the immediate tasks. In case, there is interest in an overview of theory andanalytics, especially in the context of role of monetary policy in revitalizing growth in India, Iwould urge you to refer to the Report on Currency and Finance 2000-01, released yesterday. Thechallenges ahead are aptly summarized in the concluding paragraph of the chapter on Growth,Inflation and the Conduct of Monetary Policy of the Report, which states “The conduct ofmonetary policy in India would continue to involve the constant rebalancing of objectives in termsof the relative importance assigned, the selection of instruments and operating frameworks, and asearch for an improved understanding of the working of the economy and the channels throughwhich monetary policy operates”.th* Invited Lecture by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the 88 Annual Conference of  TheIndian Econometric Society at Madras School of Economics, Chennai on January 15, 2002. He is grateful toDr.D.V.S.Sastry, Shri.Deepak Mohanty, Shri.Indranil Bhattacharyya and Shri.Kaushik Bhattacharya for theirassistance.
