Issues in Managing Capital Account Liberalisation( To suggest the need of some of the developing countries for managing capitalto emphasise the importance of both international and national context in themanagement of capital account.to outline the contours of control and regulatory framework and the possible use ofthese in prioritising capital flows while suggesting the dynamic elements needed to enableto elaborate the linkages with other external sector policies, while considering theto highlight the complementary policies that are necessary while consideringliberalisation of capital account.This presentation is from the perspective of policy making in developing countries, and isIt is currently well recognised that although global capital flows have a potential forimproving efficiency and growth prospects, they also can trigger instability, due to a varietyof reasons. The objective of current deliberations on the international financial architecture isto enhance efficiency of such flows while avoiding, to the extent possible, instability, andmanaging instability if and when it occurs. These issues are assessed essentially from theview point of developing countries, which, as a group has tended to be more vulnerable toThough there are some differences of opinion as to whether liberalisation of capital accountwould necessarily add to growth prospects of developing countries, there are severaldevelopments in regard to international trade in goods and services, international business,technology, cross border flows of capital, etc. that would necessitate a more activemanagement of capital account, with a view to continuously assessing the costs and benefitsIn the current debate on international financial architecture, there is no settled position onseveral of the actions being considered. In respect of liberalisation of capital account,however, there appears to be a broad consensus viz.: such a liberalisation is desirable, shouldbe gradual, well-sequenced and undertaken in conjunction with several other measures atmicro and macro level. In most cases, the desirability of limiting total external debt,especially short-term is generally advocated.In other words, there is need for developing countries to choose or prioritise alternative formsof capital flow on the basis of costs and benefits. In choosing the alternative forms, the costsand benefits of a variety of instruments by which each of the forms of flows can be*of liberalisation vis-à-vis control or regulation.instability arising out of capital flows.Needdrawn mainly from the Indian experience.(v)appropriate control and regulatory framework or liberalisation.(iv)liberalisation;(iii)(ii)account, implying elements of control, regulation and liberalisation as appropriate.i)The objectives of this presentation are:influenced should also be assessed. The need for prudent limits on short-term debt isuniversally acknowledged in the current debate. The treatment of individual components ofthe capital account and the pace of liberalisation need to vary. Briefly restated, thecomponents of the capital account needs to be managed by each country taking into accountIt is also clear that while several initiatives are proposed at the global level, the task ofpreventing a crisis is essentially a national responsibility though an enabling internationalenvironment is sought to be put in place to facilitate action by individual countries. No doubt,in today’s globalised world, prevention of crises as well as mitigating the effects requiremultilateral efforts, but the social consequences of such crisis are to be met by the nationalgovernments concerned. In this sense, the ultimate responsibility in regard to crisisThe policy makers in developing countries, therefore, have to manage their capital accountsto ensure an orderly process of liberalisation. In this context, management of the capitalaccount involves management of control, regulation and liberalisation. Gradualism inliberalisation implies that the mix between controlled, regulated and liberalised capitaltransactions keeps changing gradually in favour of the latter. In fact, if the option of re-imposing controls to meet an emergency is contemplated, the management of capital accountIn India, capital account liberalisation is treated as a process. The medium term objective isorderly liberalisation, while the short-run challenges are met by flexible use of the controland regulatory framework In other words, there may be occasions when the pace ofliberalisation needs to be temporarily slowed down, or halted though in some rare cases, theprocess has to be reversed albeit for a short period.ContextIndustrial and developing countries do have a common interest in encouraging larger but lessvolatile global flows. Since the policy-making in developing countries involves gradualliberalisation, the pace and sequencing would also depend on the international context asSecondly, the extent, nature, anticipated promptness, and apolitical element in liquidityThirdly, the arrangements in international financial architecture for burden-sharing betweendomestic and global as also between private and public sectors.Fourthly, the perception of a developing country on the potential for magnification ofSimilarly, the country-context is important in managing capital account.Among the relevant aspects are:2possible inadequacies in domestic policies by the international financial community.support from international financial institutions.Firstly, the state of global arrangements for prevention of crises.appropriate to the country. Among the relevant international factors are the following:should always contain control, regulatory and liberalisation options.prevention and management rests primarily on the policy makers of the countries concerned.country specific characteristics.First, size and structure of economy, especially the share of external sectorSecond, socio-political orientation to risk-taking or risk-aversion or the societal weights toThird, the potential benefits of liberalisation. For example, in some low-income developingcountries, the capital flow may be restricted to official flows , Foreign Direct Investment andtrade related flows. The immediate benefits of liberalisation in terms of private flows are,therefore, not evident.Fourth, the level of development of financial markets and consequently the possibleresponses of domestic financial institutions to the liberalisation may be such as to indicateBriefly stated, in the absence of effective lender of last resort at the international level, andperceived benefits and cost of liberalisation vis-à-vis regulatory framework and controls oncapital flows, a developing country may have to keep choosing from time to time a capitalIn India, there is a significant opinion in favour of cautious liberalisation, but at the sametime, there are understandable fears of destabilisation. In India, there is, perhaps a greaterweight attached to stability. This may be in view of the size and structure of the economy andthe uncertain comfort level on international official, and private sector response to a crises onan apolitical basis. Thus, the policy in India is to approach liberalisation on capital accountcautiously, gradually, in a well sequenced manner, treating it as a process and responding todomestic monetary and financial sector developments as also the evolving internationalfinancial architecture.The mainstream thinking till the Asian crises was averse to capital-controls, but in the recentpast, such aversion has yielded to a lively debate on the efficacy of such controls, andconsequently the framework and operation of such controls. The control-framework can beviewed from different angles , Basically, the control instruments are quantitative or price-based, including price ceilings or floors and possibly a combination of the two. Controls orlack of controls may be based on size of a transaction, purpose, or category of participant.Asymmetrical treatments in regard to applicability and nature of controls are commonbetween inflows and outflows; between outflows associated with inflows (i.e. principal,interest, dividend, profits and sale proceeds) and other outflows; resident and non-residents;and between individuals, corporates, banks and other financial intermediaries. Theinstruments of control do vary from non- applicability, to total prohibition with intermediateregimes, say of approval on an automatic basis, case-by-case or simply price-based. TheIn managing the capital account through control framework, there could be a prioritisation ofcapital flows - in terms of their desirability or otherwise. Thus, for example, a higherpreference could be to Foreign Direct investment and long term debt compared to portfolioflows and short term debt.3control may also differentiate financial instruments by their nature or ratings.Control and Regulatory Framework and Liberalisationaccount management regime appropriate to itself.relatively more or less efficiency gains, compared to the costs of instability.; efficiency vis-à-vis stability;It must be recognised that the efficacy of control depends, among many other things, on thecategory of flows or participant. For example, it is less complex to control the inflows fromnon-residents, since non-residents are keen to have a legal title to their asset. Empiricalevidence indicates that the control over outflows from residents is facilitated more byIt is necessary to make a distinction between control framework and regulatory framework.An important component of regulatory framework relates to prudential regulation on banksvis-à-vis external sector. They may include provisioning requirements for net externalpositions; limits on open positions, and limits on investments in foreign currencydenominated assets. There could also be differentiated tax regimes affecting the maturitypattern. Monetary measures such as reserve requirements have both an external sector andmonetary angle. These regulatory instruments are part of package available for influencingthe size and composition of capital flows. Similarly, regulatory restrictions on portfolioinvestments by securities regulator would also provide for different degrees of openness fromWhile controls may have a potential to be inefficient, there is considerable merit in using theregulatory mechanisms for moderating the ebb and flow in capital movements. The gradualmovement towards liberalisation can be operationalised through a change in the mix andrigour of controls or regulatory framework, especially taking into account the tendencyIn regard to the dynamic of control or regulation vis-à-vis liberalisation, it is clear that aworkable framework appropriate to each country is necessary. The more important aspect ofmanagement of capital account is the flexibility available in the framework to progressivelyliberalise the capital-account transactions, depending on the domestic and internationala flexibility could permit quick responses to changes inmagnitudes, direction and composition of flows that may appear to be inappropriate to thecircumstances. This flexibility in operations may, for success, warrant complementarity withother policies. Finally, there may be a case for retaining the freedom to re-impose controls ortighten regulations as long as the vulnerability to highly speculative or motivated attack onthe currency exists, since market corrections may be more destabilising to the economy.Thus, it may be wise, even in the liberalised framework in capital account to retain an optionIn India, regulatory framework has been used in several combinations to address problems ofexcessive inflows and pressures towards outflows, during the reform-period, implying shortterm movements bi-directionally i.e. tightening or loosening controls as also regulations,while maintaining medium-term progress in liberalisation. Controls, however, continue toapply mostly to residents.A qualitative change however, has been brought about in the legal framework formanagement of foreign exchange in June 2000 by which the objectives of regulation areredefined as facilitating trade and payments as well as orderly development and maintenanceof foreign exchange market in India. The legal framework envisages both developmentaldimension and orderliness or stability. The legislation provides power to the government toreimpose controls if public interest warrants it.4to impose controls or tighten regulations.developments. At the same time, such towards perceived excess in inflows or outflows.time to time.appropriate tax regime and acceptable exchange rates, than through the control framework.It appears that the porous nature of capital controls is minimised if the dangers of capitalflows occurring in the guise of current account transactions are avoided. Among the measuresadopted in India are the twin requirements viz.; repatriation and surrender of current receiptsof the residents (which includes entities) and restricting foreign currency payments only togenuine transactions, and in reasonable amounts. Furthermore, serious distortions in tradepolicy could make the management of capital account difficult. Thus, liberalisation of importof gold to officialising inevitable import of gold to satisfy the domestic demand wasconsidered essential to enable liberalisation of capital account in India. Moreover, if there is acommodity-concentration in exports or imports (oil in the case of India), careful monitoringis required to assess the impact and respond, if need be, with changes in management ofcapital account.Experience indicates that foreign currency denominated assets within the country and tradingof domestic currency outside the country could have destabilising effects on the balanceThe adequacy of forex reserves is yet another important consideration in the management ofcapital account. First, adequacy has to be viewed not only in terms of trade needs but alsoother short term liabilities. Secondly, it is not merely the long term or short term debt in terms maturity that is relevant for reserves, but the  maturity. Thus, in managingthe capital account, the maturity profile of debt, including short term debt becomes important.Thirdly, a trade-related debt which is in the nature of  debt may be less severeon reserve-requirements. Fourthly, any addition to portfolio-flows may warrant comfortthrough some additions to reserves, which implies that the net contribution to investment inthe country through portfolio flows is, in effect, less than what the magnitudes indicate. Thisis not to deny the indirect effects on competition of enhancing efficiency through portfolioflows. Fifthly, there is usually a cost of maintaining forex reserves and the net cost woulddepend on the difference between the marginal cost at which the reserves have been built andthe marginal return from deployment of reserves. The liquidity management including levelof forward liabilities are also relevant. Disclosures of such liabilities, as in India, have provento be effective. Finally, while the optimal level of reserves is difficult to quantify, attention tolevel of reserves and their management are critical to overall capital account management,especially to the sentiments prevailing in forex markets. Often, the incremental changes inlevel of reserves rather than the level seem to be of significance to market perceptions.Further, the market perceptions appear to be more sensitive to downward movement inreserves than upward movements. To the extent, management of capital account tries toinfluence the size and composition of capital flows impacting on meeting of current accountdeficit as well as movements in reserves , the adequacy of level of reserves is a relevantfactor.In India, the level of forex reserves is so maintained and increased from year to year as tocover adequately not only imports but also the short term liabilities, especially short termdebt and portfolio investment. Further, the level of reserves also takes into account theoperational need to enable the Reserve Bank to even out the mismatches between supply anddemand in forex markets and thus ensure orderly conditions in a less developed market5characterised by lumpy demands.collateralisedresidual original of sheets and currencies for reasons essentially external to the domestic economic factors.LinkagesOn exchange rate, the possibility of persistent misalignments due to reasons other thandomestic factors cannot be ruled out and correction cannot be left entirely to the market. Thedeveloping countries do need some armoury to address such issues. It appears almost certainthat capital controls would be ineffective if in the popular perception, the exchange rate doesnot appear to be realistic. In other words, there is considerable merit in the argument thatcapital controls are not substitutes for an appropriate exchange rate regime even thoughcapital controls facilitate avoidance of excess volatility in the exchange rate that may beappropriate. The activities in forex markets and its linkages with other markets, especiallymoney-market, debt market especially government securities market, and equity marketshave to be identified and monitored while managing capital flows. Recognition of linkages,monitoring the developments, and willingness to intervene credibly in any or all of thesemarkets, as appropriate may be essential. Perhaps, markets should be aware of the broadobjectives of such intervention. As each of the financial market develops and gets integratedwith others, measures to increasingly liberalised capital account could be considered. Indeed,it is possible to argue that liberalisation of capital account would aid the process ofdevelopment of financial markets, but this is valid only when some informed judgements aremade in respect of each country on the interactions between the management of capitalaccount and the financial markets. In any case, capital control or regulatory framework orliberalisation would be ineffective or unstable in the absence of proper appreciation of suchAbove all, irrespective of the extent of liberalisation, official monitoring and surveillance oflarge international transactions and players would be helpful in effective and crediblemanagement of capital account.In India, during periods of surges in capital inflows, or pressures on outflows, operations inthe external sector were coordinated with actions by Reserve Bank in money and governmentThere are several policy areas that have been identified as being critical to the health ofglobal monetary and financial systems in future. Many of them fall within the jurisdiction ofthe countries concerned. There is certainly an implicit recognition that the net benefits fromliberalisation of capital account in respect of any developing country would be enhanced ifthe complementary policies are followed. Among the more important of these are: first,strengthening the banking system, diversifying financial intermediation through both banksSecondly, the regulatory practices and the co-ordination between regulators as the nationallevel and among the national level regulators at the international level are also attractingThirdly, monitoring the balance sheets of large banks, large corporates and even governmentsin terms of their growth, quality and vulnerability to shocks is considered important. Thismonitoring may have to cover stocks and flows, as also foreign currency exposures hedged orotherwise and direct or indirect.linkages among financial markets.6attention.and non-banks, and developing as well as regulating financial markets in a sound manner.Complementary Policiessecurities market to ensure stability.Finally, an integrated view of the state of development of and activities in financial markets iscaused by destabilising capital flows.Fourthly, there is a fiscal burden in case there are systemic problems, especially in bankingsector, irrespective of whether banking is in public or private sector. The health of bankingsector is critical for many reasons, one of them being stability in external sector.In India, the complementary policies considered essential have been identified by theCommittee of Capital Account Convertibility (1997). The Committee observed that whilethere were benefits of a more open capital account, it could also impose pressures on thefinancial system. Hence the Committee indicated certain sign posts or preconditions for amore open capital account and these are: fiscal consolidation, inflation-mandate andOf particular significance in regard to complementary policies that are relevant tomanagement of capital account are standards and codes being evolved and monitored byseveral agencies, including in particular IMF, World Bank, BIS, Financial Stability Forumetc. (Each country will no doubt, benchmark their existing practices against the international codesand standards, and consider their appropriateness, extent of application, nature of adaptationneeded, relative priorities, etc. Several of the actions suggested require tremendous effort inregard to many developing countries and if full compliance is desirable for furtherIn India, several Advisory Groups have commenced a review of the international standardsand codes and an assessment in so far as India is concerned; some of these reports areOutlookIt is clear that avoiding crises is ultimately a national responsibility. The impact of instabilityin times of crises appears at this stage of global environment to largely be borne by the homeor domestic public sector rather than the global private sector. Moreover, the burden of suchan asymmetrical impact is more painful on developing countries, especially the poorer ones.Hence, in this context, the distinct preference for stability, on the part of some developingcountries needs to be appreciated. Such a preference towards stability also argues formanaging their capital account regime. Such regimes could have a mix of control, regulatoryand liberal elements as appear most appropriate from time to time, to the national authoritieswho are accountable to the people for possible crises. In such a mix, there is merit in avoidingcontrols, but taking recourse to regulatory measures, while pursuing the liberalisationWithin this overall framework, the progress in capital account liberalisation would perhapsdepend on several international and domestic factors. Some of them are : First, the progressin global co-operation and understanding on relevant codes and practices to assure financialstability. Secondly, the quality of assurances and support from international financialcommunity in general and International Financial Institutions in particular, if crises were tooccur. Thirdly, the nature of burden-sharing arrangements with private sector in case ofcrises. Fourth, the progress of institutional and financial market developments in the country7concerned.objectives.expected to be released for public debate during the next 6 to 9 months.liberalisation of capital account, the pace of such liberalisation may not be rapid.Dr.S.N.Acharya has made an excellent presentation on this in this Conference)strengthening of the financial system.In India, it is recognised that the pace of liberalisation of the capital account would depend onboth domestic factors, especially progress in the financial sector reform and the evolvinginternational financial architecture.• Presentation by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Commonwealth Secretariat –World Bank Conference on Developing Countries and Global Financial Architecture, at London, on June 23,2000.8
