Knowledge Revolution and Social Development *It gives me great pleasure to deliver the inaugural address at the IX EconomicConvention 2001 at the H.R. College of Commerce & Economics for more than one reason.First and the foremost, it provides me an opportunity to be amongst students who would addto the vast pool of knowledge workers that our economy commands. If this convention helpsshape their future and add to their knowledge bank, I would be most happy to play my part.Second, I learnt that the annual Convention which is less than a decade old, has alreadyacquired a place of honour among the academic initiatives being taken in this city.  The lasteight conventions all have been on topics of contemporary relevance for the Indian economy.I am happy that the present convention has participation from two developed countries, anindication of growing globalisation of the Indian economy, which in fact was the theme ofthe first Economic Convention held in 1993. Lastly, I am happy to talk on the theme of thisconvention, viz., ‘Knowledge Revolution and Social Development’. The theme is instantlythought provoking and immensely relevant for bringing about social and economictransformation in India as well as other parts of globe.‘Knowledge’ is as old as any form of life with a cognitive process. It is about knowing orthe familiarity gained by experience. Human life relates knowledge to a person’s range ofinformation and this information can take a codified or a tacit form – a distinction to which Ireturn later when I discuss the public policy implications of these two broad forms ofknowledge acquisition. Human history is replete with phases of knowledge advancement atrapid and slow paces with frequent temporal clustering. Clustering is natural as isolatedbreakthroughs provide revolutionary impetus for more new knowledge. The term ‘knowledgerevolution’ in the present milieu connotes the information society that we are headed for withthe support of information technology as well as attendant cultural changes.Computerisation-led information technology certainly wasn’t the first knowledge revolutionthe mankind has seen, but is perhaps no less important than the others witnessed, includingthe discovery of fire or the inventions that led to industrial revolution. Comparisons wouldlead to more unsettled questions than they would settle, so I would not elaborate. I choose toplay safe and use the term knowledge revolution in the contemporary sense as indicating thescientific and economic changes that have resulted in emergence of ‘knowledge economy’ orthe ‘new economy’.  After describing this knowledge revolution, my address would try toprovide a perspective to what it has meant or can potentially mean for social development. Iwould cover this both from the viewpoint of the Indian and the world economy. In doing so,the role being played by public policies in supporting this whole process of knowledgerevolution and social development would get a special attention. We would also very brieflytouch upon the proactive function of the Reserve Bank in this regard.The Role of InformationKnowledge is sometimes confused as a pure ‘public good’ in the sense of its two maincharacteristics – non-excludability and non-rivalrousness.  Students of economics wouldknow that the first of the characteristics imply that knowledge is available to all and that noone could be excluded from its potential use. This would mean that we operate in a world inwhich no information asymmetries exist. If it were so, the Royal Swedish Academy ofSciences would not have awarded the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences inMemory of Alfred Nobel for the year 2001 to George Akerlof, Michael Spence and JosephStiglitz. This year’s Nobel Prize was awarded to them for their analyses of markets withasymmetric information.Akerlof demonstrated in his seminal paper on “Markets for Lemon” that market wherefailure where either no trade will occur or trade will occur with adverse selection of low-iquality products . Akerlof analysis, for instance, provided an explanation for high interestrates in rural credit markets or for difficulties for the aged population to find individualmedical insurance. Spence showed that better informed individual market participants takecostly actions in an attempt to improve on their market outcome by credibly transmittinginformation to the poorly informed. This may explain why education is used as a productivitysignalling in job markets or why firms may use dividends to signal their profitability toagents in the stock market. Stiglitz established that less informed participants extractinformation from the better informed, by mechanisms such as the screening performed byinsurance companies dividing customers into risk classes by offering a menu of contractswhere higher deductibles can be exchanged for significantly lower premiums. He alsoprovided an understanding of many observed market phenomena, including unemploymentand credit rationing in terms of prevalence of information asymmetry.  The key point in theresearch of these three is that markets fail or work imperfectly because information is notsymmetrically available to all. Knowledge is clearly not a public good, but is important forincreasing returns. It may be worthwhile to obtain more knowledge, whether throughscreening, signalling or through codified material or even in form of skill acquisition.The Importance of ‘Tacit’ KnowledgeThere is a growing recognition that comparative advantage of the firms, organisations ornations are imbued not just in their factor endowments that include the amount of capital orsize of labour or workforce, but in human capital and knowledge; and especially in tacitiiknowledge . Tacit knowledge nowadays is understood as form of personal knowledge that isnot codified in form of books, magazines, web pages, audio or video material. As such, it isnot possible to straight away transmit this knowledge as information from one user toanother. Personal knowledge by its very nature is private information and is used to extractprofits and sometimes monopoly rents. Tacit knowledge, therefore, is substantially rivalrousin nature. The acquisition of tacit knowledge with one user may not seem to reduce theamount of tacit knowledge with another, but the very acquisition of such knowledge reducesit private characteristic and its market valuation in terms of the profits it give or the wages itearn.The Role of StateState has played an important role in the transformation of the Indian economy to aknowledge-based one. In May 1998, the Prime Minister of India formed a NationalTaskforce on Information Technology and Software Development to formulate a long termNational IT policy for the country and also remove impediments for the growth of theinfotech industry. The main objective of this was to help India emerge as an IT softwaresuperpower. The Taskforce submitted three very useful reports to the government. Thisheralded the launch of one of the rare partnerships between government and industry thatpropelled India towards reaping the comparative advantage that the country had inknowledge industry. The trend has continued unabated with sub-national governmentscompeting with national government in providing IT infrastructure, education and goodelectronic governance. In the last few years, 18 state governments have announced ITpolicies.More recently, the Government of India has come up with the Software Technology Park(STP) and Electronics Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) Schemes that take the form of100% Export Oriented Schemes. The former is targeted for undertaking Softwareincluding export of professional services for rendering consultancy services and developmentof software. The latter is for undertaking manufacture of electronic hardwareequipment/components and other items. Both these schemes are liberally encompassing andare benefiting a wide range of enterprises that are in the business of knowledge industry.The Export-Import policy and the customs duty regime have also helped spur theknowledge revolution in the Indian economy. We have a liberal customs duty regime.Computer software can be imported duty free with no duties, additional duties or surchargeslevied thereupon. Books, magazines and periodicals on CD-ROM are also exempt fromimport duty.  Under the Exim Policy 1997-2002 announced on 31 March 2000, theGovernment provided for recognition to software companies who have acquired ISO 9000series or IS / ISO 9000 Series or ISO 14000 Series or HACP or WHO-GMP or SEI CMMLevel 2 and above accreditation / certification. Double weightage is being given on FOB orNFE exports made by such units for granting status certification (e.g. Export House, TradingHouse, Star Trading House, Super Star Trading House).  Regarding the tax regime, profitsderived from export of software (including some of IT enabled services) are exempt fromIncome Tax under Section 80 HHE. Some encouraging tax holidays are also available toexport-oriented units under various schemes. For venture capital firms or funds, a completepass through has been provided on distribution of income as well as undistributed income bythe Venture Capital Company under Section 115U. Further, any income on any investmentsmade in Venture Capital Undertaking qualifies for exemption under Section 10(23FB).Clearly the fiscal incentives are plenty for the IT-sector.The Reserve Bank has also joined the Government to reinforce the role of the State indevelopment of the knowledge industry. In a bid to further a more liberalised regime for theknowledge industry, the RBI has taken several steps. These include, (i) permission to Indiansoftware companies to offer ADR/GDR-linked Stock Option Scheme to their non-resident aswell as resident permanent employees (including Indian and overseas working Directors) thatallows remittance of up to US$50,000 in a quinquennium period related to the ADRs/GDRs,(ii) provision for remittance towards import of software through Datacom Channels /Internet, (iii) reproduction of software in India in agreement with overseas copyright holderwith provision for royalty payments without any specific approval, (iv) permission, withoutlimit, for remittance towards fee payable to accredited agency abroad for ISO certification,(v) procedures for making remittance out of EEFC account towards participation by Indiancompanies in a JV / WOS overseas under normal route, fast track window and in respect oflarge investments, (vi) provision for IT software and services companies in India to acquirecompanies overseas through ADR / GDR stock swaps without prior approval up to US$ 100million, ten times the exports earnings of the previous year and for acquisition of valuesabove US$ 100 million with provision for easy and quick approvals (vii) simplified SOFTEXform that needs to be filled by all non-physical exporters of software, (viii) allowance for useof international credit cards for import of software through internet up to US$ 25,000 inadvance of even download of a software, and (ix) liberal allowance for individuals and firmsexecuting software service contracts abroad, with only a stipulation of repatriation to India ofan income equivalent of at least 30 percent of the contract value.Apart from the regulatory steps to further knowledge revolution, the RBI has also taken aproactive lead in promoting knowledge infrastructure and knowledge practices in the Indianfinancial sector.  Operationalisation of the Indian Financial Network (INFINET) andfacilitation of the Computerised Cheque Clearance (CCC) and Electronic Funds Transfer(EFT) has changed the face of financial system.  The INFINET now operates with StructuredFinancial Messaging Solution (SFMS) as its part. SFMS is based on international messagestandards (SWIFT) and ensures secured message transmission to support inter-banktransactions. The Reserve Bank is making rapid progress towards setting-up the Real TimeGross Settlement (RTGS). The RTGS when operational would provide a new generation ofhigh value payments systems that would enable the core of the banking system across thecountry to make secure inter-bank payments across the country. The transactions will coverall the general transactions and central accounting of the RBI, including the bank’s generalledger. It is expected to enable about 205 Indian banks and financial institutions to interfacedirectly. By underwriting all payments with collateral held at the Reserve Bank of India, theRTGS system will reduce ‘systemic risk’ in the Indian banking system, thereby providingincreased integrity and security for all inter-bank transactions.  Improvements are also beingbrought about in the payment system through Centralised Funds Management System(CFMS), which enables funds managers of banks to obtain a national position of balances intheir accounts with the Reserve Bank. The CFMS covers the four major metropolitan centersand would soon be extended to most other locations of RBI offices. The initiativesexemplified above are expected to reduce all kinds of costs that exist in the financialmarketplace. These costs result in the widening the bid-ask spreads and form a kind of socialtax or a deadweight loss on savers and investors in the economy.  A favourable impact of theIT initiatives is evident on the transaction costs, inventory-carrying costs and mostimportantly on adverse information costs and the spreads, in general, are beginning to narrowdown in the Indian banking sector.Education PolicyThe role of state has been pronounced, inter-alia, due to the potential of knowledgeeconomy in bringing about social and economic development.  Education forms thecornerstone of this process, both because of its knowledge enhancing and capacity buildingcharacteristic that reflects in individual higher incomes and also because this knowledgeacquired as part of education makes a better society and a better economy with networkexternalities, lower information costs, lower social losses due to corruption and betterbenefits from information spillovers.  Education policy is, therefore, central to knowledgerevolution.India spends 3.8 per cent of its GNP on education, higher than the 2.6 per cent that theChina spends. However, 46 per cent of India’s population above the age of 15 years isilliterate as against only 22 percent of such population in China.  While India still spends lessthan the world average of 4.9 per cent of GNP on education and there does appear to bescope for increasing both public and private spending on education, the resources would needto be used more carefully to improve benefits.  In addition, more balance would be neededbetween competing uses for the earmarked funds.Some attention also needs to be given to the regional balance in the spread of educationas it has an important bearing on the life of the citizens and the polity of the nation.  In India,Kottyam district of Kerala has a literacy rate of 95.7 per cent, while the Jhabua district ofMadhya Pradesh has a literacy rate of only 19.0 per cent. In fact, 9 of the top 10 districts interms of literacy come from Kerala, with Mahe district of Pondicherry being the notableother. Barmer and Jalor district of Rajasthan have female literacy rates of around 7.7 percent. In framing our planning process, we need to give more attention to how nationalpolicies could be translated for those who are being left out from the social development.Multilateral InitiativesThere is an urgent need for multilateral initiatives to strengthen the knowledgerevolution. Knowledge revolution is of relevance to all humanity and can specially be aninstrument for convergence, whereby the laggards in development from the third worldcountries are able to catch-up with the developed countries in terms of levels of per capitaincome. Present empirical evidence shows that per worker output differentials between richcountries appear to converge only at a low rate of 2 per cent per annum. Calculations showthat at this rate it would take roughly 35 years to reduce the gap in two countries’ per capitaincome to half of its present. Data for the developing countries show even slowerconvergence possibilities. Odds are that absolute convergence is difficult. If possible at all ithas most probably to come from knowledge resources. Following the works of Mankiw,Romer and Weil and the subsequent literature on endogenous growth or the new growthiiitheory, we now know the importance of knowledge embodied in the human capital. In this context, I draw your attention to some important documents and initiatives thattestify to the growing recognition for use of knowledge to bring about social development.First, the first ever summit of heads of States and Government on social development whichgathered under the UN auspices in 1995 recognised the vital role for knowledge in socialdevelopment. The Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development that it producedexplicitly stated that new information technologies and new approaches to and use oftechnologies by people living in poverty can help in fulfilling social development goals andtherefore emphasise the need to facilitate access to such technologies.Second, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) broughtout a document in 1996, very clearly recognising the interaction of knowledge andiveconomics.  The document discussed the trends and implications of knowledge-basedeconomies, the role of science systems in such economies and the measurement issues relatedto knowledge inputs and outputs and of stocks and flows of knowledge.  I find the documentimportant as it drew world-wide attention to the role of knowledge. It also recognised thattraditional national accounts frameworks do not offer convincing explanations of trends ineconomic growth, productivity and employment.Third, the World Development Report, 1998-99, published by the World Bank hasexamined the role of knowledge in improving economic and social well-being. It emphasisesthese technologies for acquiring and disseminating knowledge base of countries and whatcountries need to do and do much faster to take advantage of new technologies for acquiringand disseminating knowledge by investing in educating their people. Countries that postponethis will fall behind those that move faster, and the adverse consequences for theirdevelopment will be hard to remedy.The World Development Report suggested three lessons that are particularly important tothe welfare of the billion of people in developing countries. First, developing countries mustinstitute policies that enable them to narrow the knowledge gaps. In a sense the convergencein knowledge precedes, convergence in growth or levels of income. Second, developingcountry governments, multilateral institutions, non-governmental organisations, and theprivate sector must work together to strengthen the institutions needed to address theinformation problems that cause markets and governments to fail. Third, no matter howeffective these endeavours are, problems with knowledge flows will persist. But recognisingthat knowledge is at core of all our development efforts will allow us to discover unexpectedsolutions to seemingly intractable problems.The Report is the first widely circulated international document that very clearly calledfor access to financial, technical and medical knowledge for improving health and livingstandards of the poor. It noted that the new communications technology and plummetingcomputing costs are “shrinking distance and eroding borders and time”, so that ever remotevillages can tap into rapidly expanding global store of knowledge.The United Nations is also laying stress on capacity building in its programme, especiallyto address problems of poverty and environment. Capacity 21 is one such project which has agood outreach. All these documents and initiatives are useful for policies, though there arefiner aspects of policies that we fine-tune to meet country-specific circumstances. I havementioned these multilateral initiatives, mainly for the benefit of the predominant studentaudience that might like to improve their knowledge base.What the Poor Can DoAny policy on knowledge systems would be misplaced if it does not provideemphasis on knowledge transmission and knowledge distribution. Knowledge should serveto empower people and provide their entitlements.  The focus has to be on capacity buildingand enabling them to do things themselves. The World Bank President, Mr. James D.Wolfensohn has made this the focal point of the World Bank which he now describes as the“Knowledge-bank”. He warns that, “in our enthusiasm for information super highway wemust not forget the villages and slums without telephones, electricity or safe water, theprimary schools without pencils, papers or books.” He adds that “for the poor, the promise ofthe new information age – knowledge for all – can seem as remote as a distant star.” TheUNDP Human Development Report 2001 analyses the divides, be it digital, scientific ortechnological. The measures and actions to enable access to new technologies are essential toreducing world poverty and facilitating sustainable development.While there is recognition in the multilateral forums over the need for using knowledge toaddress poverty, commensurate effort is missing. The words are not translated into policieswith equal intensity and policies are not translated into actions with proportionate force. It isimperative that we in developing countries make our voices heard. For instance, bio-technology has the promise of precision tools to deal with soil toxicity, drought resistance,water stress, and increasing nutritional content for sustainable agriculture, food security andhuman health. The bio-technology research has, however, hardly begun and it would betragic if it were curtailed by often emotional debates in some parts of developed world.Similarly, there is urgent need for governments to support  development of environmentallysound energy technologies to mitigate potentially devastating impacts of climate change onthe world’s life supporting ecosystems and not just rely on market solutions for suchproblems. As Stiglitz points out that government interventions for knowledge developmentmay be useful because fiscal incentives do not necessarily bias the relative prices, but mayinstead address the problem of market failures amidst large externalities.Knowledge transfers also depend on domestic policies.  Countries whose policiesencourage this stand to gain. Forty years ago, Ghana had the same per capita income as SouthKorea. By early 1990s, Korea’s income was six time higher. Some development economistsclaim that at least half of the disparity can be explained by Korea’s greater success inacquiring knowledge. Costa Rica stands out in effective use of knowledge to improve socialconditions. In Costa Rica, life expectancy and infant mortality are on par with that of manydeveloped countries, even though incomes are only about a tenth of that in United States.Experts believe that governmental efforts to provide people with information about sanitationand health has helped.  Apart from government, internet could be a powerful media today todisseminate information on health and education.Competition PolicyFinally, let me make some more public policy suggestions that one could examine tofurther knowledge revolution and social development. First, knowledge revolution hasenabled greater competition by enabling smaller firm sizes with low capital and labourrequirements to operate with telling effect. But there are ever-greater dangers that firms withknowledge advantage could indulge in monopoly practices, backed by patents or other IPRsor otherwise through perceived restrictive practices such as packaging of web browsers withoperating systems. We need stronger and ever more vigilant anti-trust institutions in Indiathat curb such practices, but not necessarily the business. The global institutions need toconsider a more effective IPR regime that strikes the right balance. A balance is neededbetween incentive to demand knowledge reflected in firms’ desire to invent and innovate orits spending on R&D and supply of new knowledge that needs inputs of past knowledge.IPRs provide the former to the detriment of the latter.  For socio-economic development totake place at an optimal pace, it is necessary to frame IPRs correctly in terms of theircoverage and time span. I am sure the presentation by the Union College of USA at thisConvention would afford the colloquium an opportunity to debate this further.Second, in India we have perhaps paid more attention to codified knowledge than tacitknowledge. We are low on skill formation than the potential provided by our educationstructure. This is due to some flaws in education policy as also our poor work culture andethics. Low labour mobility between firms and regions has been an important causal factor.  Isee from my experience in public sector banks that single point entry and virtually negligibleexit options breed inertia in these entities. They miss out on tacit knowledge that is broughtby employees moving from one firm to another. The sub-theme for the National College mayenable us to reflect on the exit policy for firms as well as for labour.Third, a logical extension to the argument above relates to knowledge that may beobtained with increased openness of the Indian economy, specially with cross-border travel. Iam glad that multinational corporations as well as tourism find a place in the sub-themes ofthis Convention.  We need to think out clearly over how far we should go on liberalisation ofcapital account and the timing for the moves in this direction.ConclusionWe live at a unique and defining moment in history. It is unique in relation to the progress inscience and technology that has been achieved in the last half a century. Beginning with menon the moon in 1960s, the Green revolution of the 1970s, the information revolution of theth1980s and genetic revolution of the 1990s, the 20 century ended with mapping of the humangenome. And it is a defining time. As all this opens a new era of knowledge based actionsand decision-making that can put the world on a path of equity and sustainability.  It isstknowledge that is available, accessible and affordable that will drive progress in the 21century, and even likely to be as important if not more so than capital endowment. TheConvention may wish to deliberate some of the issues that I have raised and some others thatwould follow in course of the presentations. I wish the Convention all success.Thank you.* Inaugural address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, RBI at the IX Economic Convention2001 at H.R. College of Commerce & Economics, Mumbai on December 6, 2001.i. The term “Lemon” is an American slang for poor quality cars and Akerlof used the analogyof the American used car market to explain how adverse selection may take place. SeeAkerlof, G.A, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism”,Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1970, 84(3): 488-500.ii. The term was introduced by Michael Polanyi, who described it as that part of knowledge,which is distinct from, but complementary to the knowledge explicit in conscious cognitiveprocesses. See Polanyi, Michael (1958), Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy,London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.iii. See Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and David N. Weil (1992), “A Contribution toEmpirics of Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 107: 407-37.iv. OECD(1996), The Knowledge-based Economy, Paris: Organisation of Economic Co-operationand Development.
