Foreign Exchange Regulations – a reviewGood evening, ladies and gentlemen. I am happy to be here at the annualgeneral meeting of the FEDAI. As we never tire of mentioning, the role of FEDAIis unique. It is not merely a self regulatory organization in the sense ofcomplementing regulation, its own regulations have a binding nature to the extentthey are issued under directions from RBI. As a self regulatory organization, welook to FEDAI to promote better customer service, efficient market practices byencouraging high standards of conduct, promoting compliance with the spirit ofRBI regulations integrity and professionalism. Furthermore, the role of FEDAIencompasses the entire area of foreign exchange which includes besides foreignexchange trading all aspects relating to goods, services, non-residents etc.In today’s address, I propose to review the entire gamut of foreign exchangeregulations from a balance of payments perspective. The destination is clear.However, a review of this nature gives us a better understanding of the how theregulatory environment has evolved and also indicates how to move forward.Current account transactionsThe whole objective of markets including foreign exchange markets should be tosupport economic activity and raise the potential for economic growth.International trade in goods and services (current account transactions) providesthis stimulus. The focus of exchange control regulations will, therefore, have tofacilitate transactions in international trade in goods and services. There hasbeen significant liberalization of the trade account in respect of export/imports aswell as invisibles. While the repatriation requirement for export earningscontinues  guided by the macroeconomic situation, exporters can hold exportproceeds in foreign currency in India in EEFC accounts as per regulations.Having regard to the liberalised approach in trade matters, specific steps weretaken to allow exporters greater flexibility and freedom in the matter of seekingregulatory compliances. The system of self write off and self extension of duedate for export realisation for exporters was introduced followed by raising thethreshold limit for GR declaration. Reliance has therefore been placed onsimplifying procedures for the genuine exporter. Similarly, exporters can avail offoreign currency or domestic credit as per their choice and banks are notconstrained from raising foreign currency resources for this purpose. In fact ourdata shows that substantial foreign currency resources have been raised bybanks for this purpose and the aggregate foreign currency borrowings thereforeon an average exceed  50 percent of Tier I capital. In regard to invoicing, there isno restriction on invoicing in any currency.In regard to imports too there are no restrictions on payments for bonafideimports. Importers are allowed to avail of trade credit up to one year for importsof raw materials and up to three years for capital goods. In regard to small valueimports we have recently liberalized and delegated follow-up for bills of entry lessthan US$100,000 to authorized dealers. This ensures that genuine importers arenot put to difficultly. Similarly for import of services, there is no need for RBIapproval beyond indicative limits and authorized dealers are allowed to permitremittances by verifying the documents. Overall, measures for simplification ofprocedures have been made subject to KYC and Anti Money Launderingguidelines.A number of initiatives have been taken towards procedural simplification with anobjective of reducing the transaction cost. In the case of individuals, foreignexchange for current account transactions such as education, medical, travel,emigration, maintenance of close relatives abroad can be drawn from theAuthorised dealer based on simple declaration up to certain indicated limits. Thefocus of external sector reform measures has therefore been to dismantlecontrols and provide an enabling environment to all entities engaged in externaltransactions.Capital account transactionsWhen we come to the capital account we enter into a much more complex area.In emphasizing the advantages of deregulation, globalisation and economicreforms, a word of caution is necessary; that for a society like India, which iscomplex and diverse, comprising different states with different levels ofdevelopment, social disruption has to be avoided. The total cost of the social orpolitical disruption or market disruption has to be weighed against the flow ofbenefits whenever we talk of economic reforms. So in that sense again, itinvolves balancing between benefits over a period and costs of immediatedisruptions.We therefore have to take an integrated view of the domestic financial as well asthe fiscal situation and the imperatives of the international financial architecture incapital account liberalization and our carefully calibrated capital accountliberalisation precisely captures this objective. In this regard we need to make thefollowing distinctions:(i) non-residents and residents; under residents, households, corporatesand Fis(ii) debt and equity(iii) inflows and outflowsAccordingly, our preferred policy orientation is  towards hierarchy of capital flowsemphasizing the importance of non-debt creating flows. In pursuance of thisapproach, a sequenced liberalization of current and capital accounts has beenundertaken with a focus on encouraging these flows with free repatriability andinternational rates of taxation but with defined processes of approval/registrationand reporting accompanied by sector specific ceilings. In regard to equityinvestment for non-residents, at present, FDI is permitted under the automaticroute subject to specific guidelines except for a small negative list. There are sixsectors where investments are prohibited and eleven sectors where investmentsrequire prior approval of Government. Seven sectors are subject to sectoralcaps. Similarly the policy on portfolio flows is quite liberal and in fact India hasreceived large flows on portfolio account. The portfolio flows are permittedthrough two channels, NRI and FII. The ambit of sectors where such flows arepermitted has been increased in a phased manner, the recent addition beingpermission for FIIs to invest in security receipts issued by ARCs.The policy relating to outward remittances for residents is to give freedom tocorporates to invest in companies overseas and establish either reenfieldprojects or acquire companies. The objective is to create an enablingenvironment for Indian companies to become multinational in nature whicheventually leads to greater international trade in goods and services.   Infurtherance of this objective, several measures are being considered includingproposal to allow all forms of guarantees by corporates under Automatic Routesubject to the overall limit, extending the scope of the general permission forESOPs and repurchase by issuing companies, proposal to allow disinvestmentunder the Automatic  Route, revision of formats of APRs and Statutory AuditorsCertificate.In regard to debt flows, we need to take into account the balance sheet approachand how risks apply to different sectors and maintenance of monetary andfinancial stability. This requires that any policy should not unduly constrainindependent monetary policy making. Recent literature on “debt intolerance”emphasizes that developing countries have historically run into problems at muchlower debt to output ratios rather than advanced countries. The focus of abalance sheet approach is therefore of particular relevance for emerging marketeconomies.  There is also need to reckon the possibility of balance sheetproblems in one sector spilling over into other sectors often snowballing in theprocess. Problems can originate in the corporate sector (as in some Asianeconomies in 1997-98) or in the fiscal sector (as in Russia 1998, Turkey in 2001and in certain Latin American countries) with the banking sector playing a keyrole in all these episodes. Similarly, if banks tighten their lending to prevent theasset portfolio from further deteriorating this further complicates the situation of acorporate or a government in need of fresh financing or debt roll overs.Furthermore, in assessing the balance sheet risks one has also to take intoaccount the contingent liabilities. In fact the off balance sheet exposures bothcredit substitutes and derivatives can substantially alter the overall risk exposure.Our external commercial borrowings policy therefore seeks to address some ofthe above issues. The whole process of permitting such external debt may beeither through the automatic route or non-automatic route, but slowly theautomatic route is being expanded and the non-automatic route reduced. Again,in the capital account apart from the government’s there are three balancesheets that we take into account whether for residents or non-residents: Thebalance sheet of the households, the corporates, and the financialintermediaries. Though in theory, everything may be integrated, in our phase ofdevelopment, definitely these three are distinct in terms of their immediatereactions to market forces. That is the reason, the recent External CommercialBorrowings (ECB) policy makes a clear distinction between financialintermediaries and corporates and entities having an element of sovereigngurantee. So, depending on the situation and the nature of balance sheets, onehas to define the capital account convertibility.Procedural simplificationsIn recent years, the Reserve Bank has delegated authority to authorised dealersto such an extent that there is hardly any need for the individuals to approach theReserve Bank for any approval. However, we have come across instances wherethe liberalised procedures have not permeated to the grassroot level in bankspossibly due to lack of knowledge about various rules and regulations and alsoprocedures to be followed for various types of forex transactions. In someinstances, banks show a distinct indifference to dealing with individualtransactions either because of the transaction cost or charge adverse exchangerates and high commissions. The RBI is examining measures to further enhancethe level and quality of customer service to individuals by reviewing the scope ofactivities of entities currently eligible to undertake forex transactions.Furthermore, with a view to provide comfort to the citizens and corporatecommunity by minimizing transaction costs, while taking severe view of willful,malafide and fraudulent transactions, it has been decided to put in place theprocedures for compounding of contravention under FEMA. The Government ofIndia has, therefore, in consultation with Reserve Bank placed the responsibilitiesof administering compounding of cases with the Reserve Bank, except underSection 3 (a) of FEMA.  Directorate of Enforcement would continue to exercisepowers of compounding under clause (a) of Section 3 of FEMA (dealingessentially with Hawala transactions).Issues to be addressed in derivatives transactionsIn the area of derivatives, numerous risk management instruments have beenallowed in a phased manner though a lot of issues are to be addressed herewhich may not be possible unless all stakeholders put in a sincere and combinedeffort. The major concern is on structured products both in regard to the productsthemselves as well as the accounting and valuation. This problem becomes moreacute in case of forex related instruments since it is essentially an OTC market.We are already working on restructuring the valuation and accounting aspects, inconsultation with ICAI, and would also invite the industry comments beforefinalizing the same. Ideally, the guiding principles in regard to derivativeoperations would be:o No structured product should contain embedded derivativestructure, which is not otherwise allowed on a standalone basis.o Except under specified exceptions, the derivative structure shouldnot permit any leeway that is not allowed for the cash market.o The structure should not result in the ‘dollarisation’ of the balancesheet of the banks.I must also add that any such framework for only the banking sector would bejust the job half done. The ultimate users, the corporates, have to be prepared forthe disclosures and recognition principles in line with International Standards. Iunderstand that ICAI is working on this but the FEDAI as an industry associationmust take up with them for much greater disclosure by corporates of all theirderivative transactions. The draft now proposed by ICAI providesrecommendatory guidance rather than making it obligatory and it is fororganizations like FIMMDA and FEDAI to ensure that this happens. Any furtherliberalization will be subject to appropriate accounting and disclosure standardsbeing adopted by corporates.The "appropriateness standard" ensures that banks use the same principles fortaking credit decisions in respect of complex derivative transactions as they dofor non-derivative transactions. Banks are expected to evaluate the purpose ofthe derivative transaction and make an assessment as to whether it isappropriate to the customer’s needs and level of sophistication. Also whether theBoards of companies understand the risks.It would be pertinent to mention here about the recent report of the CounterpartyRisk Management Policy Group. An initiative of the major international players inthe financial market, the report is directed at complementary measures that willfurther reduce the risks of systemic financial shocks and limit their damage when,rarely but inevitably, such shocks occur. A similar initiative could be worthwhile inthe Indian context too and could go along way further streamlining the regulatoryframework. FEDAI and FIMMDA should take up this initiative.I wish the deliberations all success. The RBI welcomes suggestions from FEDAIfor further simplification of FEMA regulations to facilitate genuine tradetransactions.
