Managing Currency and Interest Rate Risks –1New Challenges for Banks & CorporatesndIt is a pleasure to be here at the 2 FT-Yes Bank International Banking Summitamidst a very distinguished set of panellists and audience. I must compliment theorganisers for selecting a very wide range of subjects – subjects which are asvaried as they are topical in the world as we live in today - for discussions. Thesubject for this session “Managing currency and interest rate risks – newchallenges for banks and corporations” is very relevant in the post crisis world ofelevated financial market volatility. Managing market risk has always been at thecore of the risk management function of banks and, increasingly, of corporates. Asthe subject of the discussion appropriately suggests, the recent global crisis has,indeed, posed ‘new’ challenges for banks and end-users in managing currencyand interest rate risks. Such new challenges have emerged due to excessivevolatility both in terms of dimension and direction witnessed in almost all classesof financial assets. Since banks and corporates are often required to takedecisions that can impact them much later, such a state of excessive volatilitymakes it difficult for concerned economic agents to make optimal and informeddecisions.1. .2. Institutions, both financial and non-financial, have endured extreme levels ofmarket volatility in recent years. Long standing correlations across and withinasset classes broke down, traditionally held beliefs about the valuation ofsecurities were turned on their heads, currencies and interest rates moved intoranges hitherto not witnessed, and definitely not anticipated. And all of thishappened within an environment of significant economic and geopoliticaluncertainty amidst slowing growth, posing considerable challenges for banks andcorporates alike. Scenarios which had been consigned to the “tail” of normaldistributions even in traditional stress testing exercises suddenly became actualscenarios, leaving institutions scrambling for new techniques and paradigms tomanage currency and interest rate risks. This has been, as we know, eloquentlycaptured by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his black swan theory which describesoccurrence of highly unexpected events causing high impact.Prolonged period of systemic risks and heightened volatility3. The onset of the global financial crisis in 2007 set the stage for a prolongedperiod of systemic risks, anxiety and unprecedented levels of volatility in financialmarkets. It left policy makers grappling for measures – both conventional andunconventional – as they scrambled to deal with bankrupt financial institutions,frozen inter-bank markets, increasingly volatile financial markets, persistently highlevels of unemployment and a stagnating real economy.  The increased volatilityinjected an additional element of uncertainty into financial markets and created1nd Based on session keynote address delivered by Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at 2FT-Yes Bank International Banking Summit on October 16, 2012 in Mumbai. The speaker acknowledges thecontributions of Ms. Dimple Bhandia, Shri. Rakesh Tripathy and Shri. Surajit Bose of the Reserve Bank of India.Page1 of13significant feed-through effects into the real economy. Financial and non-financialcompanies, faced with the challenges of anticipating costs and pricing theirproducts, adopted a more cautious approach to business planning and their hiringand firing policies.4. Going forward the heightened volatility in financial markets is unlikely tomoderate soon. Global economic conditions remain fragile. The green-shoots ofrecovery which had emerged during 2010 have given way to uncertainty about theprospects of global growth in developed and emerging markets alike.Unemployment remains at unsustainably high levels in many advancedeconomies. Unconventional monetary policy measures have become the norm inthe advanced world as one central bank follows another in announcing novelmeasures to kick start their respective economies. New phrases have entered thedictionary of the central bankers – “Operation Twist”, “Outright MonetaryTransactions”, “Funding for Lending” scheme, to name just a few. All of thesehave resulted in considerable uncertainty about the impact of such measures, thelongevity and extent of the measures and the timing and impact of scaling backsuch measures, as and when they are finally unwound. These uncertainties haveinevitably found expression in increased volatility in financial markets.5. There is yet to emerge any credible and sustainable solution to the sovereigndebt crisis plaguing the Eurozone. There remains continuing uncertainties aboutthe future of the European Monetary Union. Several measures have been takenrecently towards resolving the issues facing the Eurozone. These include policyannouncements about European banking and fiscal integration, announcementsof new rounds of asset purchase programmes, statements from senior policymakers in support of the single currency, etc. These have stabilized markets byreducing probability of tail risks and have bought critical time and elbow room forpolicy makers.6. Nevertheless, critical risks and vulnerabilities remain. A definite strategy to theresolve the Eurozone sovereign crisis remains elusive and policy execution risksare high given the widespread popular discontent about the proposed austerityand other fiscal measures. There are increasing signs of fragmentation alongnational lines in the euro zone while banks’ balance sheet adjustments andfunding difficulties are only adding to the credit constraints being posed by trendsin deleveraging as banks strive to attain higher levels of capitalization. Downsiderisks to global growth are non-trivial and further uncertainties are being posed bypolitical developments in the US including the looming “fiscal cliff”. All or any ofthese issues have the potential to trigger considerable market instability.7. The uncertainties in the advanced economies are finding their way todeveloping nations through trade, finance, commodity price and confidencechannels. Critically, the uncertainties are reflected in the volatility of capital flowsto emerging market – a volatility which is reverberating in domestic financialmarkets. In cases of countries such as ours the uncertainties posed by globalheadwinds are accentuating domestic macro-economic challenges. Due toincreased channel of inter-linkages between the domestic markets and the rest ofPage2 of13the world, the domestic markets have not been able to remain isolated from theglobal developments. Just to drive home the point, let us look at the ratio of itsexternal trade to GDP. In the case of India, the ratio has increased four-fold – from8 per cent of GDP in 1972 to nearly 40 per cent now. Taking cognisance of thegrowth of non-trade cross border flows, a more meaningful measure of a country’sglobal integration can be the ratio of two- way flow of goods and finance in and outof a country to its GDP. In the Indian context, this ratio has increased eight foldover last four decades, from 14 per cent in 1972 to well over 100 per cent now.These statistics clearly reflect the country’s growing trade and financial integrationwith the rest of the world. While increased integration gives better businessopportunities in normal times, during such volatile times, it would also posechallenges for banks and corporates as they seek to manage their risks whilecontinuing to find viable funding sources for their activities both in Indian andabroad and conduct their business in general. Apart from linkages with the globaldevelopments, there are several domestic factors which are also important in thecontext of increasing trend of volatility in domestic financial markets such aswidening current account deficit, growth slowdown, growing fiscal deficit, stickyinflation, governance related issues, downward revision in sovereign ratingoutlook and the threat of a downgrade of the country’s sovereign rating to belowinvestment grade, to name just a few. Government of India has, of course, taken aseries of measures to address many of the challenges in the recent weeks.8. Given very limited role that we can play in influencing the global environmentcharacterized by frequent bouts of risk-on/risk-off sentiments, I would like to touchupon the changing scenario in domestic financial markets and its implications forcurrency and interest rate risk management . Thereafter, I would briefly touchupon the challenges these developments pose for banks and corporates and whatlessons can be learnt.Currency and interest rate risk in the Indian context9. After remaining stable for nearly two years, the Indian Rupee starteddepreciating very sharply last year immediately after the credit rating of the USwas downgraded by the S&P.  As compared to an appreciation of 1.1 per centduring 2010-11, the Indian Rupee fell by more than 12 per cent during 2011-12(Chart 1). The downward pressure on the Indian Rupee was also marked byheightened volatility. A sharp depreciation within a short period of time had adestabilizing impact on the general market sentiment. As may be seen (Chart 2),the Indian Rupee was relatively less volatile till July 2011 but the level of volatilityincreased significantly thereafter. There was some moderation in volatility after aseries of policy measures were announced by Government of India and theReserve Bank of India during last quarter of 2011. These measures were aimed ataugmenting capital flows and imposing certain restrictions on banks andcorporates in order to curb speculative uni-directional bets on the Indian Rupee bysuch entities. Apart from taking policy measures, the Reserve Bank did alsointervene to maintain orderliness in the foreign exchange market by curbingexcessive volatility and in the process stabilizing the market sentiments.Page3 of1310. During the current financial year 2012-13, after depreciating by more than 10per cent till June 2012, the Indian Rupee started recovering gradually in responseto major central banks’ decision to go for further policy easing and theannouncements of next round of reform measures by the Government. Theappreciation is, however, also associated with some degree of volatility.Chart 1: Movement in the US$/INR exchange rate(Source: Reference Rate, Reserve Bank of India)Chart 2: Volatility in the US$/INR exchange rateDaily QINR=D4 03-01-2011 - 26-10-2012 (BOM)ValueVCC, QINR=D4, Trade Price(Last),  30, 365.0INR12-10-2012, 12.44971413121110987654.123403 17 01 16 01 16 01 18 02 16 01 16 01 18 01 16 01 16 03 17 01 16 01 16 02 16 01 16 01 16 02 16 01 16 01 18 02 16 01 16 03 17 01 16Jan 11 Feb 11 Mar 11 Apr 11 May 11 Jun 11 Jul 11 Aug 11 Sep 11 Oct 11 Nov 11 Dec 11 Jan 12 Feb 12 Mar 12 Apr 12 May 12 Jun 12 Jul 12 Aug 12 Sep 12 Oct 12(Source: Reuters)11. At the same time, it can be said that the Indian Rupee is not the only currencythat has been experiencing increased volatility. There are other BRIC currencies,emerging market currencies and even Euro that have seen such sharpmovements. In fact, the movement of the Indian rupee seems to be broadlytracking the fortunes of the Euro against the US dollar – a testimony perhaps tothe degree to which global markets are influencing conditions in domestic financialmarkets (Chart 3).Page4 of13Chart 3: Is Indian Rupee following the trend of Euro against US Dollar(Source: Bloomberg)12. Before I move to the issue of managing the currency risk, let me briefly touchupon another equally critical macro-economic variable-interest rate that alsoposes risk to banks and corporates alike and needs to be managed. In contrast tothe Indian Rupee movement, the movement in domestic interest rates (asrepresented by the generic 10-year yield of bonds issued by Government of India)has been range bound (Chart 4) with reduced volatility in recent months ascompared to the past (Chart 5).Chart 4: Movement in 10 year G-Sec yield(Source : Reuters)Chart 5: Volatility in 10 year G-Sec yield(Source: Reuters)Page5 of1313. The trends in interest rate movements have been influenced by a host offactors, such as, policy actions on the rate front and open market operationsconducted by the Reserve Bank, upward revision in FII investment limits inGovernment securities, broadening of investor base for investment in Governmentsecurities, persistence of inflationary pressure, etc.Measures taken by the Reserve Bank14. As stated earlier, in the face of increasing volatility in the financial marketsand a significant depreciation of the domestic currency, a host of measures havebeen taken by the Reserve Bank and the Government of India since the beginningof last quarter of 2011. These include, inter alia, the following:i. Limits on investment in debt securities comprising government securitiesand corporate bonds by foreign institutional investors were enhanced;ii. Interest rates on rupee denominated non-resident deposits werederegulated while rates foreign currency denominated deposits increased;iii. The all-in-cost ceiling for External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs) wasrationalized;iv. Following administrative measures aimed at discouraging speculativeactivities were initiated:a) Reduction in limits for booking forward contracts under pastperformance route and only on fully deliverable basis;b) Forward contracts once cancelled cannot be rebooked;c) Net Overnight Open Position Limits (NOOPL) of the AuthorizedDealer (AD) banks were reduced across the board; andd) AD banks were advised that their intra-day open position/daylightlimit should not exceed the existing NOOPL approved by theReserve Bank;v. Interest rate on export credit in foreign currency was deregulated;vi. Foreign exchange earners were asked to convert 50 per cent balances intheir Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC) accounts with AD banksinto rupee balances and credited to the rupee accounts. Subsequently, theerstwhile stipulation of allowing credit of 100 per cent foreign exchangeearnings was restored subject to certain conditions, such as, the total ofthe accruals in the account during a calendar month should be convertedinto Indian Rupees on or before the last day of the succeeding calendarmonth after adjusting for utilization of the balances for approved purposesor forward commitments;vii. Positions taken by banks in currency futures/options cannot be offset byundertaking positions in OTC market, and the NOOPL of the banks asapplicable to the positions involving the Indian Rupee as one of thecurrencies will not include positions taken by banks on the exchanges.15. Much has been said and discussed about the impact of the policy measures.There has been some criticism within the financial and commercial circles that thepolicy initiatives have been a step backwards and that they have introducedrigidities in the domestic foreign exchange market and constrained the ability ofbanks and corporates to hedge their risks. I do not intend to go into the details ofPage6 of13the raison d’être for each of these measures but would rather confine myself to afew general remarks in this regard. The Reserve Bank undertook theadministrative measures to curb the speculative trends. These measures arosefrom a set of practices and behavioural traits which had emerged in domesticfinancial markets and aggravated the pressures on domestic financial markets. Toname just a few: corporates often leave their foreign exchange exposures un-hedged to benefit from the movement of the currency in their favour and save thecost of hedging rather than concentrating on their core business to generateprofits. Derivatives are often used as instruments for generation of profit ratherthan as instruments for risk mitigation. Import exposures were typically left un-hedged or the hedge ratio was very small. The past performance facility wasmade available to corporates to enable them to plan their foreign currencyexposures. Without a delivery mandate, the facility was instead used to speculateon currency movements.16. It needs to be appreciated that none of the measures which have been takenin the recent months have in any way restricted or constrained the abilities ofcorporates to manage their genuine foreign exchange exposures. All that hasbeen done is curbing the scope available for taking speculative bets on the Rupeethat resulted in enhanced volatility. Within the overarching prerequisite offacilitating genuine hedging needs of the customers, Reserve Bank wouldconsider further relaxations in a calibrated manner. Infact Reserve Bank hasalready relaxed some of the measures in July 2012 so that the genuine hedgingrequirements of the real sector are not affected. Exporters have now been allowedto cancel and rebook forward contracts to the extent of 25 percent of the contractsbooked in a financial year for hedging their contracted export exposures. Similarly,AD Category I banks have been permitted to exclude their Net Options Positionand the positions taken by the overseas branches from their NOOPL, for positionsinvolving the Indian Rupee as one of the currencies.Managing currency and interest rate risks17. The events during the crises have compelled banks and corporates to starttaking a broader, more sophisticated approach to analyzing their risk exposures.These events have forced banks and corporates to go back to the first principlesof risk management and that is of identifying risks, measuring them and managingthem. Prior to the crisis, a prolonged period of stable financial markets,incentivized banks and corporates alike to take on more and more risks on theirbalance sheets. A one way trend in currency rates prompted corporates to leavetheir foreign exchange exposures to generate profits if the currency movedfavourably. Low and stable interest rates acted as incentives for increasingleverage. When financial markets turned volatile, the currency started depreciatingand the funding markets started drying abroad, many of these corporates were leftvulnerable. Not surprisingly a recent analysis reveals that the major reasons forcases being referred to the CDR cell in the last few years were high leverage orhuge open foreign exchange positions of companies.Page7 of1318. The experiences during the crises, therefore, entail many important lessonsfor managing currency and interest rate risks. First, the experiences have re-emphasized the importance of corporates focussing on their core businesses andnot looking at currency mismatches to generate extra profit. Second, the recentexperiences have also highlighted the risks associated with un-hedged exposures.The third set of lessons relate to the careful selection of hedging instruments.Many corporates, large and small, burnt their fingers dabbling in complexderivative products. Many leant, the hard way, that there are no free lunches andthat “zero cost structures” and “unlimited payoffs” are but figments of fertileimagination. Fourth, is the importance of stress testing or, at least, of anticipatingand preparing for potential worst case scenarios. For many corporates, the lastfew years of slower growth and trade, would arguably have been easier to handle,had they focussed on proper management of currency and interest rate risks.Fifth, the risks associated with excessive leverage have very clearly been broughtout by the crisis. The recent experiences have, thus, under-scored the age oldlesson of the downside of excessive ‘greed’.19. On its part, the Reserve Bank has continuously been making efforts insensitising the banks and the end-users for judicious use of available derivativeproducts in India in managing both currency as well as interest rate risk. Whilethere is a comprehensive regulatory frame work put in place for OTC derivativesproducts to hedge currency risk, such as forwards, swaps, options, etc. exchangetraded currency futures and options have also been permitted in order to providethe benefit of transparent pricing and better risk management.Long-term forex derivatives20. The forward market in India is pretty liquid up to one year. The liquidity inforward market for tenor beyond one year, however, is unsatisfactory and posesdifficulties for market participants who want to hedge a long term forex exposure.Mostly they deal with the problem by booking contracts up to one year and thenroll it over till the maturity of the exposure. This strategy partially addresses theirlong term risk, reducing exchange rate risk to the risk of a less volatile forwardpremium. While there has been no regulatory restriction put on bookings of long-term forwards as such, there is asymmetry in this segment in the sense that it isdominated by demand on the buy side. Further, the illiquidity also owes to theabsence of a Rupee (term) interest rate swap market, and this makes it difficult forthe market makers to price a long term forward contract.MTM of the forex derivatives21. Another related issue in this context that I would briefly like to touch upon ismarked to market (MTM) on outstanding forex derivative contracts and thereluctance on part of some of the corporates on entering into such contracts forfear of MTM losses, should the price of the underlying variable move in otherdirection. It needs to be emphasized that the MTM is a dynamic conceptrepresenting the fair value of the contracts taking into account the marketmovements and essentially represents the replacement cost of the derivativecontracts.  These accounting losses should, therefore, be looked at in totalityalong with the economic rationale of the hedges undertaken. While we have had aPage8 of13series of informal dialogues with industry representatives, banks, auditors andeven some corporates on the issue for a better understanding, there seems to beno unanimity as far as the applicability of the existing accounting guidelines arethere. Generally speaking, a corporate entering into a derivative contract as aperfect hedge should be indifferent to the price movements during the period ofthe contract as any MTM loss in the derivative contract should be near equal tothe MTM gains in the underlying. If, however, different accounting norms arefollowed for both the hedged item as well as the hedging instrument, there couldbe a possibility of timing mismatch in the profit and loss statement resulting intoundue volatility in the bottom line of the corporates. I understand that companiesthat prepare financial statements under Indian Generally Accepted AccountingPrinciples (GAAP) or International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) have theoption to apply “hedge accounting” principles to these transactions in order tominimize volatility in the profit or loss statement and reflect the risk managementobjective of these arrangements. It is necessary that industry representativebodies, such as, Foreign Exchange Dealers’ Association of India (FEDAI) and theInstitute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) discuss the issues involved andcome out with some clarity on the issue for the larger benefit of all thestakeholders.Limited appetite for risk mitigation products22. For mitigating foreign exchange exposure risks of Indian corporates/importers,facilities of onshore hedging of the Indian Rupee exposure of the non-residentbuyers/sellers have been introduced. There has been hardly any interest topromote this facility among the non-resident business associates. As far asmanaging interest risk is concerned, interest rate swaps (IRS), forward rateagreements (FRAs) are permitted derivative products in the OTC market. The IRSmarket has evolved over the past decade and is fairly liquid though activity isconcentrated at few tenor points (mostly up to five years) and among fewparticipants (foreign banks and a few private sector and foreign banks account formore than 80 per cent of trading activity). One of the issues with the IRS market inIndia is that trades are mostly concentrated on overnight MIBOR as benchmark inabsence of a liquid term money market. In order to offer alternative hedging tool tothe market participants, exchange traded interest rate futures (IRF) on 10 yearnotional GoI coupon bond and 91-day T-bills were also introduced. Afterwitnessing good amount of trading activity during initial few months immediatelyafter the launch, the trading activity has reduced considerably. Reserve Bank hasalso permitted introduction of IRF contracts on two and five year GovernmentSecurities on cash settlement basis to provide the products at the shorter endwhich would offer flexible hedging options to the market participants. Theseproducts, however, are yet to be introduced by the exchanges. There have beenvarious reasons put forward by market participants for IRF not being used bythem. Recently, the Reserve Bank constituted Working Group on “EnhancingLiquidity in Government Securities and Interest Rate Derivatives markets”(Chairman: Shri R. Gandhi). The Group has made several recommendations forimproving liquidity in both the IRS and IRF market, such as, electronic tradingplatform for the IRS market, central counter party (CCP) mechanism for providingguaranteed settlement of trades executed through the electronic platform,Page9 of13standardisation of the IRS contracts, permitting insurance companies, pensionfunds and other financially sound entities to participate in IRS market, IRF basedon overnight call borrowing rate; permitting cash-settled 10 year IRF, etc. ReserveBank has also permitted single-name credit default swaps (CDS) in India forhedging credit risk separately. Since the launch of the product, however, only fewtrades have been executed. Various reasons have been attributed for the lack oftrading interest in CDS in India. One of them is that banks are yet to put in placeinternal policies for trading in CDS. Though International Swap and DerivativesAssociation (ISDA) master agreements have been finalised by the Fixed IncomeMoney Market and Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA), participants haveto enter into bilateral ISDA agreements for transacting in CDS. When insurancecompanies and mutual funds, which are likely to be permitted by their respectiveregulators soon, start participating in the CDS market, one hopes the volumes willpick-up.Risk of long-term floating rate loans to individuals23. It has been observed that a major chunk of the loan portfolio of banks thesedays comprises floating rate products, especially in the retail segment, with loansfor housing sector extending up to 20 years or so. On the other hand the interestrate paid by them on deposits is predominantly fixed and these deposits generallyare of upto a maximum of five year maturity. This obviously can result in seriousasset liability mismatch in their balance sheets apart from subjecting theunsophisticated borrower to interest rate risk over a longer horizon. While thereare options available to banks to manage this mismatch through raising of longterm resources via bonds, securitization of assets, hedging of interest rate riskusing derivative products, etc. the retail borrowers are not well-equipped to useany hedging instrument to hedge the interest rate risk. There have been somesuggestions, such as, allowing banks to issue more long-term bonds, treatingbanks’ exposure to fix-rate long-term housing loans eligible for priority sector, andencouraging large institutional investors like pension funds, provident funds,insurance companies, etc. to invest in bonds floated by bank so that long-termfixed rate loans can be extended to the retail borrowers. In order to assess thefeasibility of introducing more long-term fixed interest rate loan products,particularly for the retail customers by banks, the Reserve Bank has set up aCommittee (Chairman: K. K. Vohra) that is expected to submit its report shortly.Management of interest rate and currency risks by banks24. Let me now turn to the challenges for banks for management of currency andinterest rate risks. Banks are essentially in the business of managing risks. Inparticular, they are required to handle interest rate mismatches as well ascurrency mismatches in their capacity as authorized dealers and market-makersin the currency market.  The events of the last few years have proved that banks,even in their own interest, have to take on at least some of the onus of riskmanagement of their clients.  The Reserve Bank has also assigned responsibilityon banks for ensuring suitability and appropriateness while transacting derivativeinstruments with the corporates and also ensuring that the corporates haveappropriate risk management framework. More specifically, before offering anyPage10 of13derivative product to clients, banks should obtain Board resolution from thecorporates which should explicitly mention, inter alia, (i) the limit assigned by thecorporate to the bank, (ii) the names and designation of the officials of thecompany authorised to undertake particular derivative transactions on behalf ofthe company (iii) specific products that can be transacted by such designatedofficials, etc. Keeping in view the implications of excessive risks taking by thecorporates and impact of consequential risks on their balance sheets and thefinancial system, banks have also been advised to evaluate the risks arising out ofunhedged foreign currency exposure of the corporates and price them in the creditrisk premium while extending fund based and non-fund based credit facilities tothem. Banks have also been advised to consider stipulating a limit on unhedgedposition of corporates on the basis of policy approved by the Board of the banks.Absence of proper oversight over corporate’s business particularly their currencyand interest rate risks has come to the fore now when we have witnessed anumber of cases of corporates seeking restructuring/CDR, many of whom havegot into difficulties due to foreign exchange related losses and excessive leverage,restructuring/defaults of overseas ECB/Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds(FCCB) obligations, loss to the overseas branches of Indian banks who havesubscribed Credit Linked Notes (CLNs) under the FCCB issues. This does not, inany way, take away the primary responsibility of the corporates towards their ownrisk management system but the joint effort can go a long way towards preventingthe kind of legal disputes which arose in the recent past.25. Banks enter into derivative contracts for the purpose of hedging their ownrisks. They also play an important role as market makers in the derivativesmarkets to enable their customers to hedge their risks. Client trades are typicallycovered on a back-to-back basis by banks in the inter-bank market, implying thatthe banks are hedged as far as market risks on client related transactions areconcerned but they continue to hold on to the credit risks arising from theexposure to their clients. Banks also typically maintain “open” positions as part oftheir trading book of their derivative portfolio and these positions engender marketrisks for the banks. The management of both risks is critical for banks, especiallyin the current environment of increased uncertainties and market volatility.26. Banks also carry a significant amount of interest rate risk in their investmentportfolio due to holding of the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) bonds and non-SLRsecurities. Managing risks in the investment portfolio, thus, acquires additionalsignificance in an environment of increased volatility of interest ratesnotwithstanding the HTM dispensation available to banks up to certain limits.Typically, banks have been using a combination of duration targets and durationgap analysis for managing risks arising out of movements in interest rates. Aseries of stress tests are being conducted periodically by the Reserve Bank on theimpact of interest rate shocks on the banking and trading books of banks. Theresults have been presented in the Financial Stability Reports (FSR) published bythe Reserve Bank of India. They suggest that while banks are largely resilient tothe shocks involving both parallel and non-parallel shifts in the yield curve, thereare a few banks which are significantly impacted. Hence, there remains a need forbanks to be vigilant in managing risks on this front.Page11 of1327. As reported in our FSR, the empirical analysis of the portfolio of select banksconducted in the Reserve Bank a few months back revealed that banks werecarrying a significant quantum of risks in their portfolios on a gross basis thoughon a net basis the positions were relatively matched (Chart 6). The chart showsthat gross positive MTM position of the derivative portfolio of some banks issignificant in relation to their capital funds. In some cases, the gross positive MTMis several multiples of their capital funds. This clearly suggests that banksremained exposed to and, would need to manage the risks of counterpartyfailures. A series of scenario and sensitivity stress tests were also conducted onthe derivative portfolios of banks as part of the above exercise. The sensitivityanalysis involved the application of a series of interest rate and exchange rateshocks to the derivatives portfolio of banks. The scenario analysis was based on aset of historical scenarios of heightened volatility. The stress test results showedthat, for some banks, the impact of the stress scenarios are very significant eventhough for most banks the impact was manageable.Chart 6: Positive and Negative MTM of SCBs as a ratio of respective capitalfundsSource:  RBI Financial Stability Report, June 201228. In summing up, I would like to mention that from all indications, theuncertainty and volatility associated with the financial markets are here to stay, atleast for the foreseeable future, as the ‘new normal’ when the world grapples thelingering impact of the global financial crises and the sovereign debt crisis, aprolonged period of low or zero interest rates leading to potential mispricing ofrisks and high volatility in oil and commodity prices, tail-risk of geopolitical eventsbesides domestic macro-economic developments. Managing currency andinterest rate risks is, therefore, going to be a major challenge for the corporatesand the banks, particularly in an emerging and developing economy like Indiawhere future development of the market is critically linked to avoiding systemicrisks and shocks as we move forward. Before I conclude, I would like to flag someof the related issues for the panel and other distinguished participants to discuss.a. Are there any models/methods available to mitigate the impact ofglobal headwinds without sacrificing the gains of globalization?Page12 of13b. Given the breakdown of traditional correlations among asset classes,assumptions about valuations, enhanced uncertainty and heightenedvolatility, are the risk management systems of the corporates and thebanks evolving in sync with the emerging challenges?c. Specifically for banks in India, have they really internalized the needand necessity of monitoring and reviewing the risk managementstrategies of their clients? Have the banks put in place the requiredsystems and processes to Know the Business of their Customers(KBC), risks they carry on their balance sheet?d. Are the corporates really constrained for hedging due to accountingissues? Can industry associations, banks and accountants develop acommon understanding on this?e. Are their staff, management and Board sufficiently sensitive to the riskmanagement related issues? What is constraining the market-makersin using the risk mitigation products e.g. IRF, CDS, etc., which wereintroduced with a lot consultation with the market-participants?f. Given the preponderance of investment portfolio in the balance sheetof banks, are they sufficiently sensitive to interest rate risks? Are bankscognizant of the need to actively manage the interest rate risks in theirderivative portfolio? With a portfolio hedged against market risks isthere adequate recognition of embedded counterparty risk?Thank you.Page13 of13
