Government Budgets, Banking and Auditors: What is New? *I am thankful to the organisers for persuading me to address this gathering since the eventhas provoked me to think deeper on a subject of mutual interest.  In fact, having agreed to give atalk, the search for an appropriate subject commenced.  It has to be futuristic as demanded by theorganisers.  It ought to be of general interest and at the same time relevant to a gathering ofChartered Accountants.  Of course it can not but be an area of concern to Reserve Bank of India.Above all, the subject should be one in which I have some comparative advantage over others.After considerable deliberation and consultations, the subject chosen is “Government Budgets,Let us start with Government Budgets.  Till a few years ago, budgets of CentralGovernment and State Governments were entirely a matter of domestic concern.  In recent years,the Government budgets, and in particular, revenue and fiscal deficits have become matters ofglobal concern also.  The international credit agencies look at the fisc, which affects borrowingsby our corporates.  The foreign investors look at our budgets in deciding to bring money in ortake it out.  The investors’ sentiments affect Stock markets and consequently to some extent, theexchange rate also.  Some analysts argue that this international focus on our Budgets is occurringonly because we are seeking foreign savings, but that is not true. Countries in European region,which include Germany, France and Italy have been mandated to keep the fiscal deficit below 3per cent of Gross Domestic Product.International ConcernBanking and Auditors: What is New”.Mr. Chairman and friends,There is since last year a Group of 20 countries of which India is a member and the G20is closely involved in addressing issues concerning international financial stability.Transparency in fiscal matters is an important item on their agenda.  Our Government budgets,and in particular, deficits are a matter of wider economic and international significance now,more than even before and increasingly so in future.Of particular significance to a Central bank is the way the fiscal deficit is financed.Financing of fiscal deficit through a process of monetisation by a central bank except at thediscretion of the central bank and at market related terms is frowned upon.  The changing role ofReserve Bank of India in financing fiscal deficits of Government, and consequent implicationsfor monetary policy as well as balance sheet of Reserve Bank of India thus assumes significance.The way banks are organised and supervised has also ceased to be a matter merely of ourdomestic concern – especially after the Asian crisis.  Most of international financial transactionshave to pass through banks and both their stability and efficiency have become areas of concernespecially for G-20.  The link between our Central Government Budget and our banks is wellknown.  Most of our large banks are wholly or substantially owned by Government and areprovided with budgetary support as equity.   Banks also hold about sixty percent of the whole ofGovernment debt, though much of it is to fulfil statutory reserve requirements.  RBI, besidesIn fact, even to allow overseas branches of our banks to operate in other countries, thesupervisors of host countries are closely tracking the standards of our supervision and health ofour banking system.  Of course, in the process of evolution of international standards, RBI isclosely involved.  In any case, in the matter of supervision of banks and non-banking finance2being a fiscal agent, is also the supervisor of the commercial banks.Well, the moment a balance sheet is mentioned, the auditor’s role cannot be far behind.companies also, RBI like many other central banks is placing increasing reliance on theprofessional inputs of auditors.In brief, there are observable links between Government Budgets and banks with whichauditors are associated, and in regard to both, the recent trends indicate changing international asBudgets and Banks in the After independence, and as part of planned development, the economic policy in Indiamoved from fiscal neutrality to what may be described as fiscal activism.  Such activism meantlarge developmental expenditures, mainly to finance long-gestation projects requiring long termfinance.  The government expected to raise funds at fine rates.  A large borrowing with a strong preference for low interest rates added to the demand for support from RBI orA little explanation on financing of fiscal deficit is perhaps useful.  Fiscal deficit, definedto be on cash basis for this discussion, can be financed either through bond issuance or moneycreation.  Bond financing entails net placement of government debt in financial markets.  Moneyfinancing, on the other hand, involves changes in the monetary base arising out of changes in netcentral bank credit to government and thus is a combined effect of central bank’s contribution toprimary issues, open market operations and clean advances.  Such financing of the fiscal deficitmay be involuntary or voluntary. For example, it is involuntary when a central bank is obliged toextend credit to government through what has been described as “automatic Similarly Government securities may be placed in captive market by legal stipulations, say onProvident Funds, insurance and banking.  The financing of fiscal deficit may not be at marketdetermined or market related rates but concessional rates if recourse is made to involuntaryincreasing 3monetisation”.monetisation of fiscal deficits.programmePast : Fiscal Activismwell as domestic dimensions.financing.  It should be obvious that each form of financing of fiscal deficit has its ownconsequences, and does impact on monetary policy and operations of financial sector.What happened in India till recently?  The RBI had to manage the effects of large scale through preemption of commercial banks’ resources by hiking Statutory LiquidityRatios and Cash Reserve Ratios well beyond the limits warranted by genuine prudentialrequirements, while Government also preempted resources from other captive institutions suchas provident funds, and  insurance.  At one stage, well over one-half of the totalresources raised by the banking system was preempted and as much as 15-16 per cent wasimpounded under the cash reserve ratio at extremely low rates of remuneration.  Reserve Bankalso had to ensure successful borrowing of mandated amounts at mandated uniform interest rates,by States and Public enterprises as part of the national planning effort.    Under thesecircumstances, RBI had virtually no choice except to allocate credit and fix interest rates for bothdeposits and credit, leading to a complex administered interest rate regime with complicatedcross- subsidisation.  The consequences of such fiscal activities were not as productive as wasFiscal activism was expected to result in a virtuous cycle of development. However,while liabilities in terms of public debt were expanding, assets created out of such borrowingsfailed to yield commensurate results. Such a gap between the cost of borrowing and the returncontinued to widen over time.  This imbalance between returns and cost of borrowing resulted ingradual deterioration into a ‘soft budget-constraint’, particularly on account of easy and artificially low cost of debt.  Efforts to improve financial returns of investments made bygovernment did not yield adequate results.4monetisationConsequences of Fiscal Activismoriginally expected.nationalisedmonetisationIn view of soft-budget constraints, the fiscal deficits persisted, and over a period, deficitson the revenue account surfaced.  The automatic monetisation of deficits by RBI mountedthrough recourse to issue of ad hoc Treasury Bills at low interest rates at much less than half themarket related rates.  The temporary mismatches between government receipts and expendituresduring the year also became larger over time, since there was no incentive towards efficient cashThere were inadequate incentives to state governments to ensure fiscal prudence, sincethe quantum and terms of borrowing were not related to fiscal promise or performance.  Manypublic enterprises also tended to become beneficiaries of preemption of banks’ resources andThe effect on the banking system was evident. Preemption of a large proportion of bankdeposits and an administered interest rate regime resulted in high cost and low quality offinancial intermediation.  The spreads between deposit and lending rates of commercial banksincreased, while the administered lending rates did not factor in credit risk. About 80 per cent ofwas accounted for by public sector banks, almost whollyowned by Government and the Reserve Bank.  In the absence of development of financialmarkets, banks also emerged as the mainstay of financial intermediation.  There was simply noThe Reserve Bank as regulator of commercial banks used to some extent, regulations tosubserve fiscal objectives.  The market for government securities and in fact for debt segmentcould not be developed since a large part of government’s borrowing was financed throughinvoluntary mechanisms.  Monetisation of deficits required the Reserve Bank to seek severalrearguard actions affecting the financial system.  In fact this fiscal-monetary interface was partlymanagement.5competition to banks and among banks either.the total activity in commercial banking directed lending.responsible for the macro-economic imbalances of the eighties.  The imbalances were evidentfrom persisting revenue deficits, large current account deficits and weaknesses in the financialsector.  The economy was thus vulnerable to a crisis, which in fact was triggered by the Gulf warof 1990-91.In sum, there was a  joint family balance sheet of Government, RBI andcommercial banks, with transactions between the three segments being governed by planpriorities rather than sound principles of financing inter-institutional transactions.  There was awidespread feeling that this joint family approach, which sought to enhance efficiency throughco- ordinated approach, actually led to loss of transparency, of accountability and of incentive tomeasure or seek efficiency.  The reform measures since 1992 strive to impart greater integrityand transparency, to the respective balance sheets and audit becomes critical in ensuring the trueRecent ChangesIt is necessary to briefly recall the reform measures taken to move away from the joFirst, the system of issuance of ad hoc treasury bills and automatic monetisation wasreplaced with a system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA).  The quantum available toGovernment as WMA to meet temporary mismatches between receipts and expenditure is nowannually agreed upon between Reserve Bank and Government.  The interest rate is also agreedupon. Second, an increasing proportion of the fiscal deficit of the governmen t is being financedby borrowings at market related rates of interest.6family approach to the balance sheets of Government, RBI and commercial banks.intaccount and proper financial relationship among the three entities.defactoJoint Family ApproachThird, most public enterprises have been moved out of what is described as “approvedmarket borrowing programme” and thus the enterprises are encouraged to borrow from marketthrough voluntary transcriptions.  Furthermore, States are also encouraged to access markets on aFourth, there has been a reduction in preemptions of commercial banks’ resources fromwell over one-half to about a third of their resources.  Thus, the mandatory component of marketfinancing of Government borrowing has decreased.  Valuation of such securities, now is attunedFifth, the administered interest rate regime has been dismantled and there are very fewprescriptions of interest rates.Sixth, a policy decision has been taken by Reserve Bank to eliminate its long termlending operations to commercial sector and to moderate other forms of monetisation byreducing direct funding of commercial sector.Seventh, an appropriate legal, institutional and technological framework has been put inplace for regulation and development of money, government securities and forex markets.  Both,the primary and secondary segments of Governments securities market have exhibited moreparticipants, larger turnover and greater depth.Eighth, there is diversified ownership of banks, and less than a third of total commercialTo sum up, the government budget has to recognise the increasing need to convince thefinancial markets to raise resources to finance its deficit.  The Reserve Bank has to ensureadequate supervision over the banking system since banks no longer will enjoy the twin comfortprogramme.7Ninth, the Government has decided to reduce its ownership stake further in the banking sector.banking activity is now transacted by wholly owned public sector banks.to international best practices to capture market risks appropriately.stand-alone basis for a part of their borrowing of large government ownership and huge portfolio of gilt edged securities in their asset-portfolio,value .Further, the non-banking finance companies are emerging as an important segment inFinally, the RBI has to manage its balance-sheet since its assets, liabilities, income expenses etc.are generated more out of its own volition and conditions in market, both domestic and than out of five year plan induced actions, or automatic monetisation at the instance ofgovernment.While one cannot ignore the importance of a consolidated balance sheet approach tofinances of public sector, both global concerns and domestic experience make  it is essential tomaintain the sanctity, integrity and well defined legal, commercial and prudential interrelationships among the components’ balance sheets.  In addition, the risk-containment andinternal control systems do become an integral part of financial management in a system relatedBalance Sheet and Audit arrangements in RBIThe RBI’s balance sheet reflects to a significant  degree the effects of economic reformsand in particular the financial sector reform.  In a speech in November, 1997, I had detailed relationship between our central bank’s balance sheet and monetary policy,  the main features ofthe RBI’s balance sheet,  the  current issues, that have an impact on the RBI’s balance sheet inthe wake of financial sector reforms and improvements that have been brought about in themanagement of RBI’s balance sheet in the context of financial sector reforms evidencing a moveforex,8towards autonomy to the RBI in operating its monetary policy.theto financial markets and progressive linkages with global developments.intermediation and are subject to regulation by RBI. financial at predetermined yields and In the address today, I will focus on internal audit arrangements in RBI and efforts beingmade to enhance the standards of accounting and consideration of code of good practices.  Asregards audit arrangements, we have had a separate Inspection Department ever since the bankwas set up.  RBI conducts both financial and systems audit.  The Bank has introduced concurrentaudit.  We are in the process of laying down norms for Information Technology audit.  GreaterThe Bank has also introduced very recently control self-assessment audit as an adjunct toThe Inspection Department reports to and operates under the direction of the InspectionThe Statutory audit of the bank’s final accounts is entrusted to firms of CharteredAccountants approved by Government of India.  Accounting policies are also disclosed in theannual financial statement.The Reserve Bank of India has in the last few years considerably enhanced the standardsof reporting and disclosure in the annual report, which contains the audited financial statements.The formats, accounting system, practices, procedures and policies were originally designed inline with the practices followed by Bank of England and the basic format has remained. While inprinciple, most of the underlying international accounting principles applied to other financialinstitutions can be applied to central banks, the implementation of the principles has to factor inthe unique objectives and special responsibilities of central banks.  With increasing deregulationand development of financial markets, the operations of the RBI for implementing policydecisions and maintaining stability in markets has also become more sophisticated with use ofnew instruments to meet the dynamics of the situation.  Therefore, it becomes necessary to9and Audit Sub-Committee of the Central Board of the Bank.internal audit, covering departments sensitive to risk.emphasis is now being laid on risk based approach to internal audit.review accounting and disclosure policies not only on an ongoing basis but also more formallyand specifically by addressing and dealing with the emerging  issues in a comprehensive manner.Such a review is being taken up to study the international practices, our own practices and In this connection, it is useful to recognise the Code of good practices on transparency inmonetary and financial policies. The IMF code identifies desirable transparency practices forcentral banks.  Part IV of the Code refers to accountability and assurances of integrity by thecentral bank and one significant good practice is that the central bank should publicly discloseaudited financial statements of its operations on a preannounced schedule. Further the financialstatements should be audited by an independent auditor.  RBI is substantially in compliance withthe code though we strive to adopt the code to suit our national requirements while constantlyAuditors’ Role in The Bank has been placing greater reliance on the role of statutory auditors and has cast aspecial responsibility on them to report, by exception, to RBI on the contravention/violations ofRBI regulations coming to their notice during the course of their statutory audit of an NBFC.There is a statutory provision for taking assistance of the auditors in carrying out special auditsand other specific scrutiny of the accounts of NBFCs as and when considered necessary.  In fact,the RBI has recently conducted 1400 special audits with the assistance of the charteredaccountants for the purpose of considering registration of NBFCs.  The auditors are required tosubmit a special report to the Board of Directions of the company on the violations, if any, ofRBI Act/Directions.  Institute Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) is represented on all theWorking Groups and Committee appointed by the Bank for examination of various issues10NBFCsreviewing and improving our practices.experience, and consider improvements, where needed.pertaining to NBFC sector and in fact the views of ICAI are taken into consideration whileIn almost all countries, the role of statutory auditors has been seen as that of a watchdog.Traditionally, the statutory auditors are expected to ensure that the final accounts prepared by thebanks are in the format laid down by the concerned supervisory authority and reflect ‘true andOver the time, a few developed countries like U.K. have begun utilising the services ofthe auditors as the supervisory resource and the central banks abroad have started employingexternal auditors for investigating specific areas of supervisory concern as their agents.  RBI hadstarted utilising the services of external auditors immediately after the irregularities in securities, financial institutions came to light during 1991-92.The Working Group (January 1995) to review the system of on-site supervision overbanks have recommended utilising the services of the external auditors as  supplementaryvehicles to the supervisors, keeping in view the limited time and resources available at theApart from their statutory duty to certify the correctness of the final accounts, thestatutory auditors of the banks are being requested to examine several items and report to theconcerned bank’s Top Management/RBI.From the year 2000-01 the auditors are being requested  to verify and comment upon thestatus of the compliance by the bank in regard to the implementation of various aspects relatingto frauds and malpractices in banks and the internal control and inspection/audit system in banks.11latter’s disposal.transactions in some of the banksfair’ position of the institution.Auditors as Supervisory Resource in BanksNBFCs. framing regulations and devising supervisory framework for the Further they have also been advised to look into the bank's functioning in order to reduceThe regulatory- resource  role played by the auditors is likely to increase manifold, in thedays to come as RBI is moving towards risk based supervision and consolidated supervision.Keeping this in view, the ICAI as well as auditor fraternity will shoulder more and moreresponsibilities to meet these challenges. But the relationship will have to be clearly definedkeeping in view international practices and our requirements.The issue of relationship of supervisors with internal and external auditors has beenflagged by the  Committee on Banking Supervision.  They had in July 2000 circulated aConsultative Paper (available at www.bis.org) .   This is being considered by the Reserve Bank.The paper addresses the delicate balance between the supervisor, external auditor and internalauditor in order to optimise supervision.  The central theme of this paper is that  internal controlswithin banking organisations must be supplemented by an effective internal audit function thatindependently evaluates the control systems within the organisation. External auditors, on theother hand can provide an important feedback on the effectiveness of this process.  Further,supervisors need to satisfy themselves that the weaknesses identified by the auditors arecorrected.  This calls for effective coordination between the supervisors, external auditor andinternal auditor. The Consultative Paper raise four main issues for discussion.  First, as regardsdefinition of internal audit, whether advising or consulting function should be the basic or  Second, what should be the stance on the whistleblowing function of internal auditors in12the context of reporting issues for the internal audit function?ancillary function of internal audit?BaselRelationship between Supervisor and Auditorstransaction cost, inculcate greater use of information technology and better customer service.Fourth, should the internal auditor be independent of the external auditing or can  The Basel Committee have asked for comments on this paper  by November 30, 2000.We would request the gathering to share your thoughts and comments with RBI as this will helpus refine our views on the subject, convey to BIS and apply the considerations in our relationshipas supervisor, with the auditors.It should be very evident that in an increasingly interdependent world of financial flowsprone to contagion, Government budgets, banks and central banks have ceased to be matters ofdomestic concern alone. This concern is equally valid for developed world and emergingIn the past, we pursued a policy of fiscal activism which resulted in several unexpectedconsequences and one of them was what may be called a joint family approach to the balancesheets of Governments, RBI and commercial banks. In the joint family approach, there wereoverlaps, duplications and above all ill-defined interconnected transactions with inadequateBoth global concerns and domestic experience make it essential to maintain the financial oraccounting integrity and prudential interrelationships of respective balance sheets withoutignoring the importance of consolidated approach to balance sheets in public sector. The reformThe ongoing audit arrangements in the RBI also reflect this changed approach. Theextensive use of external auditors in RBI's supervision of both banks and non-banks also reflects13measures in fiscal and financial sectors, among other things aim to achieve this.transparency and lack of accountability.economies like India.Conclusionaudit be performed by the external auditor?internalThird, what are the pros and cons of outsourcing of internal audit?this change in approach. In all these areas, further progress and greater refinement is beingFirst, RBI is aware that its balance sheet now is very sensitive to the use of indirect andmarket based policy instruments like the Bank Rate, open market operations and the LiquidityAdjustment Facility operations and to Second, the balance sheets of banks have also become sensitive to developments infinancial markets and they need to develop internal control and risk assessment systems.Supervisory concerns can be facilitated by use of auditors, both external and internal, but suchuse has to be carefully crafted. Your response to the consultative paper of BIS on the subject assoon as possible would be of immense help to us.In conclusion, I would invite your attention to Governor Jalan's mid-term monetarypolicy statement of October 2000 which contains two important relevant messages. First, it iswise for all concerned to have appropriate asset liability management and risk managementsystems in place to meet uncertainties inherent in the financial markets, especially in emergingmarkets including possible changes in monetary measures. Second, the RBI's current monetarypolicy stance as mentioned in the statement would be to maintain to the extent possible a stableinterest rate environment and to provide appropriate liquidity through its Liquidity AdjustmentLet me again thank the 14Hyderabad Branch, on November 12, 2000 of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Festival of Thoughts, Annual Conference Address by Dr. Y.V. organisers for giving me this opportunity.Facility as necessary.forex developments.attempted by RBI, and I will specifically mention two factors of significance.
