*Y.V.ReddyIt gives me great pleasure to be here in your midst.  Dr.C.Rangarajan,Governor, Reserve` Bank of India was originally slated to address this seminar butcould not do so due to compelling circumstances.  I shall try and partly make up for hisabsence, by drawing heavily from his speeches, in making this presentation.  I thankthe Adam Smith Institute, and in particular, Professor Carlos – Alberto CAMPOS, forgiving me this opportunity to be with you and participate in the discussions on2. I shall initially give a brief review of the factual account of the performanceof the Indian economy during the last three years, to illustrate the positive impact ofeconomic reforms in India.  I would set out the broad contours of conducting monetarypolicy in India, i.e., the objectives, the instruments used; the transmission mechanism;and the relevant institutional framework .  I will then go over to the recently announcedMonetary and Credit Policy for the first half of 1997-98 and the developments in thesecurities market.  I would conclude with the investment climate and the emergingopportunities for foreign investments, especially in the context of capital accountIndian 3. The growth in real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the last three yearsranged from 6.8 to 7.2 per cent, and the current year (1997-98) should, from allindications, be no exception .  While growth in industry averaged 10.4 per cent in thelast three years, that of agriculture was 2.5 per cent inspite of negative growth in 1995-96.  Investment rate has been on the rise, largely on account of sharp improvement inthe domestic saving rate, in recent years.  The latest data available for 1995-96 indicatethat the saving rate was 25.6 per cent and investment was as high as 27.4 per cent.Given the improvement in real GDP, there have been productivity gains.  The overall4. Gross Fiscal Deficit of Government of India as a percentage of GDP hascome down from 6.1 per cent to 5 per cent in the last three years and is estimated to godown further to 4.5 per cent in 1997-98. The liabilities of the government in relation toGDP is also down correspondingly .  The rate of inflation as measured by theWholesale Price Index moved down from 10.4 per cent in 1994-95 to 5.0 per cent in1995-96, but has edged up to 7.3 per cent in 1996-97.  In the current year, we wouldlike to contain it at around 6.0 per cent.  Consistent with this, broad money growth istargeted to grow only by 15 to 15.5 per cent in 1997-98, slightly lower than the growthachieved in 1996-97. Growth in non-food credit, however, was sluggish at 10.1 percent in 1996-97 but we expect it to move towards a figure of over twenty per cent,actuals in 1994-95 and 1995-96.1closer to the very high macro picture on the real side of the economy is highly positive.Economy : review and Outlookliberalisation that we have been contemplating.Monetary Policy and the Prospects for Investments in India.Monetary Policy and Prospects for Investment in India5. Growth of exports and imports in SDR terms averaged 13.4 per cent and 17.6per cent, respectively, in the later three years, but the performance last year was belowthe average at 9.5 and 11.6 per cent.  The current account deficit relative to GDP hasaveraged at a little over one per cent.  The exchange rate has been under pressure onoccasions but overall, while the nominal exchange rate vis-à-vis the US dollarexhibited a steadily depreciating trend, the real effective exchange rate has beenappreciating during the last three years.  Foreign currency reserves are currently over$24 billion, implying an import cover of about seven months.6. There has been a significant structural transformation in the economy thatholds a promise for maintaining a strong and sustained performance.  These include,the expanding role of the private sector and private investment; the commercialisationof agriculture, especially the opening up of agriculture for exports; the liberalisation offinancial sector coupled with strengthened regulatory framework; the public-privatesector interface to improve physical infrastructure; and  the gradual empowerment ofState or Provincial Governments vis-a-vis the Federal Government in the process ofeconomic reform.Monetary 7. The broad objectives of monetary policy in India have been (a) to maintain areasonable degree of price stability and (b) to ensure adequate expansion in credit toassist growth. The relative emphasis as between the two objectives depends upon theconditions prevailing in the year in question.  Price stability as an objective is viewednot just as an end in itself but as a means to promote sustainable and more important,equitable growth.  This leads us to the inter-relationship between money, output andprices.  Empirical evidence, as far as India is concerned, is clear that the demand forreal money function is reasonably stable .  It is this function that helps us in estimatingthe appropriate growth in money supply, given the expected increase in real output andthe tolerable level of price increase.  An increase in money supply not only results in an8. We have been targeting broad money expansion as an intermedia te target toachieve the ultimate objectives.  The concept of monetary targeting that we have beenusing is, however, a flexible one which takes into account the various feedbacks .Monetary aggregates as intermediate targets are appropriate in the Indian context fortwo reasons: First, since the money demand function for India has remained reasonablystable, it continues to predict price movements with reasonable accuracy at least over aperiod of years.  Second, the money stock target is relatively well understood by thepublic at large.  With the money supply target, the stance of monetary policy is9. Monetary authorities in India do not confine their attention to just oneaggregate.  A range of aggregates including aggregate credit are continuouslymonitored .  In the literature, the alternative  to monetary targeting is the interest rate.This, however, is more appropriate when various segments of financial markets are2unambiguously defined and gives a clear signal to market participants.increase in demand but also influences output through the availability of credit.Policy : Objectives and Analytical Framework:closely integrated, with interest rates in the various markets influencing one another.This is hardly the case in India, even though one does see in the last few years, thebeginning of such a financial market integration .  Under these circumstances, it isbetter to target money rather than interest rate, although the monetary authoritywatches the behaviour of interest rates in the various markets and intervenesappropriately.  This, we feel, is not necessarily inconsistent with an overall monetaryInstruments of Monetary Policy and Transmission Mechanism10. It is well- recognised  that the two major indicators of effectiveness ofmonetary policy are : output growth and price stability.  Data in the Indian contextshow that, in the recent past, real growth rate went up sharply during the last five yearswhile price increases were contained.  No doubt, the monsoon conditions have been, byand large, favourable and stable, ensuring impressive performance of agriculture,thereby influencing the growth of the economy.  But, industry too performed well,responding positively to the economic reforms unveiled since about the middle of1991.  The propitious circumstance of relatively high growth with reasonable pricestability has contributed to a gradual move towards indirect instruments of monetarypolicy.  Alongside, there were refinements in interest rate structure, greater autonomyin policy making, effected by changes in fiscal-monetary relationship, and quick andappropriate response to developments in the external sector.11. In the last five years, monetary policy in India has sought to carefullymodulate the liquidity in the system by a combination of measures – direct and indirectmethods of control.  Reserve requirements and open market operations are the maininstruments of action in this regard.  Institutional changes have also been effected inthe Indian financial system, which helped, in the Indian context, in shifting from directto indirect instruments.  Financial reforms have been undertaken on a wide front in thelast five years to improve the allocative efficiency of resources, and to integrate thevarious segments of financial markets.  The latest monetary and credit policy for thefirst half of 1997-98 went a step further – it has paved the way for the re-emergence ofthe Bank Rate as a signaling mechanism, thereby providing a potential support to theefficacious use of open market operations.12. The interest rate developments in the transition to financial marketintegration would emit important signals for the conduct of monetary policy.  Themonetary authorities would need to  influence market rates through their actionsrelating to not only quantity but also rate variables.  One of the ways to effect this is tomake refinements in the lending rate structure.  Lending rates which were determinedtill 1990 have been gradually freed .  They are now totally freed except for twoconcessional rates of interest for small borrowers in recognition that the credit marketsin India are imperfect.  Progressively, as in many other countries, the Reserve Bankshould be able to influence the level of economic activity by actions that impinge on3the cost of funds and the overall liquidity in the system.target.13. The Reserve Bank has also taken some significant steps to bring about agreater degree of flexibility in the operation of monetary policy.  Recently we movedaway from a system of automatic monetisation of budget deficit to a loan system,widely known in India as the system of ‘Ways and Means Advances’.  The ReserveBank, however, will continue to hold Government paper, of course at its owndiscretion.  While the direct support to budget will over time be limited, there areaspects of fiscal policy which will continue to have a bearing on the conduct ofmonetary policy .  For example, a high level of fiscal deficit can come in the way ofeffective use of open market operations as an instrument of  monetary control.  At atime when the Government borrows heavily in the open market, sale of securities bythe Reserve Bank as part of open market operations, would result in interest rates risingto unduly high levels .  Hence, there is a continued need for monetary policy to take14. With the progressive opening of the economy, monetary policy is beingincreasingly co- ordinated with policies relating to the external sector, in particular, theexchange rate policy.  To the extent the capital inflows add to net foreign exchangeassets of the Reserve Bank of India, it will have a monetary impact.  On the other hand,if capital inflows are not taken into reserves, it may result in an appreciation of thedomestic currency.  There is here a policy dilemma, faced by many countries includingIndia, which have received substantial capital inflows.  The recent surge of capitalinflows in our country has been absorbed into the country’s foreign exchange reserves,even though it has a monetary impact ;  this has been done essentially with a view tomaintaining the competitiveness of our exports, although some portion of the assetaccretion was sterilised through open market operations.  But, there are limits to,  both in terms of costs and availability of stock.Transmission Mechanism:15. The financial structure can have an important bearing on transmission ofmonetary policy.  Some of the aspects that have an impact on the transmission are thenature of balance sheets of entities, viz., banks, financial institutions, households,firms, etc., the extent of interest rates deregulation, the substitution between foreigncurrency and local currency denominations in the composition of loans and deposits,the access to finance from outside the banking system, the extent of and the depth and liquidity of secondary markets for debt and equity .  In this regard,there are some characteristics of the Indian financial structure which need to bereckoned .  A substantial part of financial intermediation is still occurring in theinformal sector.  Non-banking financial companies have been only recently broughtunder regulatory framework.  Banking sector is still dominated by public sector bankswhich have significant quantum of non-performing assets .  Debt markets have justbegun to develop.  Insurance sector is still a Government monopoly and most of long-term savings, especially contractual savings in household sector are pre-empted bypublic sector .  Significant progress has been made to reform, liberalise and the structure, but some of the rigidities persist.  But, we realise that market integrationis essential to reduce transaction costs and to help improve the transmission mechanism4modernisedisintermediationsterilisationinto account the stance of fiscal policy.of policy.  If this integration is not rendered possible, monetary policy will have tocontinue to depend heavily on direct control (such as reserve requirements) for policyeffectiveness.  So, we need to monitor market conditions in order to get  at an interestrate structure that is ‘optimal’, in the equilibrium sense of demand for and supply offunds.16. There are genera lly four channels of transmission of monetary policy viz.,credit availability effects, interest rate effects, wealth effects and exchange rate effects.Financial deregulation with greater emphasis on competition would help integratefinancial markets and promote the effectiveness of interest rate in the monetarytransmission mechanism in general.  There is, however, a concern that interest rate maynot have a significant impact, if the corporate sector relies more on internal resourcegeneration and equity finance for its financing requirements than on bank borrowings.In India, a recent RBI study on selected Financial Ratios of the Private Sector in Indiarevealed that debt to equity ratio of firms in the private corporate sector in India was inthe range of 110 to 120 per cent in the early 1990s.  Interest cost to value of productionin private corporate sector was below 7 per cent in early 1990s but as a percentage togross profits it was as high as 60 per cent.  These facts imply that firms in the privatecorporate sector in India are highly leveraged and could be susceptible to interest rateshocks.17. The wealth channel effect is very important in industrial countries where themortgage market is the prime mover of financial markets and mortgage is the maincollateral for borrowings of households and firms.  But in the Indian context, the realestate market has a dynamics of its own, which at the present stage, is only loosely andindirectly connected with the mechanisms that form part of the conduct of monetary18. The importance of exchange rate effect channel depends on how open theeconomy is; the more open the economy, the more important would this channel be.Judging by this criterion, the share of foreign trade sector (exports plus imports) inIndia is not substantial.  But with the major policy initiatives in respect of trade andpayments including the market determined exchange rate mechanism and convertibilityon current account, this channel has been assuming increasing importance in recentyears.  In the second half of 1995-96, the foreign exchange market in India experiencedconsiderable volatility, and the Reserve Bank of India had actively intervened in theforex market.  The exchange market intervention (net sales) by the Reserve Bank in thespot market led to withdrawal of a fairly large amount of liquidity from the moneymarket leading to sharp increase in call rates.  Another issue relating to this channel ishow far the balance sheet position of players in forex market (banks and limit the scope of monetary action in defence of a pegged exchange rate.  The answerto this question depends on the nature of openness of the economy and the exposure of19. It is clear from our p resentation so far that financial markets in India are notyet fully integrated and that the economy is ‘open’ only to a limited extent.  Given5domestic firms to external markets.corporates)policy.these elements, the interest rate and exchange rate channels may not be as powerful atthe present stage of Indian development as the credit availability channel.  ViewedInstitutional Framework for Monetary Policy:20. As already alluded to, significant changes have occurred and are occurringin the institutional framework in India within which monetary policy acts.  These are inthe areas of : fiscal-monetary relationship; pre- emption of resources through reserverequirements; structure of interest rates; growth of the non-bank financial sector and21. A historic reform relating to the fiscal monetary relationship was theabolition of the system of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit taking place throughthe issuance of ad hoc Treasury Bills by the Government and the introduction, in itsplace, of the system of the Ways and Means Advances effective April 1, 1997 .  Underthe new system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA), financial limits have beenfixed to accommodate temporary mis-matches in Government receipts and payments.Interest rates on WMA  would be market related.  Moreover, for two years beginningApril 1997, overdrafts would be permitted for periods beyond ten  consecutive days,but at a cost.  After these two years, no overdraft will be permitted beyond tenconsecutive days.  The new system is expected to give more autonomy to the central22. Historically, two direct monetary policy instruments, namely, the CashReserve Ratio (CRR) and the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) had to be maintained atvery high levels because of high fiscal deficits and a high degree of monetisation ofdeficits.  This ‘external constraint’ had a bearing on the profitability of the bankingsystem.  Easing of these constraints has formed a major agenda for the reform of thefinancial sector since mid-1991.  Progressive reduction in reserve requirements hasbeen effected.  The Statutory Liquidity Ratio has been brought down from 37.5 percent to 25  per cent on an incremental basis and the Cash Reserve Ratio includingincremental CRR has been scaled down from 25 per cent  to 10 per cent.  Thesechanges in the reserve requirements have implications in relation to both CRR and23. For long, the Indian financial system has been characterised by anadministered structure of interest rates.  This was aimed at directing implicit subsidy tocertain sectors enabling them to obtain funds at concessional rates of interest. In theprocess, an element of cross- subsidisation got built into the system wherebyconcessional rates provided  to some sectors were compensated by higher rates chargedto other borrowers.  The regulation of lending rates, ipso facto, led to the regulation ofdeposit rates mainly to keep the cost of funds to banks in reasonable proportion to therates at which they could lend.  The reform of the interest rate structure has, therefore,constituted an integral part of the financial sector reform.  Since September 1990, theprocess of simplification began with the reduction in the number of slabs for which6open market operations as instruments of monetary policy.bank to conduct its monetary policy.changes in exchange rate policy.thus, monetary targeting would gain in importance in the conduct of monetary policy.lending rates had been prescribed.  In a major move, the minimum lending rate wasabolished and the lending rates were freed in October 1994 for credit limits of overRs.2 ,00,000.  We are now having only two concessional rates on the lending side (onefor credit limits up to Rs.25 ,000 and the other one for over Rs.25,000 and up toRs.2,00,000), apart from prescribed ceilings for interest rate and export finance, andonly one administered rate on the deposit side, i.e., the maximum rate, which applies toterm deposits of maturity up to one year.  Banks, however, will be required to lend to24. Three changes in the struct ure of  financial institutions, markets andproducts that have been witnessed in recent times, carry significant implications for theconduct of monetary policy.  First, the growing prominence of capital markets as seenin the increasing mobilisation of resources directly; secondly, the reduction in thebarriers to capital mobility leading to increased linkages between domestic and foreignfinancial markets; and thirdly, a spurt in financial innovation resulting in emergence  ofnew financial products and services and blurring of the distinction between banks andnon-banks.  Clearly, the issue that arises in this context is as to how the monetarytransmission mechanism will get altered as non-banks and capital market begin to playa larger role in the financial system and how the channels of policy need to be rendered25. The far-reaching changes in the external sector of the Indian economywitnessed in recent years, as reflected in the substantial elimination of quantitativecontrols on imports, the reduction in tariffs, a market determined exchange rate system,the convertibility on the current account, the encouragement to foreign directinvestment and the greater access to external capital markets, have contributed to acloser link between the domestic markets and external markets and made the traditionaltransmission channels more complex to operate.  This is especially because exchangerate is now determined by demand for and supply of foreign exchange in the market .The RBI intervention in the market is limited to reducing rate volatility and to ensuringthat the market rate is not too divergent from what the economic fundamental dictate.Besides, greater access to international capital markets also means that the corporatesare able to access funds at rates lower than the domestic interest rates.  These new setof factors arising out of external sector liberalisation would need to be reckoned inworking out the desired rate of expansion of money and credit as well as the optimallevel of interest rates.Monetary Policy – An Update:26. The recent Monetary and Credit Policy for the first half of 1997-98 wentbeyond these principles and has, therefore, come to be described as a ‘big bang’ byseveral observers of the markets.  The policy contained significant features in the areaof institutional and structural reforms.  There are elements of continuity, contextualresponse and important structural changes.  I would like to highlight some of the7changes that were ushered in through this policy.effective.priority sectors to a stipulated extent.First, the policy seeks greater market orientation in the financial sector byempowering banks with greater operational flexibility.  The RBI has moved out ofmicroregulation.  Now banks are given total freedom on consortium arrangements andmethodology of assessing working capital requirements. No doubt, prudentialguidelines will continue to be prescribed by the RBI.  These measures signify changesin the relationship so far developed between the RBI and banks.Secondly, borrowers have also been em powered to reinforce These measures have changed the relationship between the banker and the borrower.Borrowers can choose to go through a single bank or multiple banks or take thesyndication route.  Access to commercial paper is freer now.Thirdly, macromanagement by the Reserve Bank has, perhaps for the first time,emphasised the need to recognise the rate variables as the potential instruments ofinfluencing the liquidity situation.  The Bank Rate will emerge as a signal of the stanceof monetary policy and determined the rate at which funds will be available to theFourthly, integration of the money market, the Government Securities Marketand the Forex Market is sought to be furthered .  Measures towards this end includeexemption of CRR/SLR on inter-bank liabilities, permission to Authorised Dealers(Ads) to borrow from and lend in overseas market, permission to ADs  to book forwardcover on the basis of past performance, permission to undertake rupee/forex currencyswaps, allowing repos in all Government Dated Securities, reverse repos for all SGLSixthly, to signal continuing consultations with market participants, Committee for Money Markets has been constituted soon after the policyannouncement.  This would be similar to the Technical Advisory Committees on Forexand Government Securities Markets which were established in early 1997 .Significantly, it signals a difference in the relationship that has hitherto been inexistence between the Reserve Bank and market participants and has placed it at anGovernment Securities Markets:27. The authorities have sought to make the Government securities market anactive segment of the Indian financial system so that the conduct of monetary policycould be rendered effective. A number of reforms have been initiated in recent years.These include: (I) the setting up of a comprehensive system of primary Dealers ( PDs ) –six PDs have already begun to operate (ii) licensing of Satellite Dealers (iii) theprovision of liquidity support by the RBI to mutual funds exclusively dedicated toGovernment securities to the extent of 20 per cent of their holdings of Governmentsecurities, which is expected to facilitate the emergence of the retail segment of theGovernment Securities market, (iv) a progressive movement towards a mark-to-marketsystem for valuation of Government securities which would impart depth to the market8informal level.aaccount holders, reducing the minimum period of Commercial Paper (CP), etc.system from the RBI.marketisation.by encouraging trading, (v) adoption of the Delivery versus Payments System (DVP)which ensures that transactions in Government securities are secure, (vi) insistence ofgreater transparency of operations rendered by dissemination of information to market,and (vii)introduction of indexed linked bonds (viii) abolition of tax deduction at sourceon Government Securities (ix) allowing  to invest in Government  Stock, and (x)introduction of Treasury Bills of various .  All of these changes, both inrelation to interest rate and government securities market, open up opportunities forusing open market operations as an instrument of monetary control.Investment Climate28. The contribution already made and efforts underway, in the conduct ofmonetary policy and reforms in financial sector as a whole to the investment climate, is.  I will highlight a few facts here:First, growth, at around 7 per cent per annum in real terms, with a large size ofSecondly, price stability has been demonstrated.Thirdly, exchange rate management is characterised by the absence of undueFourthly, fiscal stability and consolidation is being assured.Fifthly, transparent regulatory framework in both real and financial sector hasbeen mounted.Sixthly, large and critical market for Government securities is being improvedSeventhly, capital markets are rapidly ev olving – in terms of size, depth,infrastructure and quality.  The institutional framework for regulating both debt andequity markets is firmly in place.  Access is provided liberally and on a transparent andassured basis to foreign investors.stments in India have been growing in recent years.  From 23.4 per centof nominal GDP in 1991-92, gross aggregate investment rate has gone up to 27.4 percent in 1995-96.  In general it has been a gradual rise, with a minor exception in 1993-94 when the rate slid down slightly.  The domestic saving rate was lower than theinvestment rate by an average of 1.18 percentage points over the five year period 1991-92 through 1995-96, representing capital inflows.30. As a result of economic reforms and change i n foreign investment policy,there has been a shift in the structure of capital flows in favour of non-debt creatingcapital flows.  The total inflows of foreign investment, which includes both direct and929. Invewith access extended to domestic retail investors and foreign institutional investors.volatility.the domestic market, is an attractive feature.noteworthymaturitiesFIIsportfolio investment, has arisen from a mere US $ 154 million in 1991-92 to US $5,561 million in 1996-97.  As a result, the share of investments in net capital flowswhich accounted for less than 1 per cent in 1990-91 has gone up to close to 50 per centin 1996-97.Foreign Investments : Policy and Structural Changes:31. The development of domestic institutional structure in the financial sectorfrom the view point of foreign investment is aimed towards availability of reliableinformation to prospective investors in a relatively low-cost manner; appropriatemonitoring of transactions; and transparent guidelines for participation of foreigninvestors in the domestic economy, including the stock market .  In this direction, aseries of policy initiatives have been taken since 1991 regarding the approvalprocedures, the investment restrictions, the limitation on foreign equity participation,the restrictions on acquisitions and take-over by foreign investors, the local contentrequirement, the restrictions on remittance of funds abroad and the special incentives to32. In respect of approval procedure regarding foreign direct investment (FDI),a transparent framework is followed under which all the sectors have been opened,with full repatriation benefit, to foreign investors except in the case of agriculture andplantation.  The Reserve Bank provides automatic approval in the case of foreign directinvestment up to 74 per cent equity in the case of 9  high priority sectors industries and51 per cent equity in the case of 51 priority sector industries and export/trading/startrading houses.  The proposals involving higher equity participation are cleared by theSecretariat of Industrial Approvals/Foreign Investment Promotion Board.  In the caseof Non-Resident Indians (NRIs)/Overseas corporate bodies (OCBs) this equity limitcan be extended up to 100 per cent.  Wholly owned foreign subsidiaries are allowed inthe power sector, 100 per cent Export Oriented Units ( EOUs) and units in Free TradeZones ( FTZs) and Export Processing Zones ( EPZs).  Similarly, approvals are given inmining and telecommunication industries up to 50 per cent and 49 per cent of the33. The policy towards foreign portfolio investment too has been substanliberalised.  Portfolio investment in any of the listed companies of Indian stockexchanges/over the counter exchange can be made by foreign institutional investors aswell as NRIs/OCBs subject to the condition that the aggregate holding ofshares/debentures of the FIIs/NRIs/OCBs put together does not exceed 30 per cent ofthe voting equity capital of the company .  They are also permitted to invest in thepublic sector/private sector mutual funds and Government Dated Securities.  Dedicateddebt funds up to 100 per cent from FIIs have been permitted recently.  There is nolock-in-period for the remitting of the funds brought in, even in the case of preferenceshares acquired by the foreign investors .  The taxation guidelines are also transparentwith capital gains tax of 10 per cent and 30 per cent on long term and short term,10respectively and exemption of withholding tax on the dividend earned.tiallyequity capital, respectively.the foreign investors, especially in direct investment.34. The impact of these measures was clearly evident from the spurt in thevalue of foreign investment approvals as well as inflows since 1991.  The amount offoreign direct investment approved during the year 1996 has been US $ 11,142 millionwhich gives an indication of the likely volume of future inflows under directinvestment.  As against a direct investment of US $ 150 million, US $ 341 million andUS $ 586 million during 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94, respectively, the actualforeign direct investment flows for the year 1994-95 has been US $ 1,313 millionwhich further leaped to US $ 2,133 million which further leaped to US $ 2,133 millionduring 1995-96 and US $ 2,695 million during 1996-97 .  Since 1992-93, most of directinvestments has come from the USA, followed by the UK, Japan and Germany .  Thedirect investment has mainly been garnered towards the engineering industries, thefinancial services sector, the electronics/electrical equipments and the chemical/alliedproducts, in that order.  Still, the proportion of direct foreign investment in our countryis low at around 3 per cent of the overall FDI flows to developing countries during1995 and, therefore, in keeping tandem with the overall structure of the economyefforts are made to raise the amount of FDI to around US $ 10 billion every year.Keeping this in view, a Foreign Investment Promotion Council has been set up whileFIPB has been reconstituted to approving and encouraging FDI flows.35. Similarly, portfolio investment has taken quantum leap in recent years.  Not onlyhave the Indian corporates raised funds abroad through Global Depository Receipts( GDRs) and Offshore funds, FIIs and NRI/OCBs have also remained bullish on theIndian market during this phase.  The inflows into India arising from GDR were of theorder of US $ 1,602 million and US $1,839 million during 1993-94 and 1994-95,respectively.  While GDR issues were somewhat subdued in the first half of 1995-96,the same has picked up during 1996-97 with the amount repatriated to India by theIndian corporates from the GDR proceeds amounting to US $ 920 million.  Portfolioinvestment flows on account of FIIs have been encouraging with an average of aroundUS $ 1,687 million coming during 1993-94 to 1995-96.  Moreover, the total FIIinflows during 1996-97 were US$ 1,926 million.  The dimension of the flows shouldbe assessed in the light of the overall slump in global portfolio flows to developingcountries witnessed during 1995 and 1996 following monetary tightening and risinginterest rates in the US from February 1994, bullish stock markets in the OECDparticularly in the US, and the Mexican crisis in December 1994.Foreign Investments and Emerging Opportunities36. An expert committee set up to lay out the road map towards CapitalAccount Convertibility (CAC) has come to the conclusion that based on the assessmentof the current macroeconomic situation, the time is now appropriate to initiate a movetowards CAC.  The Committee has stated that fiscal consolidation , a mandatedinflation target and strengthening of the financial system should be regarded as crucialpreconditions/signposts for CAC in India.37. Successful efforts to liberalise the capital account have typically beenpreceded by a strategy of fiscal reforms which significantly reduces the fiscal deficit11and finances the remaining deficit with a minimum recourse to inflation tax .Accordingly, the committee has recommended a reduction in the GFD/GDP ratio fromthe budgeted 4.5 per cent in 1997-98 to 3.5 per cent in 1999-2000.  On the inflationfront, a mandated rate of inflation for the three-year period 1997-98 to 1999-2000 hasbeen placed at 3-5 per cent by the Committee .  This would break the inflationaryexpectations in India and bring inflation rates in close alignment with internationalinflation rates.  The Committee has also recommended full interest rate deregulation in1997-98 and reduction in the non-performing assets of the banking system.  Quiteclearly, the load of a high level of NPAs cannot be borne by the banks if the financialsystem is opened up fully to the forces of competition.  In addition, the Committee hassuggested that the conduct of exchange rate policy, the balance of payments and theadequacy of foreign exchange reserves should be assessed on an on-going basis.38. In the current situation, one way of assessing the emerging opportunitiescould be on the basis of the recommendations of the Committee.  It would bereasonable to expect that it provides a basis for what needs to be done by theauthorities in future. Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at the Adam Smith Seminar on“The outlook for emerging markets : The Middle East/The Indian Ocean”, Paris on June 11, 1997.12*
