The NPA Overhang - Magnitude, Solutions, Legal ReformsIntroductionI have readily accepted the invitation of CII for an interaction on NPAs so that thecentral bank can convey its concerns to those who can offer right solutions to this vexingproblem and at the same time hear their view points for possible mitigation role by the centralbank and government. I am thus really grateful to have been given an opportunity to talk on asubject of great interest to all who have assembled here.In fact, the problem of non performing assets (NPAs) is ravaging some of the evenadvanced economies like Japan. I had recently read an assessment by one of the internationalrating agencies that the real level of NPAs of China may be over 50 percent and for Indiansystem it can be placed at over 20 percent, after making a marginal allowance for ever-greening. Though soothing in comparison, it is not a matter of comfort. The interest bearingassets of Indian banks have so far derived comfort from a large proportion of them being heldin the form of sovereign debt paper or sovereign guaranteed advances. The non-performingassets of Indian banks (both advances and investments taken together) form only around 5 percent of the total assets at the end of March 2001. But this facet will undergo rapid change atany time if the defaults under guaranteed advances to undertakings of the some of the stategovernments escalate any further.It is not anymore lenders’ problem alonebut equally that of borrowers too !The high level of NPAs in banks and financial institutions has been a matter of graveconcern to the public as bank credit is the catalyst to the economic growth of the country andany bottleneck in the smooth flow of credit, one cause for which is the mounting NPAs, isbound to create adverse repercussions in the economy. NPAs are not therefore the concern ofonly lenders.  I consider that forum like this, comprising of representatives of a major sectionof the beneficiaries of the financial system, should equally get concerned in a serious way onwhat they can do to address the gravity of the NPA problem of banks. I would rather urgethem to lend a helping hand in the ongoing efforts of banks, and financial institutions torecover bad debts and arrest fresh accretions of NPAs.Present prudential regulationsThe prudential norms on income recognition, asset classification and provisioning thereon,are implemented from the financial year 1992-93, as per the recommendation of theCommittee on the Financial System (Narasimham Committee I). These norms have broughtin quantification and objectivity into the assessment and provisioning for NPAs.  We at thecentral bank constantly endeavour to ensure that our prescriptions in this regard are close tointernational norms. We are neither strict nor lax but just correct in tune with our needs andcapabilities.Under the prudential norms laid down by RBI? Income should not be recognised on NPAs on accrual basis but should be booked onlywhen it is actually received in respect of such accounts.? An asset is considered as “non-performing” if interest or installments of principal dueremain unpaid for more than 180 days (the lag would get reduced to 90 days from March31, 2004 to conform to international norms).  Any NPA would migrate from sub-standard2to doubtful category after 18 months (as against 12 months under international norms).  Itwould get classified as loss asset if it is irrecoverable or only marginally collectible.? The banks should make full provision for loss assets, 100 per cent of the unsecuredportion of the doubtful asset plus 20 to 50 per cent of the secured portion (depending onthe period for which the account is doubtful), and a general 10% (it is 20 per cent underinternational norms) of the outstanding balance in respect of sub-standard assets.Detailed guidelines have been issued by RBI in October 2000 on valuation andprovisioning for investment portfolio including credit substitutes.Impact of NPAs on banks’profits and lending prowessThe efficiency of a bank is not always reflected only by the size of its balance sheetbut by the level of return on its assets. NPAs do not generate interest income for the banks,but at the same time banks are required to make provisions for such NPAs from their currentprofits.NPAs have a deleterious effect on the return on assets in several ways –? They erode current profits through provisioning requirements? They result in reduced interest income? They require higher provisioning requirements affecting profits and accretion to capitalfunds and capacity to increase good quality risk assets in future, and? They limit recycling of funds, set in asset-liability mismatches, etc.There is at times a tendency among some of the banks to understate the level of NPAs inorder to reduce the provisioning and boost up bottom lines. It would only postpone thedoomsday effect as happened in some of the banks with disastrous consequences, like gettingbranded as weak and losing credibility internationally, besides subjecting the seniormanagement to vigilance and CBI process.In the context of crippling effect on a bank’s operations in all spheres, asset quality hasbeen placed as one of the most important parameters in the measurement of a bank’sperformance under the CAMELS supervisory rating system of RBI.Movement of NPAs over the yearsA glance through the statistics on the movement of NPAs of public sector banks sinceintroduction of prudential norms in 1992-1993 will help us to understand the extent to whichthe public sector banks have made progress in reducing their NPA levels.Table -IGross NPAs Net NPAsAmount As a Amount As aYear(Rs. Crore) percentage to (Rs. crore) percentageTotal to netAdvances advances(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)1992-1993 39253.14 23.18 Not compiled1993-1994 41041.33 24.78 19690.74 14.463Gross NPAs Net NPAsAmount As a Amount As aYear(Rs. Crore) percentage to (Rs. crore) percentageTotal to netAdvances advances1994-1995 38385.18 19.45 17566.64 10.671995-1996 41660.94 18.01 18297.49 8.901996-1997 43577.09 17.84 20284.73 9.181997-1998 45652.64 16.02 21232.13 8.151998-1999 51710.50 15.89 24211.49 8.131999-2000 53294.02 14.02 26187.60 7.422000-2001 54773.16 12.40 27968.11 6.74The level of gross and net NPAs has been sliding down over the years. Gross NPAhad come down from 23.18% in 1992-93 to 12.40% in 2000-01. Net NPA also moved downfrom 14.46% in 1993-94 to 6.74% in 2000-01. Still the NPA level can be considered ofstaggering magnitude in absolute terms costing the public sector banks more than Rs.5000crores annually by way of loss of interest income, besides servicing and litigation costs.  Tobe fair, I have to state that a major portion of the NPAs was a legacy of the pre-prudentialdays, when banks were accounting for interest as income on accrual basis even when theunderlying advances were not performing.It will be interesting to have a look at the movement of NPAs (gross and net), as apercentage of advances, group-wise over the last four years. This will give an idea of wherebanks, as different groups, stand in regard to their NPAs.Bank group Percentage of gross / net NPAs tototal advances as at end March1998 1999 2000 2001Public sector banks 16.0 15.9 14.0 12.4(8.2) (8.1) (7.4) (6.7)All private sector banks 8.7 10.8 8.2 8.5(5.3) (7.4) (5.4) (5.4)Old private sector banks 10.9 13.1 10.8 11.1(6.5) (9.0) (7.1) (7.3)New private sector banks 3.5 6.2 4.1 5.1(2.6) (4.5) (2.9) (3.1)Foreign banks 6.4 7.6 7.0 6.8(2.2) (2.9) (2.4) (1.9)All commercial banks 14.4 14.7 12.7 11.4(7.3) (7.6) (6.8) (6.2) Note: Figures in parenthesis denote percentage of net NPAs to net advances4It may be observed that the malady of high level of NPAs eroding the profitability ofbanks is not confined to public sector banks alone, but it is equally present in the privatesector banks too.  While some of the foreign banks loan portfolio had been affected by a fewlarge accounts turning NPA, it is a matter of concern that some of the new private sectorbanks which started off on a clean slate had acquired so quickly such a large level of NPAs.Need for building up of loan loss provisionsThe net NPAs, i.e., that portion of NPAs which is not provided for, pose a majorconcern for solvency of the bank. To the credit of the Indian banking system's ability toprovide for loan losses over a period, though not fully, the level of unprovided for  NPAs i.e.net NPAs in public sector banks  has been continuously declining from 14.46% in 1993-94 to6.74% in 2000-01. This is still not at a level of comfort and it must be noted that thepercentage of net NPAs to net advances in developed countries is around 2%.As on 31 March 2001 public sector banks together held provisions at 42.83% of grossNPAs. Only 5 banks had provisioning levels to gross NPAs at more than 50 percent as on thatdate. Provisions held by private banks was at 35%of gross NPAs and as many as 19 old and 6new private sector banks had less than 50 per cent provisioning. RBI has been advocating invarious forums the need for banks building up provisions upto at least a level of 50% of thegross NPAs at the earliest. I would like to mention that RBI during this year had viewed withdisfavour cases of banks which proposed to increase dividend levels without reaching aprovisioning level of 50 per cent of gross NPAs and would continue the policy till theprovisioning levels improve.NPAs - CausesIncidence and impact ofdirected lending to stock of NPAsIn all forums of interactions the global multilateral institutions and rating agencies hadwith RBI and the Government, directed lending concept gets quoted as an important attributeand a contributory factor for the build up of NPAs in banks in India. It is a different matterthat RBI and the Government are accused of soft attitude towards banks which do not fulfillthe prescribed targets for priority sector lending, particularly agriculture and small scalesector.  To put matters on a proper perspective, I thought I should share some informationregarding the contribution by various segments of borrowers to the NPA stock of publicsector banks. The picture in the following table as on March 31, 2001, I am sure, is self-revealing.Gross NPAs as on March 31, 2001Borrowing segment-wise distribution Amount Percentage toof gross NPAs(Rs. crores) total NPAsPublic sector units 1334.05 2.44Large Industries 11498.10 20.99Medium industries 8658.69 15.81Other non priority sectors 9516.62 17.37Agriculture 7311.40 13.35Small scale industries 10284.97 18.78Other priority sectors 6169.33 11.265Total 54773.16 100.00I do understand that recovery of NPAs under priority sector advances particularly toagriculture and small-scale industries is sometimes hampered by externalities. Further, suchNPAs are also spread over a large number of accounts and for small amounts. However, onefails to understand the reluctance of large borrowers to honour their repayment obligations. Inmany cases, failure of banks to take effective  action against some of the defaulting largecorporate borrowers was also noticed. This is a factor which prompted the Hon’ble FinanceMinister in his recent meeting with CMDs of public sector banks to set a time frame for filingsuits against such borrowers to facilitate public disclosure of defaults by big borrowers in thebanking system.Recovery of dues by banks is directly related to the performance of the borrowalunit/industrial segments.  An internal study conducted by RBI shows that in the order ofprominence, the following factors contribute to NPAs.Internal factors? diversion of funds foro expansion / diversification / modernizationo  taking up new projectso helping/promoting associate concerns? time/cost overrun during the project implementation stage? business (product, marketing, etc.) failure,? inefficient management,? strained labour relations,? inappropriate technology/technical problems,? product obsolescence, etc.External factors? recession,? non-payment in other countries? inputs/power shortage,? price escalation,? accidents, and natural calamities, etc.? changes in government policies in excise/import duties, pollution control orders, etc.,Contribution to NPAs by factors like siphoning off funds thoroughfraud/misappropriation was less significant in comparison with other factors.Incidence of NPAs on account of deficiencies on the part of banks such as delay insanction and disbursement of funds whereby borrowing units are starved of funds when inneed, and delay in settlement of payments/subsidies by the Government bodies was on thelow side in proportion to other factors.Lack of effective co-ordination between banks and financial institutions in respect oflarge value projects does contribute to the emergence of NPAs even at the implementationstage.  RBI had, in February 2000,drawn up certain ground rules in this regard in consultation6with banks, financial institutions and IBA and circulated the same among banks and financialinstitutions for implementation.Susceptibility of the sanctioning authorities to external pressure, failings of the CEOs andthe ineffectiveness of the Board to check his ways also contributed in no small measure to theunusual build up of NPAs in some of the banks.One of the most prominent causes for NPAs, as often observed by RBI Inspectors, is theslackness on the part of the credit management staff in their follow up to detect and preventdiversion of funds in the post-disbursement stage.The controversy as to who should be held responsible for diversion of funds – banks orborrowers – may not get settled and is not that material for recovery of NPAs.  From the RBIside, I would like to stress that borrowers should, in the interest of the viability of the bankingsystem on which they are dependent, resist all temptations to divert bank funds for uses otherthan for which they are sanctioned.  Banks too on their part should be vigilant to detect andprevent diversion of funds as any failure in this front is a potential source of NPAs.Implications of NPAsSupervisory action that may ariseon account of high level of NPAsOne of the trigger points in the proposed Prompt Corrective Action (PCA) mechanism[which was widely circulated by RBI through the public domain] is the level of net NPAs.When the trigger point under the mechanism is activated by the performance of a bank, themandatory actions would follow by way of restriction on expansion of risk-weighted assets,submission and implementation of capital restoration plan, prior approval of RBI for openingof new branches and new lines of business, paying off costly deposits and special drive toreduce the stock of NPAs, review of loan policy, etc.Other implicationsThe most important business implication of the NPAs is that it leads to the credit riskmanagement assuming priority over other aspects of bank's functioning. The bank’s wholemachinery would thus be pre-occupied with recovery procedures rather than concentrating onexpanding business.As already mentioned earlier, a bank with high level of NPAs would be forced toincur carrying costs on a non-income yielding assets. Other consequences would be reductionin interest income, high level of provisioning, stress on profitability and capital adequacy,gradual decline in ability to meet steady increase in cost, increased pressure on net interestmargin (NIM) thereby reducing competitiveness, steady erosion of capital resources andincreased difficulty in augmenting capital resources.The lesser appreciated implications are reputational risks arising out of greaterdisclosures on quantum and movement of NPAs, provisions etc. The non-quantifiableimplications can be psychological like ‘play safe’ attitude and risk aversion, lower moraleand disinclination to take decisions at all levels of staff in the bank.Management of NPAs7The quality and performance of advances have a direct bearing on the profitabilityand viability of banks.  Despite an efficient credit appraisal and disbursement mechanism,problems can still arise due to various factors. The essential component of a sound NPAmanagement system is quick identification of non-performing advances, their containment atminimum levels and ensuring that their impingement on the financials is minimum.The approach to NPA management has to be multi-pronged, calling for differentstrategies at different stages a credit facility passes through. RBI's guidelines to banks (issuedin 1999) on Risk Management Systems outline the strategies to be followed for efficientmanagement of credit portfolio.  I would like to touch upon a few essential aspects of NPAmanagement in this paper.Excessive reliance on collateral has led Indian banks nowhere except to long drawnout litigation and hence it should not be sole criterion for sanction. Sanctions above certainlimits should be through Committee which can assume the status of an 'Approval Grid'.It is common to find banks running after the same borrower/borrower groups as wesee from the spate of requests for considering proposals to lend beyond the prescribedexposure limits.  I would like to caution that running after niche segment may be fine in theshort run but is equally fraught with risk.  Banks should rather manage within the appropriateexposure limits. A linkage to net owned funds also needs to be developed to control highleverages at borrower level.Exchange of credit information among banks would be of immense help to them toavoid possible NPAs. There is no substitute for critical management information system andmarket intelligence.We have come across cases of excellent appraisal and compliance with sanctionprocedures but no control at disbursement stage over compliance with the terms of sanction.To overcome this problem a mechanism for independent review of compliance with terms ofsanction has to be put in place.Close monitoring of the account particularly the larger ones  is the primary solution.Emerging weakness in profitability and liquidity, recessionary trends, recovery ofinstallments / interest with time lag, etc., should put the banks on caution. The objectiveshould be to assess the liquidity of the borrower, both present and future prospects. Loanreview mechanism is a tool to bring about qualitative improvement in credit administration.Banks should follow risk rating system to reveal the risk of lending.  The risk-rating processshould be different from regular loan renewal exercise and the exercise should be carried outat regular intervals. It is not enough for banks to aspire to become big players without beingbacked by development of internal rating models.  This is going to be a pre-requisite underthe New Capital Adequacy framework and if a bank wants to be an international player, itshall have to go for such a system.Banks should ensure that sanctioning of further credit facilities is done only at higherlevels.  A quick review of all documents originally obtained and their validity should bemade.  A phased programme of exit from the account should also be considered.8Measures initiated by Reserve Bank andGovernment of India for reduction of NPAsCompromise settlement schemesThe RBI / Government of India have been constantly goading the banks to take steps forarresting the incidence of fresh NPAs and have also been creating legal and regulatory environmentto facilitate the recovery of existing NPAs of banks.  More significant of them, I would like torecapitulate at this stage.? The broad framework for compromise or negotiated settlement  of NPAs advised by RBI in July1995 continues to be in place. Banks  are free to design and implement their own policies forrecovery and write-off  incorporating  compromise  and negotiated settlements with the approvalof their Boards, particularly for old and unresolved cases falling under the NPA category. Thepolicy framework suggested by RBI provides for setting up of an independent SettlementAdvisory Committees headed by a retired Judge of the High Court to scrutinise and recommendcompromise proposals? Specific guidelines were issued in May 1999 to public sector banks for one time nondiscretionary and non discriminatory settlement of NPAs of small sector. The scheme wasoperative upto September 30, 2000. [Public sector banks recovered Rs. 668 crore throughcompromise settlement under this scheme.].? Guidelines were modified in July 2000 for recovery of the stock of NPAs of Rs. 5 crore and lessas on 31 March 1997.  [The above guidelines which were valid upto June 30, 2001 helped thepublic sector banks to recover Rs. 2600 crore by September 2001]? An OTS Scheme covering advances of Rs.25000 and below continues to be in operation andguidelines in pursuance to the budget announcement of the Hon’ble Finance Minister providingfor OTS for advances up to Rs.50,000 in respect of NPAs of small/marginal farmers are beingdrawn up.Measures for faster legal processLok AdalatsLok Adalat institutions help banks to  settle disputes involving accounts in “doubtful” and“loss” category, with outstanding balance of Rs.5 lakh for compromise settlement under LokAdalats.  Debt Recovery Tribunals have now been empowered to organize Lok Adalats to decide oncases of NPAs of Rs.10 lakhs and above.  The public sector banks had recovered Rs.40.38 crore ason September 30, 2001, through the forum of Lok Adalat. The progress through this channel isexpected to pick up in the coming years particularly looking at the recent initiatives taken by someof the public sector banks and DRTs in Mumbai.Debt Recovery TribunalsThe Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Institutions (amendment) Act, passed inMarch 2000 has helped in strengthening the functioning of DRTs. Provisions for placement of morethan one Recovery Officer, power to attach defendant’s property/assets before   judgement, penalprovisions for disobedience of Tribunal’s order or for breach of any terms of the order andappointment of receiver with powers of realization, management, protection and preservation ofproperty are expected to provide necessary teeth to the DRTs and speed up the recovery of NPAs inthe times to come.Though there are 22 DRTs set up at major centres in the country with Appellate Tribunalslocated in five centres viz. Allahabad, Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta and Chennai, they could decide only9814 cases for Rs.6264.71 crore pertaining to public sector banks since inception of DRT9mechanism and till September 30, 2001.The amount recovered in respect of these cases amounted toonly Rs.1864.30 crore.Looking at the huge task on hand with as many as  33049 cases involving Rs.42988.84 crorepending before them as on September 30, 2001,  I would like the banks to institute appropriatedocumentation system and render all possible assistance to the DRTs for speeding up decisions andrecovery of some of the well collateralised NPAs involving large amounts. I may add thatfamiliarisation programmes have been offered in NIBM at periodical intervals to the presidingofficers of DRTs in understanding the complexities of documentation and operational features andother legalities applicable of Indian banking system.  RBI on its part has suggested to theGovernment to consider enactment of appropriate penal provisions against obstruction by borrowersin possession of attached properties by DRT receivers, and notify borrowers who default to honourthe decrees passed against them.Circulation of information on defaultersThe RBI has put in place a system for periodical circulation of details of wilful defaults ofborrowers of banks and financial institutions. This serves as a caution list while considering requestsfor new or additional credit limits from defaulting borrowing units and also from the directors/proprietors / partners of these entities.  RBI also publishes a list of borrowers (with outstandingsaggregating Rs. 1 crore and above) against whom suits have been filed by banks and FIs forstrecovery of their funds, as on 31 March every year.  It is our experience that these measures had notcontributed to any perceptible recoveries from the defaulting entities. However, they serve asnegative basket of steps shutting off fresh loans to these defaulters. I strongly believe that a realbreakthrough can come only if there is a change in the repayment psyche of the Indian borrowers.Recovery action against large NPAsAfter a review of pendency in regard to NPAs by the Hon’ble Finance Minister, RBI hadadvised the public sector banks to examine all cases of wilful default of Rs 1 crore and above andfile suits in such cases, and file criminal cases in regard to wilful defaults. Board of Directors arerequired to review  NPA accounts of Rs.1 crore and above with special reference to fixing of staffaccountability.On their part RBI and the Government are contemplating several supporting measuresincluding legal reforms, some of them I would like to highlight.Asset Reconstruction Company: An Asset Reconstruction Company with an authorised capital of Rs.2000 crore and initialpaid up capital Rs.1400 crore is to be set up as a trust for undertaking activities relating toasset reconstruction.  It would negotiate with banks and financial institutions for acquiringdistressed assets and develop markets for such assets..  Government of India proposes to goin for legal reforms to facilitate the functioning of ARC mechanismLegal ReformsThe Honourable Finance Minister in his recent budget speech has already announced theproposal for a comprehensive legislation on asset foreclosure and securitisation.Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR)Corporate Debt Restructuring mechanism has been institutionalised in 2001 to provide a timely andtransparent system for restructuring of the corporate debts of Rs.20 crore and above with the banksand financial institutions.   The CDR process would also enable viable corporate entities to10restructure their dues outside the existing legal framework and reduce the incidence of fresh NPAs.The CDR structure has been headquartered in IDBI, Mumbai and a Standing Forum and Core Groupfor administering the mechanism had already been put in place. The experiment  however has nottaken off at the desired pace though more than six months have lapsed since introduction. Asannounced by the Hon'ble Finance Minister in the Union Budget 2002-03, RBI has set up a highlevel Group under the Chairmanship of Shri. Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, RBI to review theimplementation procedures of CDR mechanism and to make it more effective. The Group willreview the operation of the CDR Scheme, identify the operational difficulties, if any, in the smoothimplementation of the scheme and suggest measures to make the operation of the scheme moreefficient.Credit Information BureauInstitutionalisation of information sharing arrangements through the newly formed CreditInformation Bureau of India Ltd. (CIBIL) is under way. RBI is considering the recommendations ofthe S.R.Iyer Group (Chairman of CIBIL) to operationalise the scheme of information disseminationon defaults to the financial system. The main  recommendations of the Group include disseminationof information relating to suit-filed accounts regardless of the amount claimed in the suit or amountof credit granted by a credit institution as also such  irregular accounts where the borrower has givenconsent for disclosure. This, I hope, would prevent those who take advantage of lack of system ofinformation sharing amongst lending institutions to borrow large amounts against same assets andproperty, which had in no small measure contributed to the incremental NPAs of banks.Proposed guidelines on wilful defaults/diversion of fundsRBI is examining the recommendation of Kohli Group on wilful defaulters. It is working outa proper definition covering such classes of defaulters so that credit denials to this group ofborrowers can be made effective and criminal prosecution can be made demonstrative againstwilful defaulters.Corporate GovernanceA Consultative Group under the chairmanship of Dr.A.Ganguly was set up by the ReserveBank to review the supervisory role of Boards of banks and financial institutions and toobtain feedback on the functioning of the Boards vis-à-vis compliance, transparency,disclosures, audit committees etc. and make recommendations for making the role of Boardof Directors more effective with a view to minimising risks and over-exposure. The Group isfinalising its recommendations shortly and may come out with guidelines for effective controland supervision by bank boards over credit management and NPA prevention measures.ConclusionI am of the opinion NPAs are better avoided at the initial stage of credit consideration byputting in place rigorous and appropriate credit appraisal mechanism. In the changingscenario banks cannot behave imprudently while sanctioning credit and later run tosupervisors / regulators for regulatory forbearance and owners or strategic partners to bailthem out.Secondly, the mindset of the borrowers need to  change so that a culture of proper utilisationof credit facilities and timely repayment is developed. As you are aware, one of the mainreasons for corporate default is on account of diversion of funds and corporate entities shouldcome forward to avoid this practice in the interest of strong and sound  financial system.Finally, extending credit involves lenders and borrowers and both should realise their roleand responsibilities. They should appreciate the difficulties of each other and shouldendeavour to work towards contributing to a healthy financial system.11I do hope that corporate entities would put their best foot forward in creating an environmentwhere a healthy, vibrant and sound financial system can be built-up and sustained.Text of address by Deputy Governor (Shri G.P.Muniappan) at CII Banking Summit 2002 atMumbai on April 1, 2002
