Y.V. I deem it as a great honour to be here to deliver this valedictory address. I am gratefulto innumerable friends of my alma mater, Osmania University, and in particular ViceChancellor Ramakistayya, who have so kindly given me this opportunity. My associationwith Osmania University dates back to August 1960, with registration as a full timeresearcher for Ph.D. Later, as a lecturer in this campus, I learnt a lot before joining theAdministrative Service in 1964. The University took me back again under UGC Scheme,as a full time Visiting Professor in the late  eighties on a spell of deputation from beingSecretary to Government. I never missed and can never miss an opportunity to be in thiscampus - more so when there is an affectionate invitation to address an august gatheringThe Conference has already deliberated in detail the scholarly works of eminenteconomists here, and one should not go over the same ground. In fact, my comparativeEdmund Burke called the Eighteenth century as the  Age of the Economist . Theremark is perhaps far more appropriate for our own times than the earlier centuries. Letus recall the oft-quoted remarks of  :  practical men, who believe themselves to bequite exempt from any intellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defuncteconomist .The question is : Is there life without the economist? The answer is best provided byDr. I. G. Patel in his Fourth Dr. D. T. Lakdawala Memorial Lecture (1996) in thefollowing words.  The fact that economic rationality has to filter through a given politicaland social framework makes our task that much more difficult and our contribution thatmuch less dramatic in the public eye. Since everyone has a view on economic matters,the subject looks deceptively simple in most eyes and is thus prone to much contention.Add to this the fact that in a subject which concerns everyone so  intimately and which isalmost always in the headlines, the temptation for the economist to play to the gallery andglamorisation is not easy toBut then, life with the economist is not very simple either. Economics is perhaps theonly field in which two people can share a Nobel Prize for having divergent viewpoints -to cite Myrdal and Hayek. Often, people hold that economics is as definitive a science asastrology is, and the more charitable of them place an economist between a physicist anda sociologist. For example, in the Preface to his book  Peddling prosperity: EconomicSense and Nonsense in the Age of Diminished Expectations  (1944), Paul Krugman saysthat an Indian born economist once explained his personal theory of reincarnation to hisgraduate economics class.  If you are a good economist, a virtuous economist ,  he said,you are reborn as a physicist. But if you are an evil, wicked economist, you are reborn asa sociologist . Economics is not an exact science and it means that advice is tentative orcircumspect or contingent upon non-economic factors or assumptions. This makes the liferesist. But with all that, it is difficult to imagine life without the economist.to seek the limelight by simplification, exaggeration and even KeynesRole of Economists in Public Policyadvantage perhaps lies in saying something relating to public policy.such as this.ReddyEconomists and Public Policy*of policy maker not exactly comfortable. A statement attributed to the chief executive ofa country reads :  I am stuck with a hundred economists. I have to listen to all before anyIn public policy, the practitioner asks the economist  what is to be done?  A puretheorist may decline to answer because he feels he is not competent to do so and in anycase what is to be done in a specific situation is never a simple corollary of theoreticalSecondly, there is the problem of facts with reference to which theory has to beconsidered and prescriptions for action formed. As Sir Alec Cairncross (1985) put it inRichard T. Ely lecture  Economic theory has always to be mixed with a large dollop offact before prescriptions for action can be framed; but the facts are usually obscure,disputed, seen through different eyes against a different experience of life and stretchingfar beyond the limited economic context within which the economist seeks to analyzeThirdly, the theorist is in control of his starting point and is free to make his ownassumptions. The practitioner is never quite sure where he is. Apart from the possibledelays in getting data one has to reckon with the rewriting of the preliminary estimatesinto final estimates ! In a way, for the practitioner, on a real time basis, not merely theFourthly, economic relationships keep changing, and at times they change fast. How athing that worked in the recent past can perhaps be explained but there is uncertaintyFifthly, the practitioner has to be specific in terms of magnitudes and timing and oftenreacts very promptly to emerging situations. Theory helps in indicating directions,Finally, and closely related to timing is the issue of non-economic factors -particularly, institutional and legal factors.With all these limitations, those who One can distinguish between economic theorists, economic analysts, economic policyadvisers, economic administrators or managers and economic journalists. Among these,economic analysts catering to the market of policy makers in business have oneadvantage, viz., goal of policy is clear -usually, maximise profit or turnover etc. ,  and inany case it is well defined. Analysts dealing with public policy have a more complextask. Unfortunately, in matters relating to public policy, goals themselves may not bealways clear and relevant instruments have to emerge out of a broad consensus. Further,in business, the focal point for decision making is usually clearer than in Government.estimate of the number of economists in India!this figure has been amazed at it.  I presume that Indian Economic Association has somethat there were 110,000 economists in 1984. Every economist to whom I have mentionedt even know how many economists there are in the United States. The BLS has estimatedthere is an industry called  Economic Research.  It is a six-digit industry, 739210. We don,  Probably few economists know that in the Standard Industrial Classification, lectureT.Ely economics as having become an industry. To quote Herbert Stein s (1986), Richard analyse the economics of economics refer tooccasionally broad orders of magnitude, but seldom on timing.about the continued relevance of such observed economic relationships.future, even the past is uncertain. So some judgments become inevitable.them.conclusions. Also, theorists themselves differ even on technical issues.policy decision. Only one tells the truth but it is never the same one.One should also make a distinction between economic ideas and economists  ideas.After all, economic systems and related issues predate the birth of economics as adiscipline. That policies of Government are strongly influenced by economic ideas isundeniable, but as David Hendersen explained in the 1985 Reith Lectures, this washappening by the phenomenon of  do-it-yourself economics . This phenomenon is bestexplained in his own words :  Over wide areas of policy, the judgments of politicians andtheir officials, as also of public opinion in general, have been and still are guided to alarge extent by beliefs and perceptions about the working of the economic system, andabout national interests and the welfare of the community, which owe little or nothing tothe economics profession. In so far as the world is indeed ruled by economic ideas, theseare often the intuitive ideas of lay people, rather than the more elaborate systems ofthought which occupy the minds of trained economists. The history of national economicpolicies down the years bears witness not only to the influence of economists, whetherdefunct or alive, but also to the power of what I Following this approach, one can identify a role for a trained economist in publicpolicy viz., in clarifying and dispelling notions which appear intuitively right but actuallyresult in adverse consequences (i.e., counterintuitive but rational) and in evaluating theconsequences of lobbies for various causes (interest neutral analysis or counting the cost).In the ultimate analysis, however, economic reasoning is one of the many inputs in publicThere is often, an observable lag between economic analysis and social orinstitutional change. I recall, President Ronald Reagan saying ,  if something succeeds inpractice, economists start wondering whether it will work in theory.  But, there is a realdifficulty for an economist to capture institutional changes in his reasoning. Moreover,the first steps to bringing institutional changes within the framework of economicanalysis are invariably tentative, oral rather than mathematical and lacking the eleganceof a methodological innovation. Hence, they are readily dismissed by the men ofSometimes, policy makers express frustration (in utilising services of professionaleconomists) at the fact that the approach of many professional economists is technique-oriented rather than problem-oriented. I wondered whether it was a problem peculiar toIndia, but I notice that a study in the USA showed similar tendency and explains why ithappens. The relevant part of the observation by Colander and Klamer in the article  TheMaking of an Economist,  (1987) reads as:  There are also tensions between the emphasison techniques and the desire to do policy-oriented work. What students believe leads tosuccess in graduate school is definitely techniques; success has little to do withunderstanding the economy, nor does it have much to do with economic literature. Wehope that this information leads to discussion within the profession of whether this focusAny presentation on the role of economists in public policy will be incompletewithout a reference to recent economic reforms in the developing world, and the role .  The term  technocrats  has been used to describe the economic technocratswho assume positions of political responsibility (and Professor Manmohan Singh is citedas an example). A technopol is, in many ways, an instrument of translating economicsTechnopolsofis good or bad.scientific reputation on the pretext of being rather sloppy.policy.call  do-it-yourself economics .into public policy. John Williamson, the editor of the book  The Political Economy ofA successful technopol needs to combine two very different types of skills. One isthat of a successful applied economist, able to judge what institutions and policies areneeded in specific circumstances in order to further economic objectives. The other is theskill of a successful politician, able to persuade others to adopt the policies that he or shehas judged to be called for.Many of my economist friends are frustrated that eminently sensible economicsolutions do not find acceptance in public policy. Economists should keep trying toinfluence public policy, but economists should recognise that economic policy is onlyone element of public policy, and in fact, they should be prepared to be influenced toI had started this section by quoting Edmund Burke that it is the  Age of anEconomist , but as Daniel Fusfeld in his book titled,  The Age of the Economist  (1966)says,  The age of the economist continues, along with the quest for the good life.  Asexplained by him, the problems one generation has been able to solve lead to difficultiesthat another must face. He adds that  answers in economics keep turning into morequestions . Well, today, in many developed countries, we notice high productivity andlow inflation benefiting ninety per cent of workforce, virtually on condition that about tenper cent remain unemployed. Is it a contribution of economists to public policy, or is it aconcession ? The answer depends on who is responding - the ten per cent or the ninetyper On the role of economists in Government - the fountainhead of public policy - thebest statement I can think of was made by John Henderson in his article Professional Standards for the Performance of Government Economist  (1977) :  It is mycontention that Government economists perform their most effective professional workwhen they speak plainly and do not trim their views to suit the presumed wishes of thosewho consult them; in other words, when they deliver their best analysis of reasonablepolicy options in fair and comprehensible terms. This is easier said than done. There is agreat diversity of professional positions in the federal Government. In some cases, theprofessional commitment of economists is strong and is expected to be so; in others, it isnot of paramount importance even if it is never unimportant. Some positions arerelatively secure, and others are dependent upon the retention of political favour. Someorganizations encourage freedom of expression when the doors are closed, and otherscount upon a rather stiff orthodoxy. At any rate, the penalties visited upon theuniform .Economists are associated with Government in a variety of ways. First, there areeconomists in the permanent employment of Government such as our Indian EconomicService. Second, there are economists who make lateral entry at senior levels after adistinguished academic or policy research and remain in permanent employment. Third,there are academic economists from Universities or research/training institutions, who areinducted, on deputation for a fixed period - somewhat rare in our country. Fourth, thereare such academics whose advice or service is sought in Government committees/entitlednonconformist are not at all Role of Economists in Governmentcent ?some extent by public policy.technopols. Policy Reform  (1994), describes the skills needed for the success of advisory bodies, etc. One can add to this list, ad hoc sources of advice from the recentlyemerging academics-turned journalists, or academics-turned private consultants or retiredofficial economists. Finally, we have generalist civil servants who specialise, byqualifications and/or experience, in matters relating to economic policy. It is useful tonote that, just as a generalist civil servant may dabble in economics, economists mayLike any other profession, free and frank professional advice from economists wouldbe ideal. It is said, of course in jest, that whatever conclusion you want, economists cansupply on demand. In the same vein, it is said that an  acceptable  level of unemploymentOne of the ticklish problems confronted by an economist in Government relates tovalue judgments. Professor E.A.G.Robinson in his Foreword to the book  The Role of theEconomist as Official Adviser  by W.A.John and H.W.Singer, (1955) addresses thisissue. He maintains that an economist in sharing the shaping or administration ofeconomic policy becomes a partner in the process of making value judgments. However,he feels that economists can shape policies with first rate analysis. At the same time,according to Professor Robinson, he should contribute actively to more generaljudgments. For my part, I found it extremely difficult not to trespass into valuejudgments, though the elected representatives representing the voice of people have amore credible mandate on value judgments than we as professionals in Government have.At the same time, the consequences and implications of alternate actions based ondifferent value judgments, when quantified, analysed and presented did make somedifference to the outcome. In the final analysis, an economist - even in Government - is asensitive human being, and his advice or actions affect other people. He cannot but bringto bear on his work, his value judgments. In fact, it can be argued that there are no factswithout values since one notices facts when one looks for them, and the process ofAn economist in Government has no option but to deal with a large number of non-economists. It is, therefore, useful to make some general observations on interactions with political executive or legislators and administrators.First, in formulating any public policy, the economist should count not only economicopportunity cost but also political opportunity cost. As Charles L.Schultze says in thepaper in titled  The Role and Responsibilities of the Economist inGovernment  (1982),  The calculus of consensus has many of the same formal rules as thecalculus of welfare maximization. Those who engage in the latter cannot afford to lookdown on those who practice the Second, advocacy may be needed to counter powerful lobbies in favour of certainvested interests. This may need not only logic but articulation and gathering supportthrough consultations etc.Third, what appear to be efficient solutions are mostly based on some assumptionsrelating to flexibility of institutional circumstances. The legal, procedural and otherorganisational aspects of any measure need to be assessed. This assessment is possiblethrough interaction and constant communication with non-economists. In other words,the economic view is not the only legitimate view.former .Okun, honour of Arthur economistslooking for certain facts presupposes some predilections reflecting one s values.means that the Government economist to whom it is  acceptable  still has a job.dabble in administration.Fourth, having chosen a preferred course of action, there is a human temptation tooverstate the benefits and understate the costs to ensure  victory  in an internal policydebate - especially if others have no similar access to relevant economic facts. Access tofacts and analysis is often restricted. I suspect that such actions would get exposed soonerthan later.Fifth, there are issues of packaging some economic measures for  effect , andcanvassing public support for a proposal (as distinct from explaining or elaborating aproposal) - especially in the media or industry associations. There may be some merit inAs I see it, in real life, an economist in Government has to be less than an economistand also more than an economist; less than an economist since he has to improvise andrespond to practical questions with approximate solutions based on inadequate,incomplete and outdated data; and more than an economist because he has tocomprehend, interact and influence a host of non-economic factors, be it value-judgmentsor mundane reconciliation of conflicting interests. In fact, he has to be very much morethan an economist since he has to convince a host of co-economists within and outsidethe Government.The Indian SceneIt appears fashionable and in any case not entirely purposeless to attemptperiodisation whenever possible, in spite of issues of overlap and over-simplification. So,The age of hope covering the thirties and forties was characterised by debates ofpolitical economy coupled with blueprints for action in the light of the freedommovement. There were three schools - the Gandhian self-sufficiency, the Bombay Planinvolving the consensus of the private corporate sector and the Fabian socialism led by aNehru.The  fifties and  sixties can be described as the age of ideology. Among thedevelopment economists, two groups initially attempted to give direction to the pattern ofeconomic development for Independent India. The Vakil-Brahmananda Model gavepreference to the wage good sector, while P. C. Mahalanobis accorded top most priorityto large scale industrialisation of heavy industries variety, based on the Soviet model ofdevelopment; the latter found favour with the political authorities of the times. Events ofthe late  sixties attributable to climatic conditions, neighbourly relations and politicaldevelopments led to reappraisal of our capabilities. Given the rate of growth thatappeared feasible, economists were focusing on distributional issues and the direct attackIn the  seventies, conformism in the thinking of economists was favoured andencouraged making it the age of conformism. Referring to this period, Dr. Ashok makes his characteristically blunt comment in his book ,  My Economic Affairs  (1994)The twisted logic of this country s policies and the casuistry of their apologistsentertained me year after year. But, this involvement could only be a diversion for nonecould make a living in India by criticising the Government. So, for a livelihood Ideveloped specialties far removed.Desaion poverty.number of thinkers including India ? periodise the role of economists in public policy in how can we such actions but soon they can spill over into an alien territory viz., that of politicians.The  eighties were the age of doubt. Economic policy was under review. Scholarsstarted questioning the policies but there was no crystallisation of opinion among leadingeconomists. Various committees were appointed for reviewing economic policy but thereThe  nineties is the age of pragmatism. Jolted into realisation after the Gulf crisis ofThe above brief account shows that in our country, economists always held andcontinue to hold a special position - in fact, they enjoy positions of power, influence,publicity and financial support far superior than most other disciplines, including naturalsciences. Take for example, the official positions in Government. There are quite anumber of officials in the rank of Secretary to Government of India from the field ofeconomics. All other disciplines put together will constitute only a fraction of those fromeconomics alone. Of course, I am not including organised Civil services like IAS and IPSin the category of a  discipline . The number of research institutions and the amount offunding - both among all disciplines and within the framework of social sciences -attributable to the area of economics are easily the largest. Among disciplines inuniversities, though management science is somewhat prestigious, economics continuesto wield significant clout. Dr. I.G.Patel, in his Presidential Address to the 49th AnnualConference of the Indian Economic Association (1966) makes a reference to this :Teachers of economics in our universities enjoy a degree of esteem, publicity andfinancial support which is the envy of their colleagues in other departments. And yet,there are a great many among our fraternity whose attitude towards issues of economicpolicy is one of indifference or skepticism. Even in our more exuberant moods, we oftenbring to our profession an air of unreality or controversy which is hardly calculated toWithin the Government, most senior economists have been educated both in Indiaand in prestigious foreign universities. While few entered Government sector direct fromuniversities, many of them have had experience in multilateral institutions - like IMF,World Bank and Commonwealth Secretariat. Some have headed or had exposure toresearch institutions. Most of the economists who joined the Government are continuingwith only a few, very few, reverting to academics after a tenure. However, thecontribution of Indian universities to senior level positions in Government, aseconomists, is not very significant. It would be too simplistic to explain this away interms of bias against pure Swadeshi economists. Of course, I am not denying thecontribution made by universities in initiating these economists into the profession, indeveloping a cadre of Indian Economic Service and even in providing basic grounding toThere is another interesting factor in employment of economists and statisticians thatwe experience in the Reserve Bank. We are not bad pay masters by Indian standards. Wein the Reserve Bank find that although a large number of candidates appear for theentrance examinations, the required number are not able to meet the minimum standardsIn an earlier section of this address, I had mentioned about the various categories ofeconomists, viz., theorists, analysts, policy advisors, economic administrators orwas no serious dent in the mind-set.prescribed by us.the distinguished non-resident economists.sustain the present boom in the demand of our skills.August 1990, economic agenda has been elevated almost on par with the political agenda.managers and economic journalists. There are, to my reading, three tiers in the Indiancontext, viz., theorists, policy advisers, and others. Professor Galbraith gives aninteresting explanation as to why such a hierarchy could exist, in his book ,  AContemporary Guide to Economics Peace and Laughter  (1971) :  The prestige system ofeconomics is wholly in accord with these principles. It assigns, and for good reason, thevery lowest position to the man who deals in everyday policy. For, this individual inconcerning himself with the wisdom of a new tax or the need for an increased deficit, isimmediately caught up in a variety of political and moral judgments. This puts him incommunication with the world at large. As such, he is a threat to the sharp delineationwhich separates the tribal group from the rest of society and thus to the prestige system ofA good or a brilliant economist does not ensure good economic policy. Prof. B. S.Minhas as a Member of National Planning Commission semi-jocularly mentioned that inone State we have outstanding planners and slow growth, while in another there are poorplanners and high growth. In a somewhat similar tone, referring to the role of economistsin India s economic performance, Bhagawati made a telling comment in one of the threeRadhakrishnan s lectures that he gave at Oxford at 1992 :  It is not entirely wrong toagree with the cynical view that India s misfortune was to have brilliant economists : anaffliction that the far-eastern super performers were spared .I will be failing in my duties if I do not present to this august audience the role of theFirst, we have instituted the Development Research Group, a Division of theDepartment of Economic Analysis and Policy of the Bank. The DRG funds researchstudies in economics in collaboration with academicians and/or professional economistsSecond, we fund endowment Chairs in universities/institutions, giving them supportand access to data.Fourth, we have funded institutes like the Indira Gandhi Institute for DevelopmentResearch, the National Institute of Bank Management and the Institute for DevelopmentFifth, we extend academic support liberally by deputing our economists for lectures,participation in seminars and workshops at our own cost.Sixth, we also benefit by inviting renowned (international and Indian) economists todeliver the C. D. Deshmukh Memorial Lecture, L. K. Jha Memorial Lecture and otherspecial lectures.Seventh, Governor, RBI, invites select economists for consultations before theEighth, the volume of the History of the RBI (1951-67) is due for publication verySome Thoughts on the Future Role of Economists in Policysoon. This volume will give insights into the policy making process.monetary and credit policy announcements.and Research in Banking Technology.Third, we give grants for specific research projects on specific subjects in economics.outside the Bank.Reserve Bank in building bridges between the academics and practitioners.the profession.In the previous section, I spoke of economic tiers. Perhaps, a more conscious efforttowards involvement of economic administrators, managers and economic journalists inacademic pursuits as also policy advice would benefit all participants. I am onlyreiterating what Dr.Patel said last year, but I am providing this as a possible route toensure the much needed, more liberal entry of academics in policy arena in our country.To quote from Dr.Patel s lecture delivered on the occasion of the Silver Jubilee of theIndian Institute of Economic Growth (1984) ,  in India, the profession of economics hasyet to try really hard to do all that it can do - may be because the theorists are betterrewarded elsewhere and the analysts and advisers and administrators do not worksufficiently together or are not encouraged to do so by the environment. Within the limitsof existing theoretical insights and even on the basis of the broad policy parameters thecountry has set before it in the past, much can be done by detailed statistical work andconstant factual surveillance even of limited problems to improve the quality of oureconomic management.We need to develop the concept of case analysis in order to learn from economicpolicy decisions. We had some critical and controversial decisions in the economic arena.While the controversy is on, there may be problems in explaining all the factors ornuances that went into a decision. But, after a lapse of time, it should be possible toanalyse and explain. We have to develop - in coordination between Government andWhat I have in mind is not case studies or comparisons to draw a conclusion, or tonarrate a particular event in order to illustrate a moral, but a case study which depicts thecomplex process of decision making and the analysis of the relevant factors and theirinterrelations which were considered but wrongly judged/interpreted or that were notWhen I advocate case studies regarding policy decisions, it is also meant to reflecthow some decisions are taken on the advice of and some in spite of the advice ofeconomists in Government. Often, an economist in Government ends up defending inpublic the actions that he pleaded against in discussions within the Government. As anillustration, we quote from the introduction by the editors ( Isher Judge Ahluwalia andLittle IMD) of  the book  India s Economic Reforms and Development: Essays forManmohan Singh (1998)”: "It is difficult to identify the contribution of individual policymakers functioning as civil servants. For example, it is never possible to say what baddecisions are averted, or which good policy measures are initiated at the instance of anindividual. In fact, it is a civil servant s  dharma  to advise an elected Government freelyChronicling is yet another area needing attention. I recall a French team studying avillage economy in Andhra Pradesh - as it changed over two decades. Again, I amDr.Patel s Address of 1966, which appears even more valid today :I for one miss the kind of economist, who provides simple, honest-to-goodnessdescriptions of specific economic episodes -a kind of contemporary, economic chroniclerwho tells us the story of the operation of a particular control from the beginning to theend or describes the changing life of a village over ten years or narrates the story of aproject from the time it was conceived to the time it needed to be replaced by a new one.tempted to quote from and at the same time defend the policies that finally emerge".considered at all.academics - some case studies of policy decisions taken in the past.I had mentioned about our problem in getting young economists of the standards thatwe need. If it is accepted that we do not have within our country, enough identifiableworld class institutions, we can attempt to locate or upgrade select centres as IndianInstitute of Economics (IIE) on a pattern similar to the Indian Institutes of Managementand Indian Institutes of Technology. I have no doubt that such specific projects could befunded. This by itself would not be enough since real quality needs to be imparted even atthe undergraduate level. Perhaps, a programme of upgrading the skills as well asinfrastructural facilities in select postgraduate and promising undergraduate schoolsIncidentally, thanks to the economic reform, there is intense public debate oneconomic issues. Today, even regional language newspapers carry more coverage andanalysis of economic issues than English papers did ten years ago. But, I am not sure howwell informed the debate is. There is, often confusion regarding concepts or unchangingmindset. I believe that some people mix up standard of living with cost of living whileothers think reduction in inflation means reduction in prices - thus undermining theA number of approaches are possible -such as the use of media or short seminars/courses. There is a demand from a large section, for what may be called, "economics forRecently, I read about the controversy behind our Government inviting a particulareconomist to advise us. Some, and this I believe, including some economists, felt we donot need a foreign economist to advise us, and definitely not an economist of a particularreputation. Somehow, this appeared to me to be a new development. We had foreigneconomists before - not simply to advise but physically located in Government officesand in Yojana Bhavan. Even as interactions are increasing among other countries, weseem to become defensive. I submit that we should seek advice from all around, but keepour own counsel. In fact, speaking of how good our economists are, George Rosen in hisbook  Western Economists and Eastern Societies : Agents of Change in South Asia 1950-1970  (1985) has this to say :  as far as India is concerned the myth of an implicit westernsuperiority is no longer valid, if it ever was.  Prof. Rosen, adds  India s economists todayare making on balance a greater contribution to the economics profession in the west thanOften, we miss out significant economic ideas propounded by non-economists. I donot know whether this is unique to India but I have one illustration. Rajaji made the mosteloquent case ever for abolition of license-permit raj and even sacrificed his politicalcareer. He practiced, well before he said this, what he believed in - by abolishingrationing of and acknowledge brilliant non-economists who can contribute to economic analysis andWe talk of enormous investments needed in infrastructure, which point out to theneed for specialists in regulatory economics or sectoral economics, especially in power,port or roads. Let me again quote from Dr. Patel s Presidential address to the IndianEconomic Association (1966 ) :  Even the business of acquiring a broad-based training inrelated social fields can be exciting as also the need to develop familiarity with thepolicies.foodgrains in Madras as its Chief Minister. We should not hesitate to look forIndia receives from western economists .everyday life".credibility of the index as also economists! Should not economists do something about it?should be undertaken.technical aspects of different branches of the economy. An industrial economist or apower economist or even a defense economist can have a lot of fun apart from beinguseful; and if we mean business, we need in fact many more specialised economists ofthis kind than we have today.  In fact, Dr.Patel reverts to the same theme after decades in1996 where he states ,  I had pleaded for economists taking interest in specific factorssuch as power or transport or the oil or steel industry and having a large family ofeconomists who know something about everything in an industry or activity. I am evenmore impressed now by the need for such diversified and specialised talent. If supply-side economics is so important and someone has to help the private and public sector,including the financial sector, in taking important decisions, how can an economist makea useful contribution in this role unless he knows as much, say, about energy as he doesThere is also a widely held view that in India we produce a few brilliant economistsand most others are not active in their contributions. A similar view was in the pastmentioned about UK, contrasting it with research in the USA, where it was widespread.More recently, another distinction is being made between European economists who playan important role in the policy process and their American colleagues who are oriented toacademia. Personally, I would endorse the approach that distinguishes  high tech  andhuman capital  economics. What is this approach? Let me quote from the introduction ofa book entitled  Economic Science and Practice : The Role of Academic Economists andPolicy-Makers  (1997) edited by Peter A G Van Bergeijk et al,  Indeed, the utility ofgeographically determined archetypes or role models is questionable. It is probably moreappropriate to discuss the future development of economics, in terms of  high tech  andhuman capital  economics. With  high tech  economics, we mean a sterile, formalisticnon-contextual approach. The  human capital  approach involves high quality appliedTo conclude, in our country, society expects a lot from economists. Due to increasingglobalisation, rapid technological change, alert economic journalism, enhanced emphasison problem solving rather than ideology, emergence of diversified patterns of ownershipand regulation, high level of sophistication and sensitivity in markets, the demands oneconomists are daunting. I am confident that such demands will be met by adequate and1. Ahluwalia, Judge Isher and IMD Little, (Eds.) India s Economic Reforms andDevelopment : Essays For 2. Bergeijk, Peter A.G., A.Lans Bovenberg, Eric E.C.van Danme and Jarig vanSinderen, Economic Science and Practice, The Role of Academic Economists andElgar Publishing Ltd., U.K.3. Cairncross, Alec Sir ,  Economics in Theory and Practice,  The American EconomicReview, May 1985, Vol.75, No.2.4. Colander, David and Arjo ,  The Making of an Economist,  The Journal ofEconomic Perspectives, Fall 1987, Vol.1, No.2.Klamerpolicy-makers, 1997, Edward Manmohan Singh, 1998 : Oxford University Press, Delhi.Selected Referencestimely supply in an internationally competitive scenario.research that is transparently linked to the  real world .about economics?5. Desai, 6. Fusfeld, Daniel R., The Age of the Economist, 1966, Scott, Foresman and Company,7.8. Gunnar, Myrdal, The Political Element in the Development of Economic Theory,9. Henderson, David, Innocence and Design, The Influence and Economic Ideas onReith Lectures, Basil Blackwell Inc., 1986, New York.10. Henderson, John B. ,  Professional Standards for the Performance of the GovernmentEconomist,  The American Economic Review, February 1977, Vol.67, No.1.th 11. Patel I.G. ,  The Limits of Economic Policy,  Presidential Address to the 49Conference of the Indian Economic Association at Calcutta, December 1966, The IndianVol.XIV, No.3.12. Patel I.G. ,   Economic Theory and Economic Policy : Some Reflections in the IndianContext,    Address on the occassion of Silver Jubilee of Institute of Economic Growth,May 14, 1984.13. Patel I.G. ,  The Landscape of Economics,  Fourth Dr.D.T.Lakdawala MemorialLecture, 14. Rosen, George, Western Economists and Eastern Societies : Agents of Change in15. ,  The Role and Responsibilities of the Economist in Government,The American Economic Review, May 1982, Vol.72, No.2.1977,Vol.67, No.1.W.A.Johr, The Role of the Economist as Official Adviser, 1955,Unwin Ltd., London.18. Williamson John (Ed.), The Political Economy of Policy Reform, January 1994,Washington * Valedictory Address delivered by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the 80thAmrit Jubilee) at on December 29, 1997.Hyderabad Osmania University, Annual Conference of the Indian Economic Association (DC : Institute for International Economics.George Allen and 17. Singer H.W., and ,  Ethics in Government,  The American Economic Review, February 16. Silk, LeonardSchultze, Charles LSouth Asia 1950-1970, 1985, Oxford University Press, Delhi.Ahmedabad, March 2, 1996 : The Indian Economic Journal, Vol.45, No.1.Economic Journal, AnnualPolicy, The 1985 BBC 1954, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.Brydone (Printers) Ltd., London. 1971, Lowe and Galbraith, Kenneth John, A Contemporary Guide to Economic Peace and Laughter,Illinois.Ashok V., My Economic Affair, 1994, Wiley Eastern Ltd., New Delhi.
