Inaugural Address at the
New Delhi, February 24, 1999
by
Shri S P Talwar,
as International law enforcement agencies who have gathered here at the National Seminar on
The economic loss caused internationally by this type of crime is estimated to run into large
sums. Although this is not the scenario in India at present, this is potentially a high risk area
which we have to address with care and in a timely manner. The vulnerability of computer
systems which support critical applications, whether in the area of defence or finance, makes it
imperative that we acquaint ourselves with the means to prevent and combat this menace. Since
banks would be one of the major targets of computer crime, it is necessary for us to have an idea
of not only of the level of computerisation in the banking industry in India but also of the
Before we take up the various issues relating to computer related crime, let me give a brief
One of the characteristic features of computer crime is its transnational character. Computer
crimes often extend across national borders thanks to the technological growth in the industry
that has made geographical borders insignificant. Remote access facilities have necessitated the
harmonization of domestic laws and regulations in tandem with global prosecution needs.
Broadly, computer crimes are those that are committed either on a computer system or with the
aid of such a system. A distinction is sometimes made between 'computer fraud', where the fraud
involves the manipulation of computers, and 'computer crime' where a computer is used to
commit a fraud. Since this seminar is concerned with ‘Computer Related Crime’, both types of
However, it is important not to lose sight of types of crimes that are often committed. The United
1
Nations Manual on the Prevention and Control of Computer Related Crime classifies such
The first and most important type of this is the committing of a fraud by manipulation of the
input, output, or throughput  of a computer based system. This is of especial interest to the RBI
Input manipulation is the most common type and results in the changing of input data such as
deposit amounts in ledgers, limits in accounts, or face values of cheques. Output manipulation is
achieved by affecting the output of the system such as the one entailing the use of stolen or
The most well known throughput manipulation technique involves the process of rounding off of
the sums being credited to different accounts and siphoning of the rounded off digits to another
                                           
 Can be accessed at 
http://www.ifs.univie.ac.at
1
falsified cards in ATM machines.
which has been entrusted with the task of supervision of banks and financial institutions.
crimes into five categories.
Types of Computer Crimes
crimes would be the focus of attention of the participants of this seminar.
However, the precise definition of computer crime itself may vary from country to country.
What is Computer Crime?
overview on computer crime.
mechanisms that have been set in place to address the problems that would endanger the systems.
Computer Related Crime to interact on the threats posed by risks in computerised environment.
It gives me great pleasure to be amidst the representatives of the financial sector, National as well
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
National Seminar on Computer Related Crime,account. No system is foolproof and fraudulent transfers have been reported in even highly
2
• 
• deliberate damage caused to computer data or programs through virus programs or logic
bombs,
• 
• 
The characteristics of computer crime are different from that of conventional crime in that it is
relatively easy to commit, difficult to detect and even harder to prove. It is a 'low risk, high
reward' venture for the criminal, who, with basic skills and persistence, can easily move large
enforcers have on its incidence and spread. This is partly due to the fact that detection of such
crime is often difficult and requires a high level of skills, and partly due to the fact that
organisations often do not report these crimes for fear of adverse publicity on their systems and
controls. One estimate made in 1992 suggested that only 5 per cent of the losses caused by
3
computer crimes were actually reported. This is a matter of great concern for all of us because
this would imply that the magnitude of the problem could well turn out to be far greater than
what is widely known to be the factual position and therefore requires greater resources for both
detection and prevention than the existing available levels. At the same time, it is necessary not
Status of Computerisation of Banks in India
The first initiatives in the area of bank computerisation stemmed out of the landmark report of
the two committees headed by the former Governor of the Reserve Bank of India and currently
Governor of Andhra Pradesh, His Excellency, Dr.C.Rangarajan. One of these Committees, viz.
the Committee on the Mechanization of the Banking Industry (1984) was set up for the first
time to suggest a model for mechanisation of bank branches, regional / controlling offices and
Head Office. This had been necessitated by the explosive growth in the geographical spread of
In the ‘seventies, there was a four-fold increase in the number of branches, five-fold increase in
advances and a six-fold increase in deposits’. Mechanisation was seen as the best solution to the
“problems inherent in the manual system of operations, their adverse impact on customer
services and the grave dangers to banks in the context of increasing incidence of frauds." Based
on a study of transaction volumes and purposes, the Committee made detailed recommendations
In the first phase of computerisation spanning the five years ending 1989, banks in India had
installed 4776 ALPMs at the branch level, 233 minicomputers at the Regional/Controlling office
levels and trained over 2000 programmers/systems personnel and over 12000 Data Entry
Terminal Operators. The Reserve Bank too had embarked upon an ambitious program to bring
                                           
  AIDP report on computer crime released at  Colloquium on Computer Crimes and Other Crimes against
2
Information Technology, held in Germany in October 1992.
3
 Quoted in Reuvid, ibid.
2
on the model of mechanisation.
banking following nationalization of banks in 1969.
Let me now present the current status of computerisation of banks in India.
to create a scare about its extent in the absence of hard and verifiable evidence.
Computer crime can often turn out to be a 'dark' crime because of the lack of information that law
the affected organisations.
sums of money across countries or enter and destroy valuable data and cause very high damage to
Characteristics of Computer Crime
unauthorized reproduction of computer programs or software piracy.
unauthorized access to computers by 'hacking' into systems or stealing passwords, and,
computer forgery, which involves changing images or data stored in computers,
Among the other types of computer crimes, the major ones  are:
automated and secure fund transfer systems such as the CHIPS of USA and CHAPS of UK.
Inaugural Address at theNational Seminar on Computer Related Crimeabout state-of-the-art technology in the clearing process and had introduced MICR clearing at 4
4
Against this backdrop, the Committee on Computerisation in Banks was set up once again
under Dr.Rangarajan's Chairmanship to draw up a perspective plan for computerisation in banks.
In its report submitted in 1989, the Committee acknowledged the gains of the initial efforts and
environment in branch banking. It recommended that the thrust of bank computerisation for the
following 5 years should be to fully computerise the operations at both the front and back offices
Computerisation efforts among the Public Sector Banks (PSBs) in India, which account for over
80 per cent of the assets of the entire banking system, has been substantial. Of the 45,439
branches of the PSBs as on September 30, 1998, as many as 3,668 branches serving customers
directly had been fully computerised with a complement of more than 65,000 computer
nodes/PCs. A total of 6961 branches have been partially computerised – with Advanced Ledger
Posting Machines, Electronic Accounting Machines and Personal Computers. Of the 336 service
The PSBs had installed 194 Automated Teller machines (ATMs) all over the country; they had
issued over 8.5 lakh credit cards and  over 32,000 debit cards. The latest in this area of activity
For international interconnectivity of computers and for cross-border transactions, 568 branches
have been connected to the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication
(popularly known as S.W.I.F.T). Local Area Network of branches has been established at  571
The Reserve Bank  has recently identified the Payment Systems area as thrust region for
an operational group to make policy guidelines. The payment systems which constitute the
arteries of any economy has been recognised as  the focus area for this group. This group would
consolidate the existing payment systems, developing new, technologically advanced modes of
To facilitate these objectives, a Computer based network has also been established. This Wide
Area Satellite Based network, called the In dian nancial work (INFINET) aims at
connecting computers at branches of banks. 479 branches at commercially important cities are to
be connected to the INFINET in the first phase while the next phase would witness the coverage
The INFINET is a robust and secure network which would be used for effecting financial funds
movements and important information flow within the country. In view of the sensitive nature of
the transactions to be routed through the network and to make it totally secure, the usage of the
network would be restricted to a ‘Closed User Group’ consisting of member banks and financial
institutions only. The INFINET User Group is engaged in  various aspects pertaining to the
Payment Systems in the country including the issues related to security over the network,
encryption and decryption of messages during transmission, standardisation of message formats,
The Reserve Bank continues to be involved in shaping the technology vision of the banking
system. Following the recommendations of the Committee on Financial Sector Reforms
(which is popularly known as the second Narasimham committee), a Committee on Technology
Upgradation has been recently set up by the RBI for the Banking Sector. This committee has
representation from banks, Government, technical institutions and the RBI. Among other things,
                                           
 Data taken from the Report of the Committee on Computerisation in Banks, 1989
3
this committee will  look into issues relating to,
4
exchange of encryption keys etc.
being extended to about 5000 branches.
Net Fi
system that will function as a real time gross settlement (RTGS) in an  on-line environment.
payments and integration of different payment and settlement systems into an efficient, integrated
computerisation in banks. The Bank has constituted a Payment Systems Advisory Committee and
branch locations  using internal captive networks while 148 branches are on the RBINET.
has been the issue of SMART cards.
branches, 149 had been fully computerised and 166 had been partially computerised.
of large branches then numbering around 2500.
sought to move away from the stand-alone dedicated systems to an on-line transaction processing
centres and computerized clearing settlement at 9 centres. 
Inaugural Address at theNational Seminar on Computer Related Crime 
 
 
 Modalities for a satellite based WAN for banks and financial institutions with the necessary
security systems by banks and other financial institutions, to ultimately develop a sound and an
 Methods by which technological upgradation in banks and financial institutions could be
effected and in the context study the feasibility of establishment of standards, designing
Having dwelt on the various policy initiatives taken by RBI and extent of computerisation
undergone by Indian banking system, I would like to address some of the issues involved in
The threat to safe computer operations arises not only from the failure of technology to keep up
with the large volume of transactions or with the failure of associated infrastructure but also
come from criminal elements who manipulate the systems either for personal profit or towards
Computer crime is difficult to detect when it is committed by insiders, who have a good
understanding of the systems and controls and are thus able to exploit the loopholes without
leaving trace. Computer crime, however,  is not because of illegal work of insiders alone, it has
often been the handiwork of a wider spectrum of societies. School students have been known to
have broken into high security systems just for pleasure. Terrorist groups and organised crime
gangs have been known to attempt to sabotage critical systems to cripple economies or target
large financial institutions to fund their activities. In 1993, a systems analyst in a leading UK
financial institution was convicted of attempting to  transfer 1.6 million pounds to criminally
5
Disgruntled employees target company systems to take revenge on their employers while
This diversity, along with the anonymity of the perpetrator who can commit such crimes from
remote locations,  makes the task of having profiles of  criminals difficult and poses a challenge
In this context, I would like to recall an incident reported by a multinational bank a couple of
years back. In the reported instance, an IT expert could penetrate the multilayer password system
governing the fund transfer facility of the bank, which was allowed to be self operated by its
corporate customers. He could successfully  effect wire transfer of millions of dollars from a
the corporate treasury manager of the customer was watching the fund transfer stolen and shifted
before his very eyes, he was helpless in the context of such operation happening in few seconds.
While the cyber reach was possible in seconds, the efforts of law enforcement took time to cross
the continental legal and criminal enactment barriers to overcome before they could ultimately
nab the above criminal. It is good gesture on the part of the bank to come forward to share the
The above brings me to deal and stress  on the aspects of legislative changes required in
countries’ legal frame work. I understand that one of the purposes behind organising the Seminar
is to evolve and introduce relevant criminal laws covering various aspects of evidentiary and
                                           
4
.
1995
 Quoted in ‘The Regulation and Prevention of Economic Crime’ , editor Jonathan Reuvid, Kogan Page
5
penal procedures/ practices  to tackle such modern crimes involving sophisticated technologies.
methodology of the above fraud with wider public through a business journal.
corporate account to his own / wife’s account across continent to a destination in Europe. Though
for forensic scientists and criminal investigators.
business rivals try to access systems to take advantage of competitors’ data.
owned accounts abroad
destructive ends.
Detection of Computer Crime
detection and prevention of computer crimes.
payments system backbone and standards relating to security levels, messages and smart cards.
(5)
efficient payments system
(4)
Record keeping (3)
Admission of electronic files as evidence (2)
Encryption of Public Switching Telephone Network (PSTN) lines (1)
Inaugural Address at theNational Seminar on Computer Related CrimeWith computer crime detection being a difficult task, bringing the criminals to book becomes a
formidable challenge since the laws in many countries have not kept pace with technology. Laws
were originally designed to protect tangible assets and may not be sufficient to guarantee the
protection of electronic bits of data. It is often difficult to attribute guilt using the existing
statutes since the act of trespassing into a system and tampering with virtual data may not
necessarily be specifically provided for in law. However, this point is being increasingly
recognised as an area of concern and more and more countries are therefore enacting specific and
Model acts passed by nations highly dependent on technology tend to provide for enhanced
penalties for unlawful access to "protected computers" such as those involved in national
security, banking and finance, emergency services and public utilities. Such laws also provide for
penalties for unlawful access to any system, unlawful modification of computer programs even
6
The Reserve Bank has for its part, made several initiatives in this regard. The framing of the
such as the Bankers’ Book Evidence Act, the Negotiable Instruments Act, the Banking
Regulation Act and  the RBI Act – is in  an advanced stage. The Reserve Bank is also associated
with the efforts of the Ministries of Finance, Commerce and Law in the enactment of laws such
The imperative to enhance the levels of computerisation in the banking industry has been
strengthened by the Government's IT vision which envisages a revolution in computer
penetration by the year 2010 and also by the directive recently issued by the Central Vigilance
Commissioner to banks to computerise 70 per cent of banking business by January 2001. These
initiatives are important since many of the deficiencies of today's operations can be traced to the
outdated manual systems in place.  The CVC has also desired that the listed companies should
compulsorily offer the Electronic Clearing Services to their customers for payment of dividend
and interest warrants. This  would help avoid the risks in the existing payment modes and reduce
to a great extent the incidence of non-receipt of paper-based dividend and interest warrants
In  future, there would be increasing focus on dematerialisation of shares and securities which
would result in two advantages: first, the prevention of frauds and second, the facilitation of
All organisations which are moving towards a high level of computerisation should have in place
a security policy that  offers a shared vision of how controls in  workplaces should be
implemented with the objective of protecting location, information and eventually, the economic
value of the organisation. This would need to be supplemented by education and training in these
areas and reinforced by the actions and concerns of the top management so that a culture of
security can be created. These controls have to be strengthened  by surveillance, regular
These concerns have been addressed in a focussed manner at the Reserve Bank of India, and the
In the first place, the most important point of emphasis is on prevention of crime. In order to
prevent computer frauds and crimes, specific computer procedures have been laid down for each
• formal controls governing physical access to computer areas in addition to physical access
                                           
 The Computer Misuse Act (1992) of Singapore is one such example
5
6
to computer operation on the basis of the use of passwords, valid user identification etc., and,
activity area involving computers. These procedures detail specific requirements for
broad approach in this regard is, I venture to place before, worthy of attention.
monitoring and auditing to detect unusual usage patterns and deficiencies.
Security Policy and RBI’s Supervisory Initiatives
transactions of Government securities in an ‘On-line Real Time Gross Settlement’ basis.
despatched by post and their fraudulent payment / encashment.
Other Imperatives
as the Information Technology Act and  the Cyber Laws.
model Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) Act and rules, suggesting amendments to the various acts
through viruses and even to lawful abuse or misuse of computers.
comprehensive legislation to cover the acts of computer criminals.
Legislation and Computer Crime
Inaugural Address at theNational Seminar on Computer Related Crime• technical controls for a number of operations including standardised and secure message
formats, correct authentication, personal identification numbers, digital signatures, encryption
The next imperative is to conduct computer security audit. This is an activity that is gaining in
importance of late and is perhaps one of the best tools available for combating computer crime.
Audit of computer security – especially by professional organisations – is a vital requisite to
The broad approach outlined here cannot succeed if there is dearth of skilled personnel.  Work is,
at banks who would look after all the requirements of computerisation and also ensure that
computer frauds do not occur. It is necessary that the work and operations of the group of
technologically expert persons is monitored regularly by managements to ensure that crimes are
not perpetuated from inside. This is a challenge since over 2 lakh personnel had also received
7
It is also necessary to impart sufficient skills to our bank examiners to be able to examine records
effectively in computerised operating environment and also to be able to put together a picture of
the operations so that they could ensure that they have access to all transactions being put
through by banks. Accordingly, under a Technical Assistance project sponsored by the UK
Government, the services of international consultants were utilised to impart skills to inspecting
Simultaneously, as part of the aforesaid project, guidelines were issued to the banks on the
maintenance of minimum records in computerised environment so that any subsequent
A circular on the Risks and Controls in Computers and Telecommunications was issued by the
Reserve Bank to banks to help them in identifying the key risks arising out of continually
Bank Frauds in India
One input which can be of  use in combating frauds consists of proper reporting of incidents of
suspected frauds in banks, the progress in their resolution and the deterrent and punitive action
taken in this regard. Such reports are analysed within the Reserve Bank and any aspect that the
The incidence and the amounts involved in frauds in the past three years has increased with the
share of large value frauds (above Rs. 1 crore) being on the increase. While one may draw
comfort that the efforts of the supervisors and bankers have so far been successful in containing
bank frauds,  it is a matter of serious concern as the growth in frauds could, if not visibly
Our analysis of the modus operandi revealed that frauds so far committed has not revealed any
where the fraud was facilitated by poor access controls. In a recently reported case, the
perpetrator was able to change the borrower's limits stored in the computer by borrowing the
password of the authorized personnel.  This suggests that the password cannot just be treated as
a friendly word. This aspect in the Indian ethos, needs to be closely looked into and the system of
The increasing dependence of banks on computer technology and the concerns arising therefrom
are receiving attention from banking regulators the world over. The Basle Committee of Banking
Supervisors has addressed some of the operational risks arising out of security breach of banks’
                                           
 Data compiled from the Consolidated Statement on Progress of Computerisation in Indian Public Sector
 September, 1998.
6
Banks for the Biannual Period ended on 30
th
 
7
 
International Developments  
password determination has to be fool-proof.
extensive manipulation of the computer systems in the banks. However, cases have been reported
 
checked, encourage perpetrators to refine their tools of operation in the commission of frauds.
 
reports reveal is circulated to the banks for necessary action.
fraud. Banks are required to report to the Reserve Bank in detail the incidences of both actual and
 
 
growing use of computers and suggesting controls to mitigate consequential  risks.
investigation would not be hampered by lack of understanding or lack of access to computer data.
 
officers of the Reserve Bank.  A detailed manual was also drawn up for their use.
 
training in the handling and concepts of computer systems in the PSBs.
therefore,  already on to groom a force of highly motivated and technically sound group of people
 
ensure that complacency within the organisation does not result.
 
and decryption of data, firewalls, and  backup that would be tamper proof.
Inaugural Address at theNational Seminar on Computer Related Crimecomputer systems and misuse of computer products in its document " Risk Management for
Having adopted computerisation at a relatively late stage of our banking development, we have
the advantage of learning from the experiences of the international community and set in place
to be particularly strong. This is especially so in retail payment modes where the actual
customers could suffer the most on account of weak security features and counterfeiting or data
stealing. This is also an area where, besides supervision, regulation has to be effective and
Conclusion
While concluding, I would like to present before this forum some of the supervisory concerns
nagging me day in day out during the discharge of my oversight responsibility on the
development and expansion of IT processing capabilities both within RBI and the banking
industry in general. I would be grateful if the experts including some of the excellent IT brains
from the international investigative agencies who have taken pains to come all the way for this
• With the sole focus on expansion of computerised processing,  the software developers as
well as the institutions concerned do not often find time for parallel development of security
access control and audit features to take a back seat. This needs immediate correction. Unless
development of security  features are also attended to at the same level of efficiency and equal
speed , I am afraid that the banks will be left with beautiful software systems for public glare and
• To keep up with the deadlines for Year 2000 compliance of their computer systems, the
banks have gone for extensive outsourcing of software support for inventory and fixation of Y2k
bugs in their existing software. Due to lack of time most of them could have totally opened their
systems in their anxiety to have a total clean up within a short time span. Unless the banks have
taken steps to revise and install new access passwords and other control features, there are
chances of their system remaining open to others, the danger of unauthorised access to net
worked systems by those skilled personnel who earlier fixed Y2k bugs of the same system is all
the more real. This calls for painstaking audit of the control features of all systems which were
• I am aware the banks’ internal audit wings do not possess suitable IT professionals who are
skilled in a thorough computer audit function. In such a situation, the banks should without
hesitation go in for EDP Audit through reputed IT Consultancy firms and such audit should be at
regular periodicity, say monthly intervals and almost on the lines of concurrent audit system. In
fact in multinational banks, the EDP set up consists of  parallel authorities designated as System
Administrator and System Auditor to oversee the operations of the processing and development
Today’s seminar is the beginning of an effort towards addressing not only the computer related
crime but also a step forward in setting up of an inter agency cooperation in this regard.  The
7
 
Thank you.
I wish the seminar all success.
initiatives taken by Central Bureau of Investigation in this direction is laudable.
wings
earlier subjected to Y2k cleaning.
access, but totally unguarded and gullible against waiting information poachers.
features. In their anxiety to put the software for regular operation within deadlines, they allow the
important seminar would address them for effective IT solutions.
 
 
legislative sanctions have to be strongly supportive.
corrective systems and controls in advance. In the area of emerging products, our surveillance has
 
Electronic Banking and Electronic Money Activities" (March 1998).
Inaugural Address at theNational Seminar on Computer Related Crime