Mr. Chairman and Friends,
I am thankful to the organisers for giving me this opportunity to be with distinguished
Central Bank Governors and professionals in forex business from South Asia .  Since we met
last in Hyderabad a year ago, the financial world has come out of a serious crisis, perhaps
wiser and more sober .  We could at this stage, therefore, give some attention to structural and
developmental aspects of the external sector – including forex markets .  I, therefore, propose
to share with you the Indian experience in the development of forex markets.
A comprehensive blueprint for development of foreign exchange markets in India was
made in the Report of the Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India, June 1995
( Sodhani Committee) .  A review of the status of implementation of these recommendations
would provide an excellent overview of what has been achieved and what is yet to be
achieved. Further, the Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, August 1997 ( Tarapore
Committee) made some recommendations on financial markets, especially relevant to forex
markets, and perhaps a brief review of the current status on these would also be informative .
The significant features of our forex market are then brought out in this address. Evolving
linkages between forex markets and other markets will also have to be tracked .  Finally, some
aspects of forex markets, especially relevant to our country such as gold import policy and
flows from non-resident Indians will be explained. The address will typically conclude with a
brief narration of current issues.
Evolution
Market players in forex became active in the seventies, consequent upon the collapse
of Bretton Woods Agreement .  However, India was somewhat insulated since stringent
exchange controls prevailed and banks were required to undertake only cover operations and
maintain a ‘square’ or ‘near square’ position at all times .  In 1978, the RBI allowed banks to
undertake intra-day trading in foreign exchange and a s a consequence, the stipulation of
maintaining  `square' or `near square' position was to be complied with only at the close of
business hours each day. This perhaps marks the beginning of forex market in India. As
opportunities to make profits began to emerge, the major banks started quoting two-way
prices against the rupee as well as in cross currencies and gradually, trading volumes began to
 During the period, 1975-92 the exchange rate regime in India was characterised by
daily announcement by the RBI of its buying and selling rates to Authorised Dealers ( ADs)
for merchant transactions. Given the then prevalent RBI’s obligation to buy and sell
unlimited amounts of the intervention currency arising from the banks’ merchant purchases,
its quotes for buying/selling effectively became the fulcrum around which the market was
operated. The RBI performed a market-clearing role on a day-to-day basis, which naturally
introduced some variability in the size of reserves. Incidentally, certain categories of current
and capital account transactions on behalf of the Government were directly routed through
the reserves account.
The recommendations of the High Level Committee on Balance of Payments
(Chairman: Shri C. Rangarajan) provided the basic framework for policy changes in external
sector, encompassing exchange rate management and, current and capital account
increase.
Rangarajan Committee
Development of Forex Markets: Indian Experience *.  The Report indicated the transition path also. Accordingly, the 
Exchange Rate Management System involving dual exchange rate system was instituted in
March 1992, no doubt, in conjunction with other measures of liberalisation in the areas of
trade, industry and foreign investment. The dual exchange rate system was essentially a
transitional stage leading to the ultimate convergence of the dual rates made effective from
March 1, 1993. This unification of exchange rates brought about the era of market determined
exchange rate regime of rupee, based on demand and supply in the forex market .  It also
marks an important step in the progress towards current account convertibility, which was
finally achieved in August 1994 by accepting Article VIII of the Articles of Agreement of the
International Monetary Fund.
The appointment of a 14 member Expert Group on Foreign Exchange ( Sodhani Committee)
in November 1994 was a follow up step to the above measures, for the development of the
foreign exchange market in India. The Group studied the market in great detail and in its
Report of June, 1995 came up with far-reaching recommendations to develop, deepen and
widen the forex market as also to introduce various products, ensure risk management and
enable efficiency in the forex market by removing restrictions, introducing new products and
The Sodhani Committee had made 33 recommendations and of these, 25
recommendations called for action on the part of the RBI. RBI has accepted and implemented
in full or to some degree, 20 out of the 25 recommendations .  In the process, the banks have
been accorded significant initiative and freedom to participate in the forex market .  These
include: freedom to fix net overnight position limit and gap limits although RBI is formally
approving these limits, replacing the system of across-the board or RBI prescribed limits;
freedom to initiate trading position in the overseas markets; freedom to borrow or invest
funds in the overseas markets (up to 15 per cent of Tier I Capital unless otherwise approved);
freedom to determine the interest rates (subject to a ceiling) and maturity period of Foreign
Currency Non-Resident (FCNR) deposits (not exceeding three years); exempting inter-bank
borrowings from statutory pre- (subject to minimum statutory requirement of 3 per
cent and 25 per cent  in respect of Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory Liquidity Ratio
(SLR) for the total net liabilities respectively); and freedom to use derivative products for
Corporates also have been accorded noticeable freedom to operate in the forex
.  Thus, they are permitted to hedge anticipated exposures though this facility has been
temporarily suspended after the Asian crisis. Exchange Earners Foreign Currency (EEFC)
account eligibility has been increased and the permissible end-uses widened .  They were
given freedom to cancel and rebook forward contracts, though currently due to the Asian
crisis effect, freedom to rebook cancelled contracts is suspended while rollover is
permissible. Banks can, however, offer cross-currency options on back-to-back basis.
Corporates can also avail of lower cost option strategies like range forwards and ratio range
forwards and others as long as they do not end up as net writers of options .  Also available
are some degrees of freedom to manage exposures in External Commercial Borrowings
without having to approach authorities for hedging permission, and to access swaps with
rupee as one of the currencies to hedge longer term exposures.
market
asset-liability management.
emptions
Sodhani Committee
tightening internal control and risk management systems.
Liberalised liberalisationThe Committee recognised that improvements in internal controls and market
strategies go hand in hand with liberalisation and towards this end, RBI accepted and
implemented several suggestions of the Sodhani Committee .  These include: revamping
internal control guidelines of the RBI to banks and making them available to corporates as
well; putting in place appropriate market intervention strategies to deal with market
developments; adopting internationally accepted documentation standards; framing
comprehensive risk management guidelines for banks; adopting Basle Committee norms for
computing foreign exchange position limits and recommending capital backing for open
positions; and setting up a foreign exchange market committee to discuss market issues and
suggest solutions.  Recommendation on publishing critical data on forex transactions, has
been implemented, and in fact the standards of disclosure by RBI are considered to be very
high now.
A few recommendations of the Sodhani Committee which have not been implemented
include, inducting Development Financial Institutions ( DFIs) as full-fledged Authorised
Dealers ( ADs), setting up a forex clearing house, legally recognising netting of settlements,
corporates to undertake margin trading and setting up of off-shore banking units in
Mumbai. Let me briefly dwell on each of these issues .  Induction of DFIs as full-fledged ADs
is linked to future role of development financial institutions and indeed the approach to
universal banking . Till then, their activity in the forex market can only be incidental to what
they are permitted to do as a DFI. The position on setting up of a Forex Clearing House and
the position on setting up of off-shore banking units will be detailed in the  latter part of this
address. Margin trading by its very nature is considered to be potentially speculative, and
Tarapore Committee on Capital Account Convertibility, 1997, had recommended a
number of measures relating to financial markets, especially forex markets. Some of the
measures undertaken in regard to forex may fall short of the indicative quantitative limits
given in the Report, but the purpose and the spirit of such measures are in line with the
recommendations of the committee. Among such various  measures undertaken
are those relating to foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, investment in Joint
Ventures/wholly owned subsidiaries abroad, project exports, opening of Indian corporate
offices abroad, raising of EEFC entitlement to 50 per cent, , allowing acceptance
credit for exports, allowing  to cover forward their exposures in debt and part of their
exposures in equity market, etc. In respect of the recommendations of the Committee to
develop financial markets also, significant progress has been made. In the money market, as
part of improving the risk management, recently, guidelines for interest rate swaps and 
have been issued to facilitate hedging of interest rate risks and orderly development of the
fixed income derivatives market. Measures have also been undertaken to further develop the
Government securities market. Permission has also been given to banks fulfilling certain
criteria to import gold for domestic sale. As will be explained later in this address, this aspect
of gold policy is a major step in bringing off-market forex transactions into forex markets by
officialising import of gold. Efforts are also underway to expedite the implementation of the
announcement made in October 1997 by RBI to permit SEBI registered Indian fund
Features of Forex Market
managers including Mutual Funds to invest in overseas markets subject to SEBI guidelines.
FRAs
FIIs
forfaiting
liberalisation
Tarapore Committee
therefore, has not been seriously considered so far for implementation.
permitting There are several features of Indian forex market which, even if well known, require
The foreign exchange market in India comprises of customers, Authorised Dealers
( ADs) in foreign exchange and Reserve Bank of India. The ADs are essentially banks
authorised by RBI to do foreign exchange business. Major public sector units, corporates and
other business entities with foreign exchange exposure, access the foreign exchange market
through the intermediation of ADs. The foreign exchange market operates from major centres
- Mumbai, Delhi, Calcutta, Chennai, Bangalore, Kochi and Ahmedabad, with Mumbai
accounting for the major portion of the transactions. Foreign Exchange Dealers Association
of India (FEDAI) plays an important role in the forex market as it sets the ground rules for
fixation of commissions and other charges and also involves itself in matters of mutual
interest of the Authorised Dealers.
The customer segment is dominated by Indian Oil Corporation and certain other large
public sector units like Oil and Natural Gas Commission,  Heavy  Limited,
Steel Authority of India Limited,   and also Government of India (for 
and civil debt service) on the one hand and large private sector  like Reliance
Group,  Group, Larsen and , etc., on the other. Of late, the Foreign Institutional
Investors ( FIIs) have emerged as a major component in the foreign exchange market and they
The foreign exchange market can be classified into two segments. The merchant
segment consists of the transactions put through by customers to meet their transaction needs
of acquiring/offloading foreign exchange, and inter-bank segment encompassing transactions
between banks. At present, there are over 100 ADs operating in the foreign exchange market.
The banks deal among themselves directly or through foreign exchange brokers. The inter-
bank segment of the forex market is dominated by few large Indian banks with State Bank of
India (SBI) accounting for a large portion of turnover, and a few foreign banks with benefit
of significant international experience.
In the inter-bank market, SBI along with a few other banks may be considered as the
market-makers, i.e., banks which are always ready to quote two-way prices both in the spot
and swap segments. The market makers are expected to make a good price with narrow
spreads both in the spot and the swap segments. The efficiency and liquidity of a market are
often gauged in terms of bid-offer spreads. Wide spreads are an indication of an illiquid
market or a one way market or a nervous condition in the market. In India, the normal spot
market quote has a spread of 0.5 to one paisa, while the swap quotes are available at 2 to 4
paise spread. At times of volatility, the spread widens to 5 to 10 
Turnover
The turnover in the Indian forex market has been increasing over the years. The average daily
gross turnover in the dollar-rupee segment of the Indian forex market (merchant plus inter-
paise.Electricals
Market Makers
Segments
do account for noticeable activity in the market.
Tubro Tata
corporates
defence Udyog Maruti
Bharat
Participants
to be recalled comprehensively.bank) was in the vicinity of US $ 3.0 billion during 1998-99. The daily turnover in the
merchant segment of the dollar-rupee segment of foreign exchange market was US $ 0.7
billion, while turnover in the inter-bank segment was US $ 2.3 billion. Looking at the data
from the angle of spot and forward market, the data reveals that the average daily turnover in
the spot market was around US $ 1.2 billion and in the forward and swap market the daily
turnover was US$ 1.8 billion during 1998-99.
Forward Market
The forward market in our country is active up to six months where two way quotes
are available. As a result of the initiatives of the RBI, the maturity profile has since recently
In India, the link between the forward premia and interest rate differential seems to
work largely through leads and lags. Importers and exporters do influence the forward
markets through availment of/grant of credit to overseas parties. Importers can move between
sight payment and 180 days usance and will do so depending on the overseas interest rate,
local interest rate and views on the future spot rate. Similarly, importers can move between
rupee credit and foreign currency credit. Also, the decision, to hedge or not to hedge exposure
depending on expectations and forward premia, itself affects the forward premia as also the
spot rate. Exporters can also delay payments or receive funds earlier, subject to conditions on
repatriation and surrender, depending upon the interest on rupee credit, the premia and
interest rate overseas. Similarly, decision to draw bills on sight/ usance basis is influenced by
spot market expectations and domestic interest rates. The freedom to avail of pre/post-
shipment credit in forex and switch between rupee and foreign currency credit has also
integrated the money and forex markets. Further, banks were allowed to grant foreign
currency loans out of FCNR (B) liabilities and this too facilitated integration as such foreign
currency demarcated loans did not have any use restriction. The integration is also achieved
through banks swapping/ unswapping FCNR (B) deposits. If the liquidity is considerable and
call rates are easy, banks consider deployment either in forex, government or money/ repo
market. This decision also affects the 
Gradually, with the opening up of the capital account, the forward premia is getting
aligned with the interest rate differential. However, the fact remains that free movement in
capital account is only a necessary condition for full development of forward and other forex
derivatives market. The sufficient condition is provided by a deep and liquid money market
with a well-defined yield curve in place. Developing a well integrated, consistent and
meaningful yield curve requires considerable market development in terms of both volume
and liquidity in various time and market segments. No doubt, the integration between the
domestic market and the overseas market operates more often through the forward market.
This integration is facilitated now by allowing ADs to borrow from their overseas
Data on Forex Markets
The RBI publishes daily data on exchange rates, forward premia, foreign exchange
turnover etc. in the Weekly Statistical Supplement (WSS) of the RBI Bulletin with a lag of
one week. The movement in foreign exchange reserves of the RBI on a weekly basis are
furnished in the same publication. The RBI also publishes data on Nominal Effective
Exchange Rate (NEER) and Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER), RBI's purchases and
offices/correspondents and invest funds in overseas money market up to the same amount.
premia.
elongated and there are quotes available up to one year.sales in the foreign exchange market along with outstanding forward liabilities on reserves
etc. in the monthly RBI Bulletin with a time lag of one month. Since July 1998, the Reserve
Bank of India started publishing the 5-country trade based NEER and REER in addition to
36-country NEER and REER in the RBI Bulletin. Way ahead  of many developing and
industrial country central banks, the RBI has been publishing the size of its gross intervention
Linkages among Markets and Policy Responses
Since the int roduction of the reform measures, broad segments of the market, viz.,
money market, Government securities market, capital market, and foreign exchange market,
have exhibited some degree of integration. The markets have become inter-linked to the
extent participants can move freely from one market to another. The linkages between the
forex market and domestic markets essentially depend on the foreign currency liabilities and
assets banks can maintain and the extent and degree to which they are swapped into rupees
and vice versa . Thus, on the liabilities side, we have foreign currency borrowings from
overseas offices/correspondents, borrowings for lending to exporters, FCNR-B deposits and
EEFC/RFC deposits. These funds can be used either for raising rupee resources through
swaps or for lending in foreign currency. A significant step was taken by the RBI when it
allowed banks to lend in foreign currency to companies in India for any productive purpose
without linking to exports or import financing. This effectively meant that companies had the
choice to borrow either in foreign currency or rupees depending on the cost, taking into
account both exchange risk and interest cost .   Thus, companies can substitute rupee credit for
foreign credit freely. Similarly, exporters also have the ability to substitute rupee credit for
The integration of foreign exchange market with other markets like money market and
government securities market meant closer co-ordination of monetary and exchange rate
policy. For instance, in January 1998, when the foreign exchange market came under severe
pressure, Reserve Bank of India undertook strong monetary policy measures leading to sharp
withdrawal of liquidity and increase in short-term interest rates. The impact of monetary
management was such that by February 1998 orderly conditions were restored in the forex
market and normalcy was attained in money market. At times of highly speculative exchange
rate movements, simultaneous intervention in foreign exchange and domestic market is called
for to have an immediate strong effect on both the exchange rate and money market
conditions. Thus, to maximise the effectiveness of the foreign exchange market intervention
as a signaling device, it is also carefully co- ordinated with monetary management. These co-
ordinated intervention strategies require close day-to-day monitoring of the supply of banking
system liquidity and an active use of open market operations to adjust liquidity conditions.
However, driving a wedge between money and forex markets at times, becomes necessary
when it is felt that liquidity conditions may put pressure on the forex market, while tightening
The recent initiatives of RBI to usher in the rupee interest rate derivatives should
facilitate the development of rupee term money market and define the rupee yield curve
across maturities. Besides bringing about greater integration of the money and forex markets,
the move has set the stage for the take-off of rupee-foreign currency derivatives.
liquidity could hurt the real sector.
foreign currency credit.
(purchase and sale) each  month and its net forward liability position.Some Unique Aspects
Liberalisation of gold policy had an indirect but, significant impact on the forex
market. The logic behind the changes in the gold policy was explained in my earlier speeches
on the subjects of capital flight and gold. The major thrust of the liberalisation process in gold
policy centred around opening up of additional channels of import, a logical consequence of
which was the reduction in differential between the international and domestic price of gold.
The price differential of gold was as high as 67 per cent in 1992 when the structural reform
process was initiated; it fell to 6 per cent by the end of 1998. The unofficial market in foreign
exchange which drew its sustenance from the illegal trade in gold went out of existence as an
immediate fall out. In essence, the import of gold which was largely on unofficial account in
earlier years, was officialised, and correspondingly the foreign exchange used to finance such
unofficial imports was also officialised, mainly through enhanced flow under 
account.
NRI Deposits
Various deposit schemes have been designed from time to time to suit the
requirements of non-resident Indians (NRIs). Currently, we have three NRI deposit schemes,
viz., Non Resident External (NRE) account which is denominated in rupees, Non Resident
Non  (NRNR) account, which is non- rupee account except for the
interest component which is , and the Foreign Currency Non Resident (Bank)
(FCNR-B) account which is a foreign currency account.  Banks have also been allowed
considerable freedom in deployment of these funds. Of interest to forex markets is the
operation of FCNR-B scheme, because banks have to bear exchange risk.   Banks either hold
these deposits in foreign currency investing them abroad or lend in foreign currency to
corporates in India or swap into rupees and lend to Indian corporates in rupees. When
corporates borrow in foreign currency, there is an inflow into the market but there may be
hedging by corporates.  When banks swap into rupees and lend, there is an impact on forex
markets but forward premia and lending rates in rupees are critical.  Thus, tracking the use of
forex markets.
Public Enterprises
Operations of large public sector undertakings have a significant impact especially on
spot market, and their procedures for purchase or sale of  foreign currency also impact on
market sentiments. To this end, and in order to enable Public Sector Enterprises ( PSEs) to
equip themselves in formulating an approach to management of foreign currency exposure
related risks, the Government of India had set up a Committee in January 1998. The Report
of the Committee explicitly brings out the approach that is appropriate for risk management
with reference to the foreign currency exposure of  PSEs . PSEs with large volume of foreign
exchange exposure were also advised by the Committee to consider setting up Dealing Room
for undertaking treasury functions both for rupee and foreign exchange which include
management of rupee resources, foreign exchange transactions and risk management.
Adoption of approaches recommended would enable the PSEs to spread their demand and
supply in forex market, in a non-disruptive way to the benefit of both the PSE concerned and
functioning of 
forex market in India.
FCNR (B) deposits is essential in appreciating 
repatriable
repatriable Repatriable
invisibles
Gold PolicyOff-shore Banking Units
The setting up of Off-shore banking units at this advanced stage of financial
liberalisation in our country is considered by many to be unnecessary and that the time for an
offshore banking unit has gone.  In a country of our size, the issue of linkages between 
shore sector and the domestic sector is undoubtedly an important one. We need to make a
clear distinction between the financial issues and the non-financial issues on the subject.
From the central bank's perspective, designing appropriate regulatory framework is important
and the most important issue is ensuring of a firewall between the off-shore transactions and
domestic transactions. Physical location is not relevant, especially when deposit taking and
cash transactions are not permitted in off-shore business .  In fact, we do not have a good
model of real off-shore centre in a country with capital controls. Confederation of Indian
Industry ( CII) with assistance from the Government of Maharashtra is engaged in a detailed
study of the various issues to make recommendations to the RBI and the Government of
Clearing House
The idea of establishing a Forei gn Exchange Clearing House (FXCH) in India was
mooted in 1994. The Expert Group on Foreign Exchange Markets in India also recommended
introduction of foreign exchange clearing and making netting legally enforceable. The
Scheme was conceived as multilateral netting arrangement of inter-bank forex transactions in
US dollar. The membership would be open to all ADs in foreign exchange participating in the
inter-bank foreign exchange market. RBI will also be a participating member. The net
position of each bank arrived at the end of the trading day would be settled through a
Clearing Account to be maintained by RBI.  It was recognised that a substantial reduction in
number of Nostro account transactions of the participating banks would lead to economy in
settlement cost and efficiency in settlement. Other benefits include easing the process of
reconciliation of Nostro accounts balances by banks, reduction in size of credit and liquidity
exposure of participating banks and hence systemic risk, etc. The long-term objective is to
establish clearing house as a separate legal entity with risk and liquidity management
features, infrastructure and operational efficiency akin to other leading clearing systems.
However, to start with, we may aim at commencing the operation with such minimum
modification to the scheme as may be necessary. For the present, the focus areas are legal,
risk and liquidity aspects and operational infrastructure, and all these issues are under
Role of FEDAI
In a regime wh ere exchange rates were fixed and there were restrictions on outflow of
foreign exchange, the RBI encouraged the banks to constitute a self regulatory body and lay
down rules for the conduct of forex business .  In order to ensure that all the banks
participated in the arrangement, the RBI placed a condition while issuing foreign exchange
licence that every licensee agree to be bound by the rules laid down by the banker’s body –
the FEDAI .  FEDAI also accredited brokers through whom the banks put through deals.
There is increasing emphasis now on competition, and fixing or advising charges by
professional bodies is being viewed with disfavour and often treated as a restrictive trading
practice. It is currently argued by some that with the growth in volumes and giant strides in
telecommunication, banks may no longer need to deal through brokers when efficient match
making arrangements exist. As in some other markets, the deals are concluded on the basis of
India.
examination in the RBI.
off-voice broking and it is sometimes held that this often results in conclusion of deals which are
less than transparent, evidenced by instances where deals have been called off on payment of
differences .  Under the circumstances, there is perhaps a need to review several aspects, viz.,
compatibility of advising or prescribing fees with pro-competition policy; role of brokers;
electronic dealing vis-à-vis voice broking; and relationship between the RBI, FEDAI and
authorised dealers.
Issues
Before concluding this narration of experience, it is proposed to list b riefly the issues
that require further consideration.
First, there are some limits on freedom accorded to banks, such as ones on borrowing
and investing overseas; ceilings on interest rates and maturities of non-resident foreign
currency deposits; and these could be reviewed at appropriate time, with a view to
Second, the medium-term objective of reducing cash reserve requirements to the
minimum prescribed in the statute and the longer term objective of proposing amendments to
the statute to make all the reserve requirements flexible will be pursued, consistent with
developments in fiscal and monetary conditions.
Third, the restoration of freedom to corporates to hedge anticipated exposures is
continuously under review. However, the issue of restoration of facility to rebook cancelled
contracts needs to be reviewed with caution.
Fourth, the extension of facility of forward cover to FIIs is also under continuous
FIIs.
Fifth, trading in derivatives is a desirable objective, but a number of preconditions are
to be satisfied in the matter of institutional as well as regulatory arrangements. This is a
Sixth, setting up a forex clearing house is on the agenda and it is essential to design it
on par with other leading clearing systems in the world.
Seventh, a number of recommendations of Tarapore Committee have been accepted,
and others are also reviewed from time to time. A view will have to be taken on each one of
them only in the context of overall liberalisation of capital account, which in turn, depends
on, among other things, progress of our financial sector reforms and evolving international
Eighth, development of deep and liquid money market with a well-defined yield curve
in place is an accepted objective of RBI. The actions taken and those contemplated to
perform this hard task have already been articulated in my earlier speeches on money and
debt markets, and the recent Monetary and Credit Policy Statement of April 1999 has
provided evidence of RBI's approach in this regard.
financial architecture.
complex task, but certainly is on the agenda of reform.
utilised by review, though facilities available now are yet to be fully 
liberalising them prudently.Ninth, implementation of the recommendations of the Report on Public Sector
Enterprises will facilitate the efficient management of their foreign currency risks and also
even out lumpy demand and supply situations in the forex market.
Tenth, while there is a dominant view that setting up Mumbai as an off-shore
centre is no longer a necessity, the views of CII, which is posing the issue, may have
Eleventh, in any effort to develop markets, role of self regulatory bodies is critical.
The role of FEDAI in achieving greater competition, efficiency and transparency in the forex
markets needs to be reviewed on a continuous basis, so as to keep pace with developments in
technology and financial sector reforms.
Twelfth, a number of legislative changes are under contemplation, and of these the
ones relating to Foreign Exchange Management and Money Laundering are critical to
development of forex markets. Harmonisation between existing institutions, regulations and
practices, including transition path to new legislative framework would be a significant task
Thirteenth, several representations have been received by Regulations Review
Authority to simplify, streamline and rationalise some of the regulatory and reporting
requirements pertinent to foreign exchange. The RRA should be taking a final view in the
matter, on the basis of expected report of group of Curiae, within a few weeks.
Fourteenth, in the area of technology, on-line connectivity has been initiated in
respect of data transmission by market to the RBI. Once this system is fully established, it
will lead to a very prompt and effective on-line monitoring by RBI as well as reduction in
multiplicity of reporting statements. Similarly, initiatives are underway to expedite back
office linkage between banks themselves and with RBI for settlement, which will fructify
Conclusion
To conclude, the medium-term objective of developing an efficient and vibrant forex
market continues to be an important priority within the overall framework of development of
financial markets. Naturally, the pace and sequencing have to be determined by both the
domestic and international developments. In particular, the unique features of Indian forex
markets, legal, institutional and technological factors, and developments related to macro-
economic policies would govern the path of moving towards the medium-term objective,
without sacrificing freedom in tactical measures to respond to unforeseen circumstances in
the very short-term.
rd
* Keynote Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, at the 3 South Asian Assembly, at Katmandu, Nepal, on September 3,
1999. Dr.Reddy is thankful to Shri. G.Padmanabhan Shri.G . and  Dr.A.Prasad for their assistance.
Mahalingam ,  
once the VSAT is fully operational.
Amicus 
in the context of forex market development.
to be awaited and considered seriously.
financial 