• •
I am happy to be here with you at the first of a series of seminars being organised
by the Primary Dealers Association of India. In fact, this event is in fulfillment of one of
the roles of the Primary Dealers Association, as a self-regulatory organisation, and as
The number of PDs were just six when I inaugurated the Primary Dealers
Association in March 1998 and the size of the family has more than doubled to thirteen in
one year. Primary Dealers will have to play a significantly larger and more effective role
in the Government Securities market this year.  On our part, RBI will continue to offer
full support to PDs in our effort to further develop the financial markets. In fact, the RBI
has been facilitating the operation of PDs through a variety of measures and these are
invariably discussed with them.  The PDs have been in close coordination with the RBI
on all matters of contemporary relevance in the Government Securities markets.  We
have been soliciting their advice on various matters and their advice has provided
valuable inputs to us in fine-tuning some of the policies.  Currently, the Primary Dealers
Association is working closely with the Internal Debt Management Cell of the RBI in
setting up the Electronic Dealing System.  I believe that this will be in place by June
The Primary Dealers’ presence in the Government Securities market has brought
about an element of dynamism, both in the primary and secondary segments. Last year
was a difficult year due to unprecedented international and domestic developments. With
cooperation from PDs as well as other market participants, we were able to complete the
In December 1998, I had spoken on the Development of Debt Markets in India
and, this was followed up with another lecture on the development of money market in
India. The major policy developments were reviewed and a detailed agenda for further
action was drawn up.  The Agenda which included technology, regulatory and legal
issues and the need for standardisation of practices in debt markets, also underlined the
imperative need to generate a strong retail segment of the gilt market. An internal sub-
Group of the Technical Advisory Committee on Government Securities Market was set
up to look into the various aspects of the repo market. The sub-Group has since submitted
its report which is currently being examined by us. Meanwhile, in the Union Budget for
1999-2000, the Government has proposed to abolish stamp duty on transfer of debt
instruments within the depository mode. This is expected to improve the volume in repo
of PSU bonds and corporate securities. There is also progress in the proposal to amend
                                           
•
 Inaugural address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, RBI, at the Seminar on Government
Securities Market, in Chennai, on April, 17, 1999. He is grateful to Dr.A.Prasad for his assistance.
1999.
market borrowing program of Government smoothly. large 
envisaged by us.
Chairman Mr. Gopalakrishnan and friends,
Securitisation in India: Next StepsSecurities Contracts Regulation Act to enable improved regulation and functioning of
debt markets. Guidelines for introduction of interest rate swaps are ready and we will be
issuing them soon. I am mentioning these by way of illustration about implementation of
Similarly, there has been progress in regard to interest rates, on which I had
spoken in June 1998 in Mumbai, while addressing FIMMDA, where some of you were
present.  I had narrated trends in both nominal and real interest rates in India and
analysed the five important reasons for pressure on real interest rates in India.  Six issues
were flagged of which Government borrowing programme was the first.  Market reforms
relating to Government securities market and money market were also listed.  In both
My colleague, Mrs. Usha Thorat will speak in detail, on the Government
I would, therefore, speak on a sub-sect of the debt market, viz., 
I will briefly explain for record, the concept of securitisation and highlight the
importance of securitisation in terms of its benefits to the originator, investor and the
financial system.  The process of securitisation will then be dealt with, of-course, tracing
the Indian experience in securitisation. The major legal and regulatory issues relevant are
listed. Finally, to help operationalising what has been debated so far, I will place before
Securitisation is a process through which illiquid assets are transferred into a more
liquid form of assets and distributed to a broad range of investors through capital
markets.  The lending institution’s assets are removed from its balance sheet and are
instead funded by investors through a negotiable financial instrument.  The security is
Securitisation as a technique gained popularity in the US in the 1970.  Favourable
tax treatment, legislative enactments, establishment of Government-backed institutions
that extend guarantees, and a pragmatic regulatory environment appear to have
contributed to the successful development of this market. The market for securitisation in
the US which is dominated by home mortgages has diversified to credit cards, home
UK is the second largest market for securitisation after the US.  Areas of
securitisation in the UK are broadly similar to the US and include residential mortgages,
credit cards, consumer loans, commercial real estate and student loan.  The Bank of
England has played a leading role in evolving guidelines for banking and other authorised
institutions in its loan transfers and securitisation. Now, the Financial Services Authority
2
equity loans, student loans and small business loans.
backed by the expected cash flows from the assets.
Concept
you, what could be the next steps for development of this market.
securitised debt.
Securities market, later today.
these, PDs have a significant role to play.
the agenda laid out.(FSA) sets out the policy on securitisation and loan transfers. Experience of UK is of
Other countries in Europe have been relatively slow starters, though regulatory
and legislative changes in Germany, France, Belgium and Spain have been fashioned to
assist development of securitisation. In Japan, the securitisation market is not well
developed since until recently, the Government had restricted securitisation to the assets
of leasing, consumer loan and credit card companies. The Government has, however,
Securitisation is designed to offer a number of advantages to the seller, investor
and debt markets.  For seller or originator, securitisation mainly results in receivables
being replaced by cash thereby improving the liquidity position. It removes the assets
from the balance sheet of the originator, thus liberating capital for other uses, and
enabling restructuring of the balance sheet by reducing large exposures or sectoral
concentration. It facilitates better asset liability management by reducing market risks
resulting from interest rate mismatches. The process also enables the issuer to recycle
assets more frequently and thereby improve earning.  Finally, transparency may be
For investor, securitisation essentially provides an avenue for relatively risk-free
investment. The credit enhancement provides an opportunity to investors to acquire good
It also provides opportunity for matching cash flows and managing ALM since a
securitised instrument carries regular monthly cash flows and has varying maturities. The
From the point of view of the financial system as a whole, securitisation increases
the number of debt instruments in the market, and provides additional liquidity in the
market. It also facilitates unbundling, better allocation and management of project risks.
It could widen the market by attracting new players on account of superior quality assets
Now, a word of caution. Benefits are possible but there are views that the
securitisation process, if not carried out prudentially, can leave risks with the originating
bank without allocating capital to back them. While all banking activity entails
operational and legal risks, these may be greater, the more complex the activity.  It is felt
that the main risk a bank may face in a securitisation scheme arises if a true sale has not
been achieved and the selling bank is forced to recognise some or all of the losses if the
assets subsequently cease to perform.  Also, funding risks and constraints on liquidity
may arise if assets designed to be securitised have been originated, but because of
disturbances in the market, the securities cannot be placed.  There is also a view that there
3
being available.
prevalence of secondary markets would offer liquidity.
quality assets and to diversify their portfolios.
improved since securitisation results in identifiable assets in the balance sheet.
Features of Securitisation
amended laws to allow full-scale securitisaton as recently as in May 1997.
special relevance to India, and we should liberally draw on it.is at least a potential conflict of interest if a bank originates, sells, services and
For the uninitiated, let me briefly narrate the process. The proces s begins when
the lender (or originator) segregates loans/lease/receivables into pools which are
relatively homogenous in regard to types of credit, maturity and interest rate risk.  The
pools of assets are then transferred to a Special Purpose Vehicle ( SPV) usually
constituted as a trust.  The originator may float the SPV as a subsidiary in the form of a
limited company.  Another option could be for the SPV to be floated jointly by the
originator/individuals/banks/institutions who are interested in the securitisation deal.
Based on these, the SPV issues asset backed securities in the form of debt, certificates of
beneficial ownership and other instruments.  The securities issued may be with or without
recourse.  Interest and principal payments on the loans, leases and receivables in the
underlying pool of assets are collected by the servicer (who could also be the originator)
and transmitted to the investors. Credit enhancement can add features to boost investor
confidence.  This could be in the form of a provision of recourse, a guarantee requiring
collateralisation.
There could be three basic methods of transfer of assets, viz., 
assignment and sub-participation. Novation is the clearest way of selling a loan and
effectively transferring both the rights and obligations. In novation, the existing loan
between originator and borrower is cancelled and a new agreement between the investor
and borrower is substituted.  The buyer steps into the shoes of the original lender or seller
who ceases to have any obligations to the borrower.  The loan, is therefore, excluded
An assignment transfers from the seller to buyer, all rights to principal and
interest.  Assignments for the purpose of disposing of assets may fall into two basic legal
categories.  The first is statutory assignment, transferring both legal and beneficial title.
A statutory assignment will pass and transfer from the seller to the buyer all the legal
rights to principal and interest.  In most cases, it will also pass on all the legal remedies
available against the borrower to ensure discharge of debt.   In other words, the buyer
acquires the full legal and beneficial interest in the loan. The second is equitable
assignment, transferring only beneficial title. It does not transfer legal rights.  Thus, a
buyer may not be able to proceed directly against a borrower.  The seller must be joined
Sub-participation does not transfer any of the seller’s rights, remedies or
obligations against the borrower to the buyer.  But, it is an entirely separate, back-to-
back, non-recourse funding arrangement, under which the buyer places funds with the
seller.  In return, the seller passes on to the buyer, payments under the underlying loan,
Securitisation in India
4
novation,
which the borrower makes to him.  But, the loan itself is not transferred.
in action.  However, the seller is not liable for debt.
from the balance sheet of the seller.
the originator to cover losses, a letter of credit from a bank, or over 
Process
underwrites the same issue of securities.There is no authentic data on the magnitude of securitised debt in India.
Available data indicates that ICICI had securitised assets to the tune of Rs.2 ,750 crore in
its books as at end March 1999. Assets to the tune of Rs.1 ,200 crore is in the process of
being bought over.  CRISIL is reported to have rated about Rs. 1,200 crore of securitised
unrated transactions.
The first widely reported securitisation deal in India dates back to 1990 when
Citibank securitised auto loans and placed a paper with GIC mutual fund.  Since then, a
variety of deals have been undertaken.  Asset classes chosen have concentrated mostly on
auto and hire purchase receivables of NBFCs.  According to some estimates, 35 per cent
of all securitisation deals between 1992 and 1998 related to hire purchase receivables of
Apart from these, some innovative deals have also been struck. Earlier, in 1994-
SBI Cap structured an innovative deal where a pool of future cash flows of high value
customers of Rajasthan State Industrial and Development Corporation was securitised.
An oil monetisation deal has been structured where the future flows of oil receivables
accruing to a company was securitised.  Real estate developers have securitised
receivables arising out of installment sales. The recent securitisation deal of Larsen &
Toubro has opened a new vista for financing power projects.  The deal was a
securitisation of lease receivables even before the plant was completed.  Thus, this
National Housing Bank ( NHB) has made efforts to structure the pilot issue of
mortgage backed securities ( MBS) within the existing legal, fiscal and regulatory
framework. Under the proposed transaction, mortgage debt shall be
transferred/assigned/sold to NHB by Housing Finance Companies ( HFC) (originator)
pursuant to an agreement/contract in the ‘debt simplicitor form’. NHB will act as an
issuer of pass through certificates ( PTCs) and as a trustee on behalf of the investors.
There is a view that there will be a conflict of interest if NHB, a regulator also acts as a
trustee. However, as stated in the RBI discussion paper on universal banking, the
ownership, regulatory and supervisory framework of the development financial
On the basis of the Indian experience, the following features of securitisation
 Most deals have involved the transfer of beneficial interest on the asset and not the
 
 In fact, many transactions have followed the escrow mechanism where receivables
 According to Duff & Phelps India, a rating agency, past deals have mostly been direct
 
5
legal title.95, 
Routing the transaction through a Special Purpose Vehicle is yet to gain popularity. (e)
NBFCs. purchases of receivables by institutions and bigger 
(d)
are transferred to an escrow account for payment to the buyer.
(c)
Most transactions have followed the pass-through mechanism. (b)
(a)
appear noteworthy.
institutions are under review.
securitisation deal financed even the asset creation.
trucks and the rest towards other auto/transport segment receivables.
transactions up to 1998.  In addition, there have been several  securitised debt.
 The market is unregulated and lacks transparency in terms of volume, price, parties to
 
 
Legal and Regulatory Issues in Securitisation
A number of factors, mainly legal and regulatory, appear to have to be addressed
The first relates to stamp duty. Under statutory assignment, securitisation involves
transfer of mortgaged debt, which can be effected only by means of an instrument in
writing.  Every instrument by which property, whether movable or immovable is
transferred attracts  valorem stamp duty.  Typically, the rate of stamp duty ranges from
0.5 per cent to as high as 4 to 8 per cent of the value of transaction.  Thus, the process of
securitisation becomes too expensive. Recently, there has been significant relief since
stamp duty has been reduced to 0.1 per cent in some States.  This is so, in Maharashtra in
respect of transfer of movables; in Tamil Nadu in respect of transfer of housing
loans/security created; and in Gujarat and Karnataka in respect of movables and
immovables.
Second, under the Registration Act, 1908 transfer requires compulsory
Third, the Transfer of Property Act, according to some legal views, has held that
assignment of a debt should be in whole and not a part assignment.  Further, both the
Transfer of Property Act and the Sale of Goods Act hold that only a property currently in
existence is capable of being transferred.  The laws impede development of securitisation
in future receivables as transfer of future property does not fall under the definition of
Fourth, s ome provisions of the Income Taxt Act, 1961 are reported to have an
impact on securitisation.  For instance, Section 60 of the Act, contemplates transfer of
income without transfer of assets which are the source of the income.  In such a case, the
income so transferred is chargeable to income tax as the income of the transferor and is
included in his total income.  Similarly, there are other sections in the Act which inhibit
Fifth, the existing set of foreclosure laws are said to increase the risks of mortgage
backed securities by making it difficult to transfer property in cases of default. An
efficient foreclosure law is undoubtedly the key to the success of secondary market
Sixth, there is a view that a SPV structured as a company under the Companies
Act may come under the definition of non-banking financial companies and hence is
6
ad
subject to prudential norms.  I would like to clarify this issue here.
operations.
the progress of securitisation.
debt.
registration. This also imposes additional costs to the transaction.
to ensure healthy development of the Indian securitisation market.
There are no standard accounting and valuation norms. (i)
The settlement procedures are not clear. (h)
the transaction, etc.
(g)
There appears to be no secondary market for (f)In the context of securitisation, if SPV is structured as a company under the
provisions of the Companies Act, and engages itself in activities akin to investments,
technically it becomes a non-bank finance company requiring registration under Section
45-IA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. However, in terms of the existing
regulatory framework, only companies holding/accepting public deposits are subject to
prudential norms and are also required to comply with SLR requirements as a percentage
of their public deposits.  Thus, SPVs, which are non-deposit taking NBFCs would not be
subject to prudential norms prescribed by RBI on capital adequacy and credit exposure
Whether the Pass Through Certificates ( PTCs) issued by the SPV would be
considered as public deposits under RBI’s NBFC Directions depends upon the class of
subscribers to the instruments issued by the NBFCs.  If the PTCs are issued to a category
of subscribers, who are in the exempted category, then these Certificates are not be
treated as public deposits. The exempted category of investors include Government,
NBFCs, banks and financial institutions.
Another important aspect relates to whether NBFC directions apply if only the
beneficial interest on the assets is transferred to SPV issuing the Certificates. As per
RBI’s regulations, the nature of assets for securing the deposits raised is not the criteria
for the applicability of the Directions.  However, the definition of public deposits does
not include debentures/bonds, which are fully secured by the assets owned by the
company in respect of which a charge has been created in favour of the trustees for such
Development of the market for securitisation in India will need efforts of the
Central Government, State Governments, RBI and SEBI. I had briefly alluded to some of
the legal and regulatory issues. The provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, Stamp
Act, Registration Act and the Income Tax Act may have to be examined in detail in order
to facilitate securitisation in a cost effective manner.  Legislative amendment to various
Acts is a time consuming process.  Some of the issues, particularly the external legal
environment affecting banks and financial institutions are receiving the attention of the
Expert Group set up by the Government under the Chairmanship of Shri T.R.
Andhyarujina. In the meantime, it may be useful to identify issues of a short-term nature
which could be tackled on a priority basis.  An in-house Group has been set up in the RBI
to identify these issues and the action points and I want to make it clear that whatever I
7
Regulatory Framework
say here is without prejudice to the freedom of the Group to give its recommendations.
Legal Framework
Next Steps
debenture/bond holders.
statutory authorities, companies including 
norms, although registration is mandatory.
Special Purpose Vehicle as a CompanyCurrently, there is no comprehensive regulatory framework for
securitisation, understandably so, since it is of recent origin even in developed countries.
SPV can be formed as a company under the Companies Act, 1956 or as a Trust under the
Indian Trusts Act, 1882. Hence, SPV formed as a company will have to be registered as
an NBFC under the RBI Act and is subject to RBI’s regulatory framework. Secondly,
such an NBFC will also come under the regulations of Companies Act. Thirdly, SPV
formed as a Trust will come under the purview of the Indian Trusts Act. Fourthly, to the
extent banks and financial institutions are involved in securitisation, they will continue to
fall under RBI regulations. Fifthly, the Securities/Pass Through Certificates issued by
SPV fall under the definition of securities under Securities Contract Regulation Act,
1956. There is thus a  need to clarify and formalise a regulatory framework for
There is a case for widening the market for securitised debt.  SEBI has recently
permitted mutual funds to invest in these securities.  A similar extension to FIIs to invest
in securitised debt within existing ceilings could  be examined.  FIIs are already familiar
with these instruments in other markets and can, therefore be expected to help in the
Regarding operational details in the market, it would appear to be advantageous to
permit issue of these securities in dematerialised form only. These could also be notified
as securities that would be eligible for repos. Technological upgradation will usher in a
more transparent trading system and a more effective clearing and settlement mechanism
will attract greater interest towards this instrument. This aspect could be addressed as part
So far, there has been no clearly or unambiguously well defined role for any
agency  in the development of a market for securitised debt.  There has been a demand,
particularly in the context of infrastructure financing, that the RBI should take the
initiative for a number of reasons. Since SPV formed as a company will have to be
registered as an NBFC under the RBI Act, it is possible to regulate them as a  category of
NBFCs. Banks and financial institutions are major players in securitisation, and in any
case, they will be bound by RBI’s guidelines in the matter. There is already a proposal to
amend the Securities Contracts Regulation Act, to add an enabling provision to give
powers to Government to provide formal jurisdiction to the RBI also in the regulation of
A possible approach for the role of RBI in the development of such a market
8
could :
forth comprehensive guidelines. The guidelines involves setting 
the debt markets.
Role of RBI
of clarifying the regulatory framework.
Market Orientation
development of this market.
Widening Investor Base
securitisation. 
 
 highlight the wider implications for the risks to banks and financial institutions
 
 outline the rules applicable to transfer in order to limit the association between the
 
 evolve specific guidelines on matters relating to disclosure requirements, valuation
To conclude, I would leave these thoughts with you at this stage.  I invite
suggestions from Primary Dealers and other market participants on a possible approach to
I wish the Seminar all success. I am confident that the seminar will not only
9
outline the principles and objectives behind the approach to securitisation,
disseminate information but also come up with suggestions.
securitised debt in India. developing a market for 
procedures, accounting standards and eligibility norms.
g)
set out considerations for credit enhancements f)
originator and assets
e)
set out the preconditions to securitisation structures d)
resulting from securitisation,
c)
b)
indicate various legal sources and regulators that impinge on securitisation a)