Recent Trends in the Indian Debt Market and Current Initiatives 
§
Rakesh Mohan 
 
The Indian debt market, and the government securities market in 
particular, is at a turning point in India with significant changes taking place in 
the domestic economic environment along with various proposed legislative 
changes. Let me briefly touch upon the reasons why I believe we are living in 
interesting times and why this is an opportune time to reflect on further debt 
market development.  
The first such significant change is the prohibition of RBI’s subscription 
to Government securities in the primary market effective April 1, 2006, as 
mandated by the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act.  
This will complete the transition to a fully market based issuance of 
Government securities, a process that was initiated in the early 1990s with the 
introduction of auctions.   
Second, as a consequence of the recommendations of the Twelfth 
Finance Commission, the role of the Central Government as a financial 
intermediary for State Governments is effectively ending, although there will 
be some transitional arrangements.  Thus State Governments' borrowing will 
be more and more market determined.  This is perhaps the beginning of the 
emergence of a vibrant sub-national debt market – although it still has a long 
way to go.  
Third, the economy is estimated to be growing at 8.1 per cent this year 
with modest inflation and if similar conditions prevail, we can expect growth 
and inflation next year to also be on a similar path. If this growth is to be 
maintained and accelerated in the medium and long run, financial 
intermediation will have to improve and the debt market, in this context will 
become even more important.  
Fourth, the sustenance of such growth will be possible only i f 
investments in both infrastructure and industry accelerate.  Again, this will 
require debt financing with medium to long term maturity to supplement 
traditional bank financing.  
Fifth, as Government finances have been improving for both, the 
Central and State Governments in consonance with the Central and State 
FRBM Acts, the negative savings rate of public sector that had arisen over the 
last 5 years has turned positive.  We can, therefore, look forward to Gross 
Domestic Savings touching 30 per cent or more of GDP on a sustained basis.  
Moreover, as the combined fiscal deficit falls, a greater proportion of private 
                                                 
§
 This is based on Deputy Governor, Dr. Rakesh Mohan’s lectures at the Fourth India Debt 
Market Conference (organized by Citi Group and Fitch Rating India on January 31, 2006) and 
at the Annual Conference of FIMMDA (jointly organised by Fixed Income Money Market 
Dealers Association of India  and Primary Dealers Association of India on March 14, 2006) at 
Mumbai. Comments from Usha Thorat, B. Mahapatra, G. Mahalingam, and Alpana Killawala, 
and assistance of T. Rabi Sankar, S. Subbaiah, Y. Jayakumar, Navin Nambiar and Partha 
Ray are gratefully acknowledged.   
 financial savings will be available for channelising into the private sector.  This 
entails higher risks but also opens up the possibility of higher returns. There 
will then be greater demand for debt securities.  
Sixth, in recognition of these developments, an amendment to the 
Banking Regulation Act has also been introduced in the Parliament, which 
would enable the removal of 25 per cent minimum SLR as and when feasible. 
Further, as and when the Government Securities Bill (that will replace the 
Public Debt Act and which, I understand, has been approved by the Standing 
Committee in Parliament) is passed,   the introduction of newer instruments 
like STRIPS will also be possible.   
Seventh, although gross domestic savings increased to 29 per cent in 
2004-05 driven significantly by improvements in public and corporate savings, 
the current account deficit widened reflecting heightened investment activity in 
the country and hence greater absorption of capital flows.  The robust growth 
in industrial activity has resulted in strong credit growth which in turn has 
created more competition for available resources.  This development has 
reemphasized the fact that bond financing has to supplement traditional bank 
financing to take care of the growing credit needs of the economy and that 
resource allocation has to be more efficient.    
Recognising the force of these changes, the Government had set up 
an Expert Group under Dr. R.H. Patil to recommend measures for energizing 
the corporate debt market.  This report was released recently and as 
announced in the recent Budget Speech of the Finance Minister, the 
Government has broadly accepted the recommendations. With Dr. Patil's 
track record of setting up the NSE and revolutionising the equity market, we 
can now look forward to similar developments taking place in the debt market. 
 
I. Background 
I had reviewed the developments in the Government securities market 
earlier.   So I don't intend to do a full review this time.  Full documentation of 
the development of the Government securities market is also available in two 
articles in the RBI Bulletin of November and December 2004. I would, 
however, briefly take you through the history of reforms in the Government 
securities market, before highlighting the pending issues and concerns.   
The Government securities market before the 1990s was 
characterised by administered interest rates, high SLR requirements that led 
to the existence of captive investors, and the absence of a liquid and 
transparent secondary market for G-Secs. Low coupon rates were offered on 
Government securities to keep Government borrowing costs down, which 
made real rates of return negative for several years till the mid-1980s. During 
the 1980s, the volume of Government debt expanded considerably, 
particularly short-term debt, due to automatic accommodation to Central 
Government by the Reserve Bank, through the mechanism of ad hoc 
Treasury Bills. However, with a captive investor base and low interest rates, 
the secondary market for Government bonds remained dormant. Artificial 
yields on Government securities affected the yield structure of financial assets in the system, and led to an overall high interest rate environment in 
the rest of the market. Driven by these compulsions, the Reserve Bank’s 
monetary management was characterised by a regime of administered 
interest rates, and rising Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and SLR prescriptions. 
High CRR and SLR left little room for monetary manoeuvering.   
 Furthermore, the period was marked by greater pre-emption of 
financial savings. Given such high pre-emptions and administered interest 
rates which were artificially kept lower than the market rates, there was no 
possibility of price discovery.   Other interest rates too were perhaps higher 
than what market interest rates otherwise would have been. 
The RBI had to undertake a long and phased programme of reforms to 
make a transition from this situation to one where interest rates would be 
market determined, Government borrowing would be market based and would 
reflect market costs.  The reforms were also important for developing the 
environment for effective monetary policy making and monetary transmission 
mechanisms. 
The reforms process has encompassed important developments in 
active policy making and institution building, with detailed attention being 
given to development of market micro structure, clearing and settlement 
systems, trading systems, diversification of participants and instruments, 
better regulatory systems, introduction of new technology and appropriate 
enabling legislation. 
As a result of gradual reform measures taken over the years, the Indian 
G-Sec market has seen a transition for the better, with the market becoming 
increasingly broad based, characterised by an efficient auction process, an 
active secondary market and a liquid yield curve up to 30 years (Chart 1). 
The market is now supported by an active Primary Dealer (PD) system and 
electronic trading and settlement technology that ensure safe settlement with 
STP and central counterparty guarantee.  At a more macro level, the reforms 
fostered integration of the different segments of the domestic markets as well 
as some degree of integration of the domestic financial markets with 
international markets. I note some of the specific achievements of the 
reforms:   
• Although India's (Centre and States combined) fiscal deficit has been 
among the highest in the world, we have not had to resort to external 
borrowing, except from bilateral and multilateral sources. This has 
imparted stability to the system. 
• The holding of G -secs among financial institutions has been more 
diversified, particularly, with the emergence of insurance and pension 
funds as a 'durable' investor class for the long-term securities. This 
became possible due to the sustained efforts devoted to elongating the 
maturity profile of Government securities by developing a smooth and 
robust yield curve.  
• The process of passive consolidation has helped in containing the 
number of bonds around the level that was prevailing at the end of 1998-99. This was a significant factor that promoted secondary market 
liquidity for Government Securities.  
• Market liquidity today compares well not only with the emerging 
economies, but also with the developed world, with bid-offer spreads in 
at least liquid securities being very fine at 1 -3 bps. The illiquidity 
premium levels are also in line with those in the international markets.  
 
Chart1:Yield Curve
8.00 31-Mar-03 31-Mar-04 31-Mar-05 31-Dec-05
7.50
7.00
6.50
6.00
5.50
5.00
4.50
4.00
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Year
 
 
Though the reform measures have resulted in creation of a vibrant G-
sec market, there is still some way to go in terms of improvement in 
regulation, introduction of newer technology and creating an enabling 
legislation. 
 
II.  Recent developments  
Let me now recount the developments that have taken place in G-sec 
markets recently.  First, security settlement has migrated to DvP III, enabling 
net settlement of securities and funds, resulting in efficient liquidity 
management.  Net settlement has also enabled selling of securities that are 
already contracted for purchase, in the same settlement cycle, which greatly 
mitigates the price risk faced by participants.  Second, roll over of repos has 
been enabled thus furthering the participants’ ability to manage their fund 
positions more efficiently. Third, a uniform T+1 settlement cycle has been 
adopted for the settlement of outright transactions in Government securities.   
This will give participants more processing time for transactions and will thus 
enable better funds as well as risk management.   Fourth, in order to further 
widen the repo market in Government Securities, its access has been 
extended to listed companies and non-scheduled urban cooperative banks.  
Fifth, the facility of selling stock acquired in primary auctions on the same day, 
which was hitherto available only for SGL account holders, has been 
extended to CSGL account holders also.   
 
YieldNDS-OM 
As part of its constant endeavor to improve the facilities for trading and 
settlement in the Government securities market, the Reserve Bank had 
formally launched, on August 1, 2005, an electronic Order Matching trading 
module for Government securities on its Negotiated Dealing System (NDS-
OM in short).   The system is an anonymous order matching system in which 
the identity of parties is not revealed, the CCIL becomes the central 
counterparty to each trade done on the system and the system allows 
straight-through processing (STP). The NDS-OM is an additional facility 
available to the participants and the participants continue to have the option of 
using the current reporting and trading platform of the NDS. The settlements 
of both types of transactions are, however, integrated. NDS-OM which was 
initially open only for the RBI regulated entities has been extended to all 
insurance entities in the second phase.   
The Order Matching system has been well received by market 
participants. Though it started only seven months back, it now accounts for a 
significant share of the total traded volume in G-secs (Chart 2).   
 
Chart 2: NDS-OM as % of G-sec Turnover  
Chart 2: G-sec Turnover- % of NDS-OM
Total G-sec turnover
20,000.00 65.00
% on NDS-OM
18,000.00
55.00
16,000.00
14,000.00
45.00
12,000.00
10,000.00 35.00
8,000.00
25.00
6,000.00
4,000.00
15.00
2,000.00
- 5.00
 
 
III. Current Issues in the G-Securities Market 
Under the FRBM Act, 2003, the RBI will not be participating in primary 
issuance of Government securities with effect from April 1, 2006 and nor can 
securities devolve on the RBI in a passive manner.  Moreover, the states will 
also have to be more market dependent.  This situation calls for a paradigm 
shift in the debt management framework and a comprehensive restructuring 
of debt issuance to ensure   that   the borrowing programme of the 
Government is successfully carried out and the cost of borrowing is also kept 
at a reasonable level.  In order to address these emerging needs and to equip 
the RBI and the market participants adequately, an Internal Technical Group 
on Central Government Securities Market was constituted in the RBI. Earlier, 
Rs. crore (Value)
01-Aug-05
06-Aug-05
12-Aug-05
19-Aug-05
26-Aug-05
01-Sep-05
08-Sep-05
14-Sep-05
20-Sep-05
26-Sep-05
01-Oct-05
07-Oct-05
17-Oct-05
24-Oct-05
31-Oct-05
08-Nov-05
16-Nov-05
23-Nov-05
30-Nov-05
07-Dec-05
14-Dec-05
21-Dec-05
28-Dec-05
Percentanother Group (Chairman: Dr.R.H. Patil) had examined the role of PDs in the 
Government securities market. A number of important issues have been 
identified by these Technical Groups.  Let me discuss them one by one.   
 
(i) Greater role for PDs in ensuring subscription to auctions   
 The RBI’s non-participation in primary auctions except under 
exceptional circumstances, effective April 2006, as indicated in the FRBM Act, 
will require alternative institutional arrangements to ensure that 
• debt management objectives are met; and  
• the Government is able to borrow under all market conditions without 
exacerbating market volatility. 
 This will necessitate some restructuring of current institutional 
processes, in as much as the RBI’s role in the primary market hitherto has to 
be replaced by a more active and dynamic participation by PDs.  Since the 
current system of annual bidding commitments does not guarantee that the 
notified amount will be sold in each auction, it was suggested that a system of 
100 per cent underwriting for each auction by PDs be put in place to ensure 
that the notified amount is sold at each auction.  This suggestion is being 
considered.   
 However, with the increased responsibility, the PDs will require 
adequate capital backing so as to sustain adverse movements in the market 
yields.  Consequently in the Annual Policy Statement 2005, it was announced 
that consultations would be held with banks, PDs and the Government to 
consider permitting structures of PD business to include banks that fulfil 
certain minimum criteria to act as PDs.  The guidelines enabling banks to do 
PD business have been issued recently after extensive consultations with the 
market participants.  A proposal to allow other stand alone PDs to diversify 
their activities is also under consideration and will be put in process shortly.  
 
(ii) Thin investor base 
Currently a large portion of G-secs is held in the investment portfolio of 
banks.  With burgeoning credit growth, the investible surplus of banks has 
found competition (in terms of possible deployment in loans vis-à-vis 
investment in G -secs). Furthermore, conversion of recap bonds to SLR 
securities implies reduced demand from banks for fresh SLR securities.  
Looking ahead, the Government has already introduced legislation in the 
Parliament to remove the statutory minimum SLR of 25 per cent.  On the 
other hand, the enhancement of FII limits to $2 bn from $1.75 bn, as 
announced in the Union Budget, will increase FII demand for Government 
securities.  As and when it becomes possible to lower the SLR, it will become 
even more important to widen the investor base.  The market making role of 
PDs will also become more important and they will have to make extra efforts 
to widen the investor base to add players such as provident funds, pension 
funds, cooperative banks, trusts, NGOs and other institutions.   
 (iii) Price Discovery and Hedging 
 There was a sustained decline in interest rates for 3 years with the 
yield on 10 year Central Government Securities going down to as low as 4.95 
per cent in October 2003.  Since then, however, there has been a reversal in 
the trend and the rates have been hardening to reach about 7.4 per cent now.   
 In the absence of instruments that allow players to take a view on the 
interest rates, it is observed that the markets are active and liquid when the 
rates are falling but turn lackluster and illiquid when the rates rise (charts 3 A 
& 3B).  Low volumes render markets shallow and prone to price 
manipulations. To enable participants to manage their interest rate risk more 
efficiently and to also impart liquidity to the markets, even in a rising interest 
rate scenario, the Technical Group has recommended permitting short sales 
in Government securities in a calibrated manner.  This would enable market 
participants to express their views on interest rate expectations. The Mid-term 
policy review had announced ‘intra-day’ short selling in Government securities 
and their guidelines have been issued recently.   
 
Chart 3 A:  Relation between market volumes and yields (during downward trend) 
180000 12.00%
160000
11.00%
140000
10.00%
120000
9.00%
100000
80000
8.00%
60000
7.00%
40000
6.00%
20000
0 5.00%
Net traded value (Rs.crores) 10yr Gilt YTM
 
 
 
 
Chart 3 B:  Relation between market volumes and yields (during upward trend) 
 
 
25000 8.00
7.50
20000
7.00
15000
6.50
10000
6.00
5000
5.50
0 5.00
G-sec volume 10 yr Gilt YTM
 
Jan-00
Apr-00
Jul-00
Oct-00
Jan-01
Apr-01
Jul-01
Oct-01
Jan-02
Apr-02
Jul-02
Oct-02
Jan-03
Apr-03
Jul-03
Oct-03
Jan-04What are the risks in short selling Government securities? The inherent 
risk in short sales is that the participants may not be able to cover their short 
positions.  Further, due to the rush to cover intra-day short positions, security 
prices may actually go up, aggravating the situation.  To mitigate such risks, it 
has been proposed to limit each participant’s short position to 0.25% of the 
total outstanding stock.  The details of the outstanding amounts are made 
available on the RBI website.  Further, the participants are required to have 
an internal policy, approved by their respective boards, laying down the 
guidelines on risk limits on short positions, aggregate nominal short sale limit, 
etc.   Over a period of time, as participants get used to short sale, market may 
evolve mechanism to meet any unanticipated end-of-day shortages in the 
system.  The Reserve Bank will be actively monitoring the developments.  As 
we gain experience in the operation of short sales we will consider the 
feasibility and desirability of introduction of other phases of short selling as 
recommended in the Technical Group’s report.  We also need to give further 
thought to the modalities and procedures that would be required for the 
introduction of interest rate futures as has been recommended by market 
participants and expert groups alike at various times. 
 
(iv) Introduction of ‘When Issued’ Market 
 The  Technical Group has also recommended introduction of ‘when 
issued’ market which  would facilitate an efficient distribution process for 
Government securities by stretching the actual distribution period for each 
issue and allowing the market more time to absorb large issues without 
disruption, in addition to providing better price discovery.   The Government 
has concurred with this proposal and guidelines have been discussed with the 
market participants and are in the process of being finalized.  We expect to 
issue them shortly. 
 
(v) Active Consolidation of Central Government Securities 
The Reserve Bank, as a conscious exercise, has been following 
passive consolidation through reissuances.  The quantum of reissuances as a 
percentage of total jumped to 82 per cent in 2004-05 compared to 33 per cent 
in 1998-99.  Yet the number of actively traded securities is very low as 
compared with the total number of securities outstanding.  As at end- 
December 05, there were 111 Central Government securities of which 44 
securities, with minimum outstanding issues of Rs. 100 billion or more, 
accounted for 71 per cent of the total outstanding amount.    On a daily basis, 
hardly 10-12 securities are traded, of which only four or five securities trade 
actively. Without active trades in the markets, the yield curve is kinky making 
pricing of securities difficult.  This also leads to a situation where securities of 
similar maturity profiles trade at very different yields, with the liquidity premium 
sometimes going as high as 50 basis points. 
The Technical Group on Central Government Securities markets has 
recommended active consolidation of Government securities to promote 
greater liquidity and a smoother yield curve.  The proposal has since received ‘in principle’ approval from the Government of India and the finer modalities 
for implementing the scheme are being worked out in consultation with the 
Government.  
  
(vi) Widening the Investor Base 
NDS-OM, which initially had permitted participation of RBI regulated 
entities only, has also been extended to insurance entities.    It is now being 
extended to qualified Mutual Funds, Provident Funds and Pension Funds as 
announced in the Finance Minister's Budget speech.  The increased 
participant base should improve liquidity thus enabling the participants reap 
the benefits of better price discovery.   
As suggested by the Patil Committee on Screen Based Trading in 
Government Securities, the largely untapped non-retail mid-segment 
comprising Pension Funds, Trusts, Co-op banks, and non-profit organizations 
can be targeted with aggressive market making in order to widen the investor 
base further. 
 With the implementation of the Twelfth Finance Commission 
recommendations and expected achievement of FRBM targets in both the 
Central and State Governments the volume of State Government borrowing 
will become similar in magnitude to Central Government securities.   
 
(vii)  Liquidity in State Government Securities   
At present secondary market liquidity in State Government securities 
has been found to be very low, accounting for less than 3 per cent of the total 
turnover.  It is, therefore, important that we take measures to enhance liquidity 
in this market substantively. As a first step, measures are being contemplated 
in terms of granting repo status to State Government securities as also to 
enhance the investor base by permitting non-competitive bidding in primary 
auctions of State Government securities.  
 
(viii) Legality of OTC Derivatives 
Over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives play a very crucial role in 
reallocating and mitigating the risks of corporates, banks and other financial 
institutions.  The ambiguity regarding their legal validity is said to be inhibiting 
the growth and stability of the market for such products.  Clearing ambiguity 
on OTC derivatives is important and has therefore been attempted through an 
amendment to the RBI Act which is awaiting Parliament’s approval.   
 
(ix) Asian Bond Fund     
Before I conclude this section, a few words on the Asian Bond Fund 
(ABF) initiative would be very relevant.  The ABF is an important initiative to 
promote bond markets in the Asian region.  With over half of the total trade in 
Asia being intra-regional trade, and with this proportion still on an increasing trend, economies in the region are becoming increasingly interdependent 
among themselves, arguably more so as each of them depends less on the 
developed economies in Europe and America. By comparison, the degree of 
financial integration in Asia is disproportionately low.  Allow me to share with 
you some numbers.  
In 2004, according to IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics (December 
2005), Asia’s exports accounted for 21 per cent of the world exports. Asia’s 
trade (exports plus imports) accounted for about 42.0 per cent of the world 
trade (exports). Asia accounts of 53 per cent of developing countries’ total 
exports.  In terms of intra-regional trade, Asia’s share in its total exports 
account for 42.8 per cent. Within the Asian region, China is the largest trading 
country, followed by Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, India, 
Indonesia, Philippines and Vietnam. These countries, together, account for 
87.0 per cent of Asia’s intraregional trade. 
In this context, the initiative of setting up the ABF enables bringing 
together of Asian economies with different sizes, different economic structures 
and with different stages of economic and social development.   This will help 
to lay the foundation for promotion of development of regional and domestic 
bond markets in the Asian region.  When different countries in the region 
exhibit varying degrees of current account deficits and surpluses,  
development of the bond market will enable intra-regional debt flows that can 
then usefully be absorbed within the region.  
To sum up, what I have just described illustrates how hard it is to build 
the markets and to ensure that they work efficiently. While bringing the G-Sec 
market where it is today, we have learnt that such a transition does not 
happen easily and proactive measures have to be taken to develop a debt 
market. Such development also requires cooperation of and coordination with 
the key players. In developing the market for Government securities, for 
instance, close coordination with the Government has been a significant 
element. Many developments that have taken place in the last ten years 
illustrate the very close collaboration that exists between the RBI and the 
Government.  
As we traverse the uncharted path of FRBM and Post TFC, we enter a 
new era in the development of the debt market in which evolving a vibrant 
market for sub-national debt and corporate debt will be our major 
responsibilities. The lessons we have drawn from the earlier experience of 
developing the G-Sec market would be helpful in our next endeavour. Clearly, 
this will be a long drawn out process and there are no magic solutions. I have 
briefly touched upon the measures required in imparting vibrancy to the sub-
national debt market in earlier paragraphs. Let me now briefly touch upon the 
corporate debt market. 
 IV. Corporate Debt 
In his recently released report, Dr. R. H. Patil has, as may be expected, 
and as always, done an excellent job in reviewing the status of the corporate 
debt market and provided recommendations for energizing it.   
A key point that I would like to emphasize is that learning from the 
experience of developing the Government securities market, we need to 
proceed in a measured manner with well thought out appropriate sequencing 
for developing the corporate debt market.  Financial market development 
involves action on a number of fronts with the key objective, obviously, being 
to enable the most efficient allocation of resources to the most productive 
uses and efficient intermediation from savers to investors.  In other words,  
banking development, equity market development, debt market development 
all go hand in hand.  And within the debt market, an efficient Government 
securities market is essential for price discovery and for providing reliable 
benchmarks to price corporate bonds off the credit risk free yield curve.  
As our financial markets grow, and as the need for investment grows, 
which we perceive to be happening at present, some disintermediation is 
expected to take place as the most credit worthy borrowers seek the lowest 
borrowing costs. The demand for developing the corporate debt market has to 
be seen in this context. 
What is curious, however, is that it has been difficult to develop the 
corporate bond market everywhere. As the Patil Committee has documented, 
just under half the world's corporate bond market is in the US, and another 15 
per cent in Japan.  Among other countries, the UK has a long standing bond 
market, but the European one is still developing, with financing in many 
countries still being bank dominated. Among developing countries, it is 
perhaps only South Korea that has a reasonably well developed bond market. 
The key problem is that for a corporate bond market to function, we 
need a large number of issuers, a large number of investors and issues of a 
large size.   
We have a potentially large pool of issuers. Let me give a quick run 
down.   
 
Issuers  
(i) Infrastructure Projects: SPVs formed to build projects like airports, 
roads, ports and railways can seriously consider accessing the bond route to 
raise the required resources, if an appropriate risk management framework is 
developed in the country.  Once initial risks have been cleared and income 
streams are assured, bonds of such projects should, in principle be very 
attractive.  
(ii) Housing: We are witnessing a major housing boom, along with very 
large increases in housing finance.  In fact the growth in housing finance has 
been large enough for the Reserve Bank to draw attention of banks and 
borrowers alike to the credit quality and we have accordingly increased the 
risk weights on housing finance.  With increasing urbanisation, changes in economic demographics, increasing tendencies towards nuclear families, and 
growing incomes we can expect growth in housing demand and finance to be 
sustained for a foreseeable future.   Hence, we can expect mortgage backed 
securitisation to gather pace. This will need significant institutional 
development, but can potentially form a large segment of the corporate debt 
market, as in other countries. The High Level Expert Committee on Corporate 
Debt and Securitisation has identified, inter alia, resolution of taxation and 
stamp duty issues to further the growth of mortgage backed securitisation in 
Indian context.  The Committee has also recommended establishment of an 
appropriate institutional process to evolve a consensus across the States on 
the affordable rates and levels of stamp duty on debt assignment, PTCs and 
securities receipts (SRs).   
(iii) Municipal Bonds: Growing urbanisation will need large urban 
infrastructure investment and hence the associated need for funds could be a 
potential candidate for bond issuance.  Municipal bonds are a tried and tested 
method of urban infrastructure financing in the US accounting for almost 10 
per cent of the US bond market.  In India too there is a huge potential for 
municipal bonds with about 35 cities that have a population of greater than 1 
million and about 400 cities with population exceeding 1,00,000.  
Development of this segment, however, requires a lot of institutional work to 
be done. 
(iv) Corporates: Indian industry has now begun to exhibit international 
competitiveness.  With expanding domestic demand and export growth, 
growth in industrial investments will undoubtedly accelerate leading to greater 
demand for bond financing in the absence of term lending institutions.   This 
segment covers about 20 per cent of the US market.   
 
Investors  
The investors in this segment have typically been institutional 
investors.  It is puzzling that in India corporate deposits have long been a 
popular investment avenue for retail investors, yet the same retail investors do 
not evince much interest in corporate bonds.   It seems that retail investors 
are more comfortable with credit risk than with interest rate risk.  This does 
not seem logical to me. One would have thought that rated bonds are much 
safer than unrated corporate deposits.  Or is it that unlike corporates, financial 
intermediaries have not bothered to market bonds to retail investors? So I 
think this is an area where some work can be done. 
 Who will be the investors in corporate bonds?  Insurance companies, 
mutual funds, provident funds, pension funds, banks, non-profit institutions, 
NGOs and retail segment are all potential investors provided the instruments 
offered match their risk return preferences.  In the US about 50 per cent of the 
mutual fund assets are in debt securities.   Once again, a great deal of work 
will need to be done to market these to different kinds of investor segments 
exhibiting a range of risk appetites.  
  Given the large heterogeneity in risk taking capacity, the necessity of 
risk mitigation techniques, marketing networks and liquidity can hardly be overemphasized. So the potential exists, but how is it to be tapped?  What are 
the key issues in this regard?  
Trading:  It can be seen everywhere in the world that most bond trading 
is in the OTC segment, with most bonds being unlisted.  In the US about 92 
per cent of the bonds are unlisted and only 1 per cent of the trading is done 
on exchanges.   It is because of these structural rigidities, that the corporate 
bond markets are mainly confined to institutional investors.  We need to 
understand why developed country markets have developed in this fashion.  
However, there is no reason why we can't innovate and have electronic 
based, anonymous order matched trading to have a wider reach and also 
thereby enhance liquidity in the bond market.  In this context, the Union 
Budget has proposed establishment of a unified exchange traded system for 
corporate bonds.  Furthermore, we should note that as new systems are 
coming up worldwide, we also need to build efficient price discovery 
mechanisms. 
 Size of Issues: Another issue that concerns development of corporate 
bond markets is the issue size.  Trading and liquidity needs reasonable 
issuance size.  Cost of issuance is not related to size so there is great 
potential for economies of scale.  This aspect will have to be addressed by 
bringing about more discipline in issuances and by following consolidation 
through reissues.  
Cost of Issuance: Cost of issuance in term of rating, listing, disclosure 
and marketing requirements makes the public issue of bond expensive 
making private placement a preferred alternative for most issuers.  If the 
corporate bond market is to develop, a great deal of attention will have to be 
given to minimize the issuance cost and the time taken to make public issue.  
Market making institutions, marketing networks and the like will have to be 
developed with this.   Regulatory attention will have to be given to provide for 
economy in disclosure and development of appropriate systems.  Since debt 
issuance is more frequent than equity, re-issuance will need to be made much 
cheaper. 
Clearing and Settlement systems:  As already indicated, a robust 
trading platform would go a long way in enabling efficient price discovery in 
corporate bonds as also in creating depth and vibrancy to the market. An 
efficient clearing and settlement system would further the development of 
corporate bond markets by reducing the counter party risk and settlement risk.   
  As the corporate bond market develops and expands, diversifying and 
expanding investor interest will need institutional measures for credit 
enhancement.  We are fortunate in India to have built up first rate credit rating 
institutions.  So the first step in credit enhancement has already been taken.   
Credit risk can also be addressed by developing bond insurance institutions. 
Institutional investors who have superior risk assessment capacity along with 
investment capacity can also act as credit enhancers.  All this takes time to 
develop and does not happen on its own. 
It may be noted that each of the problems mentioned in respect of 
corporate bonds has been addressed in the context of development of G-
securities market.  That goes to show that the problems are not insurmountable but only that it takes some time to resolve. But we have just 
begun.  Patil Committee has already given us very valuable recommendations 
towards resolving these problems.  It is true that the Government securities 
market took so much time to develop, despite being much simpler.   The 
corporate debt market being much more complex, would require some extra 
effort to move ahead.   In short, we have a long way to go. 
 
To conclude, I hope that some of these issues are deliberated upon 
and some practical solutions are arrived at in this conference.  I also hope the 
next 12 months will be eventful with many changes taking place particularly 
towards evolving the corporate debt market.    
 
 
 
 