SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium 2011 
 
Venue: Kumarakom, Kerala, India 
June 9-11, 2011 
 
FINANCIAL STABILITY: SOME ISSUES
 
(Y.V. Reddy)  
 
 
Dear Governor Subbarao, Esteemed Mr. Jaime Caruana, Respected 
Governors of Central Banks of SAARC region, distinguished central 
bankers and friends,  
 
 I am grateful to my friend and distinguished successor Governor 
Subbarao and RBI, for giving me this opportunity to be with this august 
gathering.  The subject for the Symposium is very timely, and is of 
great significance for the central banks.   
 
I want to congratulate the scholars in RBI for outstanding concept 
papers.  They are to the point, comprehensive, updated and, above all, 
very informative as well as analytical.  I am delighted to endorse the 
papers.  All the country papers are of very high standards, and provide 
deep insights into the relevant issues.  I eagerly look forward to the 
discussions.     
 
In my brief presentation today, I will address some inter-related issues 
on financial stability.  First, what has been the thinking and what have 
 1been the actions of RBI in regard to financial stability in recent years? 
Experience, both good and bad, can provide insights into this issue. 
 
Second, is the global financial crisis behind us or ahead of us?  Put 
differently, are we likely to be out of serious threats to financial stability 
in the near future, though no one can rule out a financial crisis for ever?   
 
Third, what are the broader issues in regard to financial stability that 
ought to be addressed now?  
 
Evolution of Policy on Financial Stability in India  
 
India recorded impressive growth in 1980’s, though the growth rate has 
been gradually accelerating since Independence, while simultaneously 
reducing volatility in output.  The higher growth in 1980’s was 
accompanied by a build-up of macro-economic imbalances, especially in 
regard to fiscal and external position as also, arguably health of 
financial sector.  The balance of payments crisis of 1991 was essentially 
a liquidity crisis caused by the impact on external trade due to collapse 
of USSR and Gulf crisis, almost simultaneously.  However, the way-out 
of liquidity crisis which was executed in an exemplary manner despite 
political uncertainties, warranted attention to a process of reversing the 
trend in macro-economic imbalances in the economy brought about by 
 2the strategy for growth in 80s.  The process of reform since 1991 thus 
addressed, simultaneously, external, fiscal, financial, and real economy.  
 
It must be recognised that throughout 1980’s and beginning of 1990’s, 
despite the crisis in balance of payments front, there was virtually no 
issue of financial stability, due to the public-ownership of banks, 
financial repression, and closed economy.  Incidentally, one lesson from 
this crisis was that a closed economy, by itself provides no insurance 
against all instability.  Thus, the thrust of reforms in financial sector was 
not in the context of responding to a crisis or vulnerability in financial 
sector, but aimed at improving its efficiency.  Its aims were to release 
the rigour of financial repression, improve regulation, promote 
competition, and increase openness of the economy.  All measures 
taken in this regard, emphasisd gradualism, and a non-disruptive 
approach.  As Reports of Committees on reform of external sector and 
financial sector indicate, the thrust of reform was on macroeconomic 
stability,  especially  in regard to external sector, and improvement in 
efficiency, while emphasizing prudential regulation in regard to financial 
sector.    
 
Attention to financial stability was first hinted in August 1997, in a 
speech [please see Appendix for extracts from speeches between 
August 1997 and 2008], in response to overvalued exchange rate of 
rupee and unhedged foreign currency exposures of some corporates.  
 3About this time, the link between fiscal, banking and external sector 
was highlighted in the report of Tarapore Committee on liberalization of 
capital account.  The pace of reforms in fiscal arena and improvements 
in regulation of banks was accelerated with a view to promoting overall 
efficiency, while active intervention in forex markets, both direct and 
indirect, became the norm in order to avoid excess volatility in financial 
markets.    
 
The stress on financial stability as one of the objectives of monetary 
policy was articulated, perhaps for the first time, after Asian crisis and 
later due to crises in many other emerging market economies.  The 
provocation was the possibility of impact of external developments on 
Indian economy in general, and in foreign exchange markets, in 
particular, with consequent impact on banking sector.   
 
In 2001, the developments in equity markets affecting the health of a 
modern private sector bank as well as cooperative banks, brought to 
light the importance of liquidity in money markets, banks’ dependence 
on money markets, and banks’ exposures to capital markets as well as 
other intermediaries in capital markets.  Consequently, financial stability 
gained attention of all regulators in financial sector, under the 
leadership of RBI, and   regulatory prescriptions included limits to 
bank’s exposures to money markets and equity markets.   
 
 4At a personal level, there was exposure to the operations of IMF in 
Turkey, Argentina and Brazil during 2002-03 which showed clearly that 
IMF’s level of comfort in regard to financial sector and macro-
management in EMEs was not a dependable measure of signs of macro 
or financial stability.  The limits to the support available from global 
financial architecture were all too evident, and hence a  higher weight 
for avoiding serious instability, it was felt, was warranted.     
 
Since 2004-05, there were signs of excess global liquidity being 
transmitted to India.  In India, the “lazy-banking” was moving towards 
“crazy banking” with pick-up in credit and money supply.  Pre-emptive 
actions on monetary policy-front at this stage were justified partly due 
to reasons of financial stability.  Further, the increase in oil prices was 
not totally ignored by RBI as a mere supply shock.  There was also a 
reference to early signs of overheating, indicating a preference for 
countercyclical monetary policy.   
 
The activities of financial conglomerates were expanding in India 
warranting formal mechanisms for identification and coordination 
among regulators.  The rapidly expanding activities of non-bank finance 
companies and off balance sheet exposures of banks domestically 
became a cause for concern in 2005-06.  However, process of gradual 
liberalization and deregulation continued but in a carefully calibrated 
fashion.   
 5 
The preoccupation of overall policy at this stage was global economic 
imbalances and risks arising out of very lax monetary policies, including 
rise in asset prices.  In 2005-06, it was clear that global economy was 
in a state of “stable disequilibrium” with dissonance between 
perceptions of markets and policy.  The importance of analysis of 
balance sheets of households, corporates, banks, government and 
central banks to monitor threats to financial stability was recognized at 
the sign of early symptoms of excess leverage in global financial 
markets.   
 
During 2005-06 and in particular during 2006-07, there were signs of 
exuberance in real estate and consumer credit, in addition to boom in 
equity markets in India.  At the same time, there were simultaneous 
pressures on exchange rate, interest rates and liquidity due to massive 
capital flows, despite efforts by RBI to contain it through management 
of capital account.  Hence, regulations in regard to banks, non-bank 
finance companies, money markets, derivatives, etc were tightened and 
supervisory review of select overstretched banks and non-banks 
undertaken.  The annual policy of 2006 was a turning point when the 
quality of credit gained attention.   
 
During the year 2006-07, it was clear that there were excessively 
leveraged operations in global markets along with issues of setting of 
 6trades, and ignorance on where risks lie, etc.  There were fears about 
uncertainties in trades in credit derivatives, structured products and 
their settlement.   
 
Thus, in the years leading to the global financial crisis, the focus of 
measures to counter threats to financial stability were no longer 
confined to global factors, but included domestically induced factors.  
Provisioning for standard assets and risk weights increased sensitive 
sectors.  The “excesses” of domestic financial sector in a way reflecting 
the excesses of global factors, warranted several monetary tightening,  
regulatory, and supervisory measures which were resented by market 
participants.  They were supported by preference of political economy to 
growth and short term gains.   
 
Since the beginning of 2007-08, the anticipation of threats to financial 
stability, due to both domestic and external factors was unambiguous.  
Further, determination to counter threats to financial stability through 
what had been described as “unconventional measures” was 
demonstrated in speeches and in monetary policy statements.  In 
addition, contingency plans in the event of sudden and significant 
reversal of capital flows were prepared and hinted at in first week of 
January 2008, indicating a set of detailed precautionary measures.   
 
 7What were the challenges faced by policy-making in the process of 
promoting growth, containing inflation and taking precautionary 
measures against instability? 
 
It is difficult to consider macro-stability and financial stability as distinct 
and different.  Often, weaknesses in macro situation may warrant 
greater stress on stability in financial sector, and vice-versa.  The 
sources of instability cannot be easily predicted, but continuous 
vigilance helps the process of identification.   
 
A major challenge in administering the regulatory restrictions on 
‘exuberance’ and ‘excesses’ in financial markets was to make a 
distinction between ‘growth enhancing’ credit and finance, and 
‘speculation enhancing’ ones.  The distinction required discrimination 
based on end-use and products, virtually amounting to selective credit-
controls; and often judgments were required on instruments and 
magnitudes of interventions.  In brief, operationally, pursuit of financial 
stability could not be divorced from promoting of development, both for 
short-term and over medium-term.   
 
Yet another challenge was the calibration of pace and extent of reform 
in financial sector on the basis of evolving global uncertainties and 
domestic vulnerabilities such as slow progress in fiscal consolidation and 
in removing structural rigidities in real economy.  When it was felt that 
 8domestic vulnerabilities coincide with global uncertainties, precautionary 
measures and recalibrating pace of reform financial sector were 
resorted to more vigorously.    
 
It may be observed that most of the actions taken were on the basis of 
close observation of evolving developments in macro economy, multiple 
indicators of such developments and also practices of market 
participants.  Anything out of the ordinary was not necessarily a good 
innovation or a positive development but needed to be continuously 
evaluated in terms of impact on efficiency and stability, and in that, 
judgements were inevitable.   
 
It is worth noting that the design of instruments, whether Market 
Stabilisation scheme or provisioning risk weights had to explicitly 
provide their use to counter threat to stability from both excesses and 
deficiencies.  It was considered wise to keep all the tools of intervention 
on the table and insist on option to use them always and at any time.  
Keeping options by itself does not curb efficiency of markets, but its 
exercise had to be based on continuous vigilance.   
 
A wide range of tools to a central bank to intervene in the functioning of 
the financial markets, institutions, and instruments seems to have made 
the task of ensuring growth with stability.   
 
 9Financial Instability: behind or still with us?  
 
There was indeed a threat of depression when serious instability in 
financial sector in 2008 occurred.  This event was followed by recession 
in most countries leading to the current stage of uneven or multi-speed 
recovery.   
 
There are debates about the firmness or fragility of current phase of 
recovery.  There are also some academics and a few analysts who hold 
that there could be a recurrence of a financial crisis, not necessarily as 
part of such episodes that seem to recur periodically but simply as a 
consequence of the manner in which the global financial crisis was 
managed so far and its proximate causes addressed.  When an 
important market participant adds his voice to such sentiments, there is 
merit in analyzing the prospects of another crisis, as an extension or a 
fall out of the recent crisis in global finance.   
 
A report in Economic Times last week, partly sourced from Bloomberg 
reads as follows:   
 
Mark Mobius, executive chairman of Templeton Asset 
Management’s emerging markets group, said another financial 
crisis is inevitable because the causes of the previous one haven’t 
been resolved.   
 10 
“There is definitely going to be another financial crisis around the 
corner because we haven’t solved any of the things that caused 
the previous crisis,” Mobius said at the Foreign Correspondents’ 
Club of Japan in Tokyo in response to a question about price 
swings.   
 
It is useful to briefly review whether the causes have been addressed, 
assuming that the main causes relate to macro-economic imbalances; 
regulation of financial sector and global financial architecture.   
 
Macro-economic imbalances
 
There has been considerable discussion on macro-economic imbalances 
this in policy circles, and G20 has arrived at an agreement on indicators 
of macro-economic imbalances.  These include public debt, fiscal 
deficits, private savings and debt, and external imbalances composed of 
several factors including fiscal, monetary and other related policies.  
Both structural and statistical approaches are proposed to be adopted.  
The G20 has also identified countries or economies which have spillover 
effects on global economy.  It is useful to speculate how some of the 
major countries stand with reference to these criteria.   
 
 11In U.S.A., structurally, there are disturbing signs of fiscal deficit but 
current policy debate is on desirability of permitting fiscal deficit to spur 
growth.  There is also a view that any effort to contain fiscal deficit 
would warrant further monetary easing over and above QE2 with 
spillover concerns.  It is not clear as to how the stated policy of strong 
dollar would be consistent with its stand on current account deficit / 
surplus.  The outlook for U.S.A. at this stage is still mixed.  Contrary to 
the position of U.S. on fiscal stimulus, U.K. has opted for fiscal 
austerity.  Euro zone, as a whole, does not contribute to economic 
imbalance in relation to the rest of the world in terms of current account 
deficits.  However, the surpluses of Germany and deficits of the 
southern European countries warrant greater economic integration 
within the zone over the medium-term but there is still lack of clarity 
about managing the fiscal and debt sustainability issues of several 
countries.  If the route of debt restructuring of some countries, in some 
form or other is resorted to, the spillover effects on global financing 
markets are likely to be severe.  Japan has huge public debt and it can 
legitimately claim that its holders and currency are such that it has little 
spillover effect on the rest of the World.  China has committed to shift 
in policy towards increased domestic consumption, but the role of 
exchange rate in the process of correction of imbalance is still 
contentious.  In any case, such a shift cannot occur in the very short-
term.  India has a large public debt and fiscal deficit, but it will be 
difficult to establish that it has contributed or is likely to contribute to 
 12global economic imbalances on this account.  Current account deficit is 
on all accounts reasonable.  Briefly stated, there is no evidence of 
agreement on corrective policy actions and hence there could be an 
undesirable sense of unease on way forward in systemically important 
countries.    
 
No doubt, there are positive of these initiatives.  First, spillover effects 
of national policy have been recognized.  Second, the principle of 
unlevel playing field for conduct of surveillance and implicitly 
imperatives for corrective actions at national level has been accepted.  
Third, whether the peers are willing to honour peer pressure or not, is 
not yet clear, but the domestic opinions or forces that support 
responsible policies consistent with interests of global economy, do get 
strengthened through such multilateral exercises.   
 
There are several question marks on the thinking and prospects for 
unwinding of imbalances.  First, prima facie, as is evident from earlier 
narrative, indicators provide partial truths, and solutions are not self 
evident.  Second, the IMF framework, including indicators, is based on 
economic theories and models that were proved inadequate so far.  The 
recent seminar on macro-economic policies by IMF recognizes the 
limitations of current models, but the search for alternate model is still 
in progress.  Some of the areas where empirical evidence seems to 
contradict IMF framework is, openness of capital account and role of 
 13volatile flows; role of domestic savings in financing public debt; possible 
benefits of financial repression in promoting growth or managing public 
debt; structural shifts in tolerable inflation; and possible benefits of 
public sector in financial sector since financial crisis seems to be 
ownership.  Third, the dominant role of global financial markets, 
especially large financial conglomerates as also that of credit rating 
agencies with their infirmities continues.  Fourth, the most fundamental 
issue of international monetary system, and in particular reserve 
currency, remains unresolved.  There is, as yet, no market discipline 
and no rules of issue, on the issuer of dominant global reserve 
currency.   
 
There are some scholars who refer to several fundamental causes of 
global economic imbalances, and these have been in some form or 
other recognized as relevant in policy debates.  These relate to growing 
inequality and its impact on savings / investment balances, excessive 
financialisation with incentives to multiply financial transaction for the 
benefit of participants with no social value added, and lack of distinction 
between massive gross financial flows and net flows, which impart 
volatility.  These have not been addressed but one should recognize 
that their link to the causes of the crisis, are not fully established.   
 
 
 
 14Financial Sector Regulation  
 
There have been several positive developments in regard to regulation 
of financial sector.  These include reforms in bank capital and liquidity 
standards, special dispensation for systemically important financial 
institutions, attempt to regulate shadow banking and possibly 
differentiating traditional banks from others; and reform in derivatives 
markets.  Efforts have been made to reform regulatory structures, 
particularly in U.S.A., U.K. and Europe, which were centres of crisis.   
 
However, several concerns remain, and in some cases, new issues have 
arisen.  First, the new capital standards are sought to be introduced 
with a large time gap, and in some cases till 2019.  The risks to global 
economy will persist in the meantime.  Second, there are incipient 
tendencies to dilute the rigour of the standards in the operational detail 
of standards.  Third, while ‘too big to fail’ is a concern, larger financial 
conglomerates have become even larger.  Further, by recognising them 
as too large to fail, they have little incentive for strict compliance with 
regulatory discipline.  Fourth, the race to the bottom in financial 
regulation, especially between U.S.A. and U.K. has resurfaced.  Many 
large financial institutions are successfully threatening the policy-
makers and regulators that they would move out of the jurisdictions 
unless the ongoing proposals for strict regulation are diluted. They are 
also threatening that the economic recovery will be stalled due to 
 15cumulative burden being imposed on them by new regulatory 
prescriptions. Fifth, the magnitude and complexity of derivatives do not 
seem to have abated.  For example, exemptions for forex derivatives 
from being traded on exchanges, is being accorded in some 
jurisdictions.  Sixth, it is not clear whether restrictions on the pay and 
other incentives to assume risk on the part of senior managers are 
really effective, if one were to assess the current level of payment of 
bonuses, etc. despite mixed signals on employment and output.  
Legislations for severe limitations on such payments have been facing 
resistance.  Seventh, proposals for taxes that would hamper or penalize 
financial sector for causing a burden on tax payer have also been 
stalled.  Finally, major contributors to global crisis have been the 
financial intermediaries that were most active in cross border activities 
and there is little that is in the nature of restraining them or specially 
focused regulation on them. 
 
Global Financial Architecture
 
The global financial architecture was found to be somewhat inadequate 
to prevent the global financial crisis.  Immediate response to manage 
the crisis and improve the situation was in terms of revitalizing two 
institutions, which were created in the context of the Asian crisis.  
These are G20 and the Financial Stability Board.  It is hoped that these 
institutions in the revitalized form (the G20 and FSF in previous Avatar 
 16were not very successful in their mission relating to financial stability) 
would be in a position to meet the requirements of the global financial 
issues.  The G20 has been reasonably successful in ensuring global 
coordination for avoiding collapse in financial markets and depression.  
Agreement in regard to exit from measures relating to stimulus was 
more difficult. It has began efforts to moderate macro-economic 
imbalances. The issues of appropriate representation and its close 
relationship with IMF as its operating arm have been matters of 
considerable discomfort.  At this stage, therefore, its effectiveness and 
its future relationships with the IMF, World Bank and United Nations, 
which have greater multi-lateral legitimacy are still open.  Financial 
Stability Board continues to be an important technical arm.  It has 
greater representation of developing countries now.  While it could issue 
the guidelines, the actual regulation will have to be effected by the 
national authorities.   
 
Simultaneously, efforts are being made to reform multi-lateral 
institutions such as World Bank and IMF in three directions, viz., 
reducing the governance deficit, correcting ideological deficit, and 
improving the resource base.  In addition, the available instruments for 
providing liquidity have been expanded on a more assured basis.    It is 
not very clear whether these initiatives are adequate while admittedly 
they are in the right direction.   
 
 17Monetary system has been an area of considerable concern and 
recognized as such in G20.  There has been some attention and 
extensive recommendations on the subject by Stiglitz Commission, and 
the Report of the Palais-Royal Initiative group.  Fundamental differences 
still persist on basic issues such as what is monetary system and what 
is liquidity at a global level.  There is some consensus on the need to 
expand use of SDR globally.   
 
Disorderly debt-restructuring has been a fact of life in regard to many 
countries.  Stiglitz Commission has given extensive recommendations 
for orderly debt-restructuring.  The issue is gaining attention in the 
context of the difficulties faced by countries in southern Europe in 
discharging their debt obligations in a manner that is satisfactory to the 
global financial markets.   
 
To sum up, several improvements have taken place to address the 
issues of financial stability in the global economy, but there is some 
legitimate doubt about their adequacy in fully resolving the crisis that 
was triggered in 2008, and in avoiding recurrence of a similar crisis in 
the very near future.   
 
 
 
 
 18Broader Issues: 
 
(a) The current approach by global initiatives to ensure financial 
stability is based on the belief in the efficiency of globally 
agreed standards of economic policy and of regulation of 
financial sector. There is no guarantee that such globally 
acceptable standards would be optimal. For example, if we 
had such an approach ten years ago, the global economy 
would be modeled on Anglo-Saxon framework and there 
would not be different systems (China or India?) to lead a 
recovery. In brief, the advantages of diversity on policies of 
countries could contribute to stability in global economy and 
finance. Are recent initiatives undermining the value of 
diversity, in policies and systems, in ensuring financial 
stability? 
(b) A nuanced view of coordination and conflict of interest which 
discriminates between public and private sector may be worth 
exploring. To avoid conflicts of interest and ensure efficiency 
as well as accountability, arrangements like independent 
monetary authority were prescribed in the past. The lack of 
coordination in public policies in financial sector was one of 
the consequences. The private sector was allowed to expand 
to several areas in the interest of economies of scope and 
scale hoping that conflict of interest can be taken care by 
 19creation of firewalls. Obliviously they did not work. Clearly, 
incentives in public and private sector differ and hence good 
or bad consequences in terms of coordination and conflict of 
interest are different. Has there been adequate appreciation of 
this experience in designing institutions and policies so that 
there is more coordination in public sector and less scope for 
conflict of interest in private sector in financial markets?   
(c) There is ample evidence of a comprehensive capture of the 
regulatory apparatus of financial sector and political economy 
(perhaps academic too, as illustrated in the movie “Inside 
Job”). Is there a sense of comfort that they are being 
addressed now? 
(d) The design of regulation of financial structure now is oriented 
to ensure stability, the assumption being that the role of state 
should be strengthened since experience has shown markets 
are not smoothly self correcting. However, the assumption 
that market will efficiently allocate resources and bring about 
desirable developmental outcomes seems to persist, though 
empirical evidence of recent years in developing world does 
not support it. The idea that intervention by state is justified 
for ensuring stability but not necessarily for promoting growth 
suffers from contradictions. In any case, development or 
efficiency and stability are admittedly two sides of the same 
 20coin, both for public sector (state) and private sector 
(markets). 
(e) The framework of countercyclical policies advocated, 
particularly in standards of regulation, should ideally capture 
both cyclical and structural developments in the economy. 
Further, a disaggregated, and perhaps a somewhat sectional 
view of such components may be realistic, particularly for 
developing countries. Do the globally agreed guidelines 
provide for this? 
(f) Finally, are there prospects that the thinking on appropriate 
policies that has been advocated and being practiced by 
advanced economies will change dramatically after the 
consequences of the current crisis unfold? For example, the 
idea that IMF is a lender of last resort only for developing 
economies is no longer valid. That IMF would be averse to 
regional arrangements as it was in the case of Chang Mai 
initiative in Asia is no longer the norm, with its partnership in 
European Union.  Ben Bernanke conceded that excess capital 
flows to USA was also responsible for crisis in financial sector.  
Some eminent economists anticipate recourse to financial 
repression by advanced economies that have to service large 
public debt.  Some others anticipate greater tolerance to 
higher inflation as a means of reducing burden of taxation as 
 21a means of servicing high public debt. Some eminent scholars 
suggest that the function of managing public debt should 
revert to central banks.  In brief, will there be, sooner than we 
anticipate, new thinking and new practices as global norms in 
the field of policies relating to financial sector?  If so, what are 
the implications for developing countries?     
To conclude, while there may or may not be new thinking and 
new practices in central banking also in the long run, to me 
the short-run appears full of uncertainties in economic 
prospects and volatilities in financial markets.   
Perhaps, central bankers of South Asia have to, as Oliver Cromwell did, 
believe in God (or G20 or IMF or World Bank, as you wish), but keep 
their powder dry.   
 
***** 
 
 22