Co-Operative Banks in India :
Strengthening through Corporate Governance
by
Vepa Kamesam
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India 1
I deem it a privilege to have been invited to address this gathering on a topic of tremendous
relevance, focus and significance in today’s context. Needless to say, for the co-operative
banks in India these are transitional times. Never before has the need for restoring customer
confidence in the co-operative sector been felt so much. Never before has the issue of good
governance in the co-operative banks assumed such criticality. The literature on corporate
governance in its wider connotation covers a range of issues such as protection of
shareholders’ rights, enhancing shareholders’ value, Board issues including its composition
and role, disclosure requirements, integrity of accounting practices, the control systems, in
particular internal control systems. Corporate governance especially in the co-operative
sector has come into sharp focus because more and more co-operative banks in India, both in
urban and rural areas, have experienced grave problems in recent times which has in a way
threatened the profile and identity of the entire co-operative system. These problems include
mismanagement, financial impropriety, poor investment decisions and the growing distance
between members and their co-operative society.
2. The purpose and objectives of co-operatives provide the framework for co-operative
corporate governance. Co-operatives are organized groups of people and jointly managed and
democratically controlled enterprises. They exist to serve their members and depositors and
produce benefits for them. Co-operative corporate governance is therefore about ensuring co-
operative relevance and performance by connecting members, management and the
employees to the policy, strategy and decision-making processes.
3. In fact, the very definition of corporate governance stems from its organic link with
the entire gamut of activities having direct or indirect influence on the financial health of
corporate entities. For the Nobel Prize-winning economist Milton Friedman, who was one of
the first to attempt a definition, corporate governance is to conduct business in accordance
with owner or shareholders’ desires which generally will be to make as much money as
possible while conforming to the basic rules of the society embodied in law and local
customs. In subsequent definitions, the scope of corporate governance has got expanded.
While some experts say corporate governance means doing everything better, to improve
relations between companies and their shareholders, to encourage people to think long-term,
to ensure that information needs of all shareholders are met and to ensure that executive
management is monitored properly in the interest of shareholders, the Former President of
World Bank, Mr. James Wolfensohn had said that corporate governance is about promoting
corporate fairness, transparency and accountability. A more comprehensive definition has
come from the Organisation of Economic Co-operation & Development <OECD> which
identifies corporate governance as the system by which business corporations are directed
and controlled. Here the corporate governance structure specifies the distribution of rights
and responsibilities among different participants in the corporation, such as the Board,
managers, shareholders and other stakeholders and spells out the rules and procedures for
making decisions on corporate affairs. By doing this, not only does it provide the structure
through which the company objectives are set, it also provides the means of attaining these
objectives and monitoring performance.         2
4. It will certainly not be out of place here to recount how issues relating to corporate
governance and corporate control have come to the fore the world over in the recent past. The
seeds of modern corporate governance were probably sown by the Watergate scandal in the
USA. Subsequent investigations by US regulatory and legislative bodies highlighted control
failures that had allowed several major corporations to make illegal political contributions
and bribe government officials. While these developments in the US stimulated debate in the
UK, a spate of scandals and collapses in that country in the late 1980s and early 1990s led
shareholders and banks to worry about their investments. Several companies in UK which
saw explosive growth in earnings in the ’80s ended the decade in a memorably disastrous
manner. Importantly, such spectacular corporate failures arose primarily out of poorly
managed business practices.
5. This debate was driven partly by the subsequent enquiries into corporate governance
(most notably the Cadbury Report) and partly by extensive changes in corporate structure. In
May 1991, the London Stock Exchange set up a Committee under the chairmanship of Sir
Arian Cadbury to help raise the standards of corporate governance and the level of
confidence in financial reporting and auditing by setting out clearly what it sees as the
respective responsibilities of those involved and what it believes is expected of them. The
Committee investigated accountability of the Board of Directors to shareholders and to the
society. It submitted its report and associated ‘code of best practices’ in December 1992
wherein it spelt out the methods of governance needed to achieve a balance between the
essential powers of the Board of Directors and their proper accountability. Being a pioneering
report on corporate governance, it would perhaps be in order to make a brief reference to its
recommendations which are in the nature of guidelines relating to, among other things, the
Board of Directors and Reporting & Control.
6. The Cadbury Report stipulated that the Board of Directors should meet regularly,
retain full and effective control over the company and monitor the executive management.
There should be a clearly accepted division of responsibilities at the head of the company
which will ensure balance of power and authority so that no individual has unfettered powers
of decision. The Board should have a formal schedule of matters specifically reserved to it for
decisions to ensure that the direction and control of the company is firmly in its hands. There
should also be an agreed procedure for Directors in the furtherance of their duties to take
independent professional advice.
7. On Reporting & Control, the Cadbury Report recommended that the Board should
ensure that an objective and professional relationship is maintained with the auditors. It is the
Board’s duty to present a balanced and understandable assessment of the company’s position,
the report said. The Board should establish an Audit Committee with written terms of
reference which deal clearly with its authority and duties. The Directors should explain their
responsibility for preparing the accounts next to a statement by the auditors about their
reporting responsibilities. The Directors should also report on the effectiveness of the
company’s system of internal control. The report also stipulated that the Directors should
report that the business is a going concern with supporting assumptions or qualifications as
necessary.
8. The Cadbury Report generated a lot of interest in India. The issue of corporate
governance was studied in depth and dealt with by the Confederation of Indian Industries
(CII), Associated Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM) and Securities and
Exchange Board of India (SEBI). These studies reinforced the Cadbury Report’s focus on the
crucial role of the Board and the need for it to observe a Code of Best Practices. Co-operative
banks as corporate entities possess certain unique characteristics. Paradoxical as it may3
sound, evolution of co-operatives in India as peoples’ organizations rather than business
enterprises adopting professional managerial systems has hindered growth of professionalism
in co-operatives and proved to be a neglected area in their evolution.
9. Professionalism reflects the co-existence of high level of skills and standards in
performing duties entrusted to an individual. The absence of a proper system of placement
and skill upgradation inputs constrain professional management in co-operative banks.
Though there is a system of training in place in many co-operative banks, attempts are
seldom made to match them with the current and future staff requirements. It is desirable that
the training programmes encompass skill upgradation and aptitude development in full
measure. It is also necessary to keep the staff sufficiently motivated through periodic job
rotation, job enrichment and recognition of performance. The co-operative banks should
indeed work like professional organizations on sound managerial systems in tune with the
needs of the time taking care of future projections of requirements to retain and improve their
market share and identity in the long run. It is in this context that professionalism and
accountability of the banks’ boards assume such critical significance.
10. Regulators are external pressure points for good corporate governance. Mere
compliance with regulatory requirements is not however an ideal situation in itself. In fact,
mere compliance with regulatory pressures is a minimum requirement of good corporate
governance and what are required are internal pressures, peer pressures and market pressures
to reach higher than minimum standards prescribed by regulatory agencies. RBI’s approach
to regulation in recent times has some features that would enhance the need for and
usefulness of good corporate governance in the co-operative sector. The transparency aspect
has been emphasized by expanding the coverage of information and timeliness of such
information and analytical content. Importantly, deregulation and operational freedom must
go hand in hand with operational transparency. In fact, the RBI Governor’s April 2002
Monetary & Credit Policy announcements have made it clear that with the abolition of
minimum lending rates for co-operative banks, it will be incumbent on these banks to make
the interest rates charged by them transparent and known to all customers. Banks have
therefore been asked to publish the minimum and maximum interest rates charged by them
and display this information in every branch. Disclosure and transparency are thus key pillars
of a corporate governance framework because they provide all the stakeholders with the
information necessary to judge whether their interests are being taken care of. We in RBI see
transparency and disclosure as an important adjunct to the supervisory process as they
facilitate market discipline of banks.
11. Another area which requires focused attention is greater transparency in the balance
sheets of co-operative banks. The commercial banks in India are now required to disclose
accounting ratios relating to operating profit, return on assets, business per employee, NPAs,
etc. as also maturity profile of loans, advances, investments, borrowings and deposits. The
issue before us now is how to adapt similar disclosures suitably to be captured in the audit
reports of co-operative banks. RBI had advised Registrars of Co-operative Societies of the
State Governments in 1996 that the balance sheet and profit & loss account should be
prepared based on prudential norms introduced as a sequel to Financial Sector Reforms and
that the statutory/departmental auditors of co-operative banks should look into the
compliance with these norms. Auditors are therefore expected to be well-versed with all
aspects of the new guidelines issued by RBI and ensure that the profit & loss account and
balance sheet of co-operative banks are prepared in a transparent manner and reflect the true
state of affairs. Auditors should also ensure that other necessary statutory provisions and4
appropriations out of profits are made as required in terms of Co-operative Societies Act /
Rules of the state concerned and the bye-laws of the respective institutions.
12. Appropriate internal control systems become even more critical in the context of the
growing emphasis on diversification of business products as the prime need at all levels in
co-operative credit institutions.  It is indeed necessary for co-operative banks to devote
adequate attention to maximizing their returns on every unit of resources through an effective
funds management strategy and mechanism. One prime component of the investment
portfolio of the co-operative banks which has attracted a lot of attention - unfortunately for all
the wrong reasons - is their transaction in government securities. So much so that it has even
triggered the holding of today’s Convention.
13. The financial sector reforms in India have sought to achieve, among other things,
improvement in the financial health and competitive capabilities by means of prescription of
prudential norms. The co-operative banks have also thus been put under the prudential norms
regime to bring about the desirable level of transparency in their balance sheets. While urban
co-operative banks have been subjected to income recognition, asset classification,
provisioning and other related norms in a phased manner beginning April 1992, these
prudential norms including asset classification and provisioning (excluding the capital
adequacy ratio) were made applicable to the SCBs and DCCBs from the year 1996-97 and
extended to ARDBs from 1997-98.
14. RBI had also issued comprehensive guidelines transactions in securities to all co-
operative banks - both urban and rural - as early as in September 1992. Detailed guidelines
have been given therein on transactions through brokers, Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL)
facility, issue of Bank Receipts, internal control systems, audit and review systems, etc. As
per the guidelines in force, each bank is required to formulate an investment policy, with the
approval of its Board. Banks have been advised that all transactions in Government Securities
for which SGL facility is available should be put through SGL accounts only. Certain
discipline has also been introduced for transactions through SGL accounts for minimizing
settlement risks through a framework for penal action against bouncing of SGL transfer
forms for want of sufficient balance in the SGL account or current account.
15. Banks were advised that only brokers registered with NSE or BSE or OTCEI should
be utilized for acting as intermediary. If the deal is put through a broker, the role of the broker
should be restricted to that of bringing the two parties to the transaction together. The
settlement of the transaction, namely, both funds settlement and security settlement should be
made directly between the counter parties. With a view to ensuring that a disproportionate
volume of transactions is not routed through one or a few broker, a prudential ceiling of 5%
of the total transactions (both purchases and sales) has been prescribed for routing
transactions through an individual broker. In case any bank is required to exceed the
prudential ceiling of 5% for any broker, the bank is required to inform the Board indicating
the reasons therefor post-facto.  Banks have also been advised to have proper internal control
measures for monitoring the transactions in government securities.
16. Regulatory policy can however only set the broad contours of an appropriate
investment strategy. It is no guarantee for articulation and implementation of commercially
sound investment decisions by lending institution(s). Even the most comprehensive
regulatory framework and effective supervisory system need not be a foolproof mechanism
against a pliant management acting in collusion with unscrupulous clients. Supervision is
only periodic and therefore it cannot be a substitute for effective and continuous internal
control backed by an independent and efficacious audit system. Towards this, it is imperative
to have in place Audit Committees of the Board independent of the management in co-5
operative banks. It may well be recalled that with the extension of the Banking Regulations
Act to the urban co-operative banks in 1966 and deposit insurance in 1971, people’s
confidence in the co-operative sector had taken a big leap forward. So much so that today the
non-member deposits in urban banks far exceed member deposits. Nothing would be more
tragic if we fritter away these advantages and allow indiscipline and lack of commitment in
these banks make people’s trust in the co-operative sector a casualty.
17. One important issue that has engaged much attention in the recent past is the duality
of control over co-operative banks. In terms of the Co-operative Societies Acts of respective
States, the Registrar of Co-operative Societies was the sole regulator and supervisor of all the
societies registered in his State including societies carrying on banking business. With the
application of BR Act, 1949 (AACS) to co-operative banks, this position has since changed.
While RBI now regulates and supervises banking activities carried on by urban co-operative
societies, supervision of State Co-operative Banks and District Central Co-operative Banks is
carried out by NABARD.  The core principles of supervision in relation to co-operative
banks have thus to be formulated and implemented by RBI in respect of UCBs and by
NABARD in respect of SCBs & DCCBs and there is an emergent need to constantly beef up
the supervisory system through proper on-site monitoring and adequate off-site surveillance.
We also need to analyse and pick up early warning signals, if any, in respect of any such
irregularities in the investment portfolio of these banks from the periodic review reports on
such transactions which are received from them. There is also an urgent need for clarity in
defining the roles of various control institutions by streamlining processes, procedures, etc.
for removing overlapping of controls over cooperative banks presently vested with State
Govts., RBI and NABARD, as the may be. It is in this context that the Governor’s Monetary
& Credit Policy announcement in April 2001 had stressed the need for a separate regulatory
agency for the co-operative banks. This issue is being debated in various quarters.
18. Credit institutions are linked to each other through a complex chain of inter-bank
relationships which - as recent instances have showed - in any event of difficulty become
mechanisms for spread of the contagion effect. Signs of financial mismanagement in an
institution or a group of institutions regardless of the reasons is liable to set off similar
problems in other institutions and open serious risks in the financial system. It is in this
context that good corporate governance assumes critical importance. Power and decision-
making in co-operative banks are all too often concentrated at the top in too few hands. Co-
operative performance has therefore been for a long time characterized by lack of
participation and sense of involvement. Active members who feel that they are part of an
organization that has goals in harmony with their own and clear roles for constructively
engaged, competent governing bodies and management would be a powerful force to build
co-operative identity and excellence. It is perhaps time that the State Governments
refashioned management in co-operative banks by picking up threads of good corporate
governance.
19. Success of economic decisions depends after all on the human resources at the
disposal of any organization. A change is needed today in the co-operative banks which is
built on confidence in human capital - the most important of all resources - in commitment,
creativity and innovation brought about by proactive management, membership and
employees. Strong corporate governance that takes its obligations seriously can truly be a
source of strength to the management. The ability to capture knowledge and wisdom gives
co-operative banks their competitive advantage. A prerequisite is that participants from all
parts of a co-operative organization know and understand its purpose, core values and
visions.6
20. In the years to come, the Indian financial system will grow not only in size but also in
complexity as the forces of competition gain further momentum and financial markets
acquire greater depth. I can assure you that the policy environment will remain supportive of
healthy growth and development with accent on more operational flexibility as well as
greater prudential regulation and supervision. The real success of our financial sector reforms
will however depend primarily on the organizational effectiveness of the banks, including co-
operative banks, for which initiatives will have to come from the banks themselves. It is for
the co-operative banks themselves to build on the synergy inherent in the co-operative
structure and stand up for their unique qualities. With elements of good corporate
governance, sound investment policy, appropriate internal control systems, better credit risk
management, focus on newly-emerging business areas like micro finance, commitment to
better customer service, adequate mechanisation and proactive policies on house-keeping
issues, co-operative banks will definitely be able to grapple with these challenges and convert
them into opportunities. I am sure all of you will bring your experience and knowledge to
bear upon the afore-discussed issues in course of the deliberations in the next two days.
1
 Inaugural Address delivered on July 5, 2002 by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
at the National Convention of Urban Co-operative Banks : Strengthening through Corporate Governance at
Mumbai, organized by Academy of Corporate Governance, Hyderabad supported by Administrative Staff
College of India, Hyderbad.