Indian Banking of Tomorrow *
by
Vepa Kamesam,
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
It is a proud privilege to be present at a conference which not only provides an
introspection of the way things have gone by but also provides a glimpse into the near
future – so that banks could plan their future course of action accordingly.  I am indeed
privileged to make the lead presentation on a topic close to my heart – on managing
change for the better. Although my topic reads as ‘Indian Banking of tomorrow’ let me
hasten to add that the tomorrow is already here today. If this paradox has to be
understood better, I must dwell on certain aspects which I believe would kick start the
much needed changes in the Indian Banking industry.
2. The changes staring in the face of bankers relate to the fundamental way of
banking – which is undergoing a rapid transformation in the world of today in response to
the forces of competition, productivity and efficiency of operations, reduced operating
margins, better asset / liability management, risk management, anytime and anywhere
banking. The major challenge faced by banks is to protect the falling margins due to the
impact of competition. Falling profit margins call for increasing volumes so as to result in
better operating results for banks. This is best achieved by exploiting the benefits of
technology, which facilitates handling increased volumes at higher levels of efficiency
and enhancing customer relationships. It is in this context that there is an imperative need
for not mere technology upgradation but also its integration with the general way of
functioning of banks to give them an edge in respect of services provided to their
constituents, better housekeeping, optimising the use of funds and building up of MIS for
decision making and better management of assets and liabilities and the risks assumed
which in turn have a direct impact on the balance sheets of banks as a whole. Technology
has demonstrated potential to change methods of marketing, advertising, designing,
pricing and distributing financial products and services and cost savings in the form of an
electronic, self-service product-delivery channel. These challenges call for a new, more
dynamic, aggressive and challenging work culture to meet the demands of customer
relationships, product differentiation, brand values, reputation, corporate governance and
regulatory prescriptions. Technology holds the key to the future success of Indian Banks.
3. Winning in the new economy depends crucially on strategically effective andintelligent management of marketing and customer relationships. The first and foremost
important shift required by banks is to treat the customer as a customer of the bank and
not as a customer of any particular branch. Technology enables the customer "help
himself" through PC banking, ATM banking and telephonic banking and the banks to
fine tuning their marketing strategies to the right targets for the right products and at the
right time. Indeed, the competitive edge that a bank would require to just retain its
existing customers would be to provide such innovative services which offer customers
the convenience of transacting from anywhere, at any time and using delivery channels
more suitable for them. Therefore, the imperative need would be to inculcate an
attitudinal change in the mindset of bankers – towards providing services through such
innovative, simple and secure means. However it my be borne in mind that technology
dependent customer relationship management need not necessarily be 'cold' and
'mechanical' but must carry an individual dimension displaying personalised uniqueness,
relevance and accuracy. The intangible factors of conduct such as likeable-ness,
timeliness and creativity will reflect vital characteristics of corporate culture and enhance
customer satisfaction.
4. Another change which is taking place – slowly but at a steady pace is the use of
alternatives to cash by most of the constituents of banks. The large scale use of cards for
settlement of financial transactions – whether credit cards or debit cards or even the new
smart cards – proves beyond doubt that cash is slowly losing the prominence of the
yesteryears. It is gratifying to note that banks are quickly adapting themselves to provide
for non-cash based services too. This development has, however, to be looked at from an
opportunity for banks to cash in on certain invisible benefits. It is a recognised fact that
the cost of servicing a transaction conducted through an Automated Teller Machine or
through an electronic mode such as the Internet – as in the case of Internet Banking – is
substantially less than a physical service to a customer from a counter of a bank. The
need of the hour is therefore, to encourage the wide spread usage of such cost effective
payment modes. The proliferation of ATMs and the network of ATMs – the Swadhan –
are all but indicators of the initiatives of banks in this direction. With the cost of handling
cash and the associated risks being an inherent part of the cash based society, non-cash
based payment systems offer an excellent choice for reduced costs to banks thereby
resulting in better overall financial results. Such efforts need to be augmented and
consolidation of these would result in better results of the banking sector as a whole.
25. For the corporate customer, funds availability at the place of its deployment is an
important requirement. Most of the banks have already put in place, Cash Management
Products which meet this objective and that funds are transferred from many parts of the
country to the preferred location of the customer. I must add here that this requirement
would grow manifold and a centralised facility for operation on cash balances held across
many locations may have to be provided for by banks. It is in this context that
centralisation of the accounts of banks comes to the rescue and provides for the
requirements of efficient cash management by constituents of banks.
6. The technology initiative calls for attention to certain aspects which would have a
direct bearing on their functioning such as, standardisation of hardware, operating
systems, systems and application software to facilitate inter-connectivity of systems
across branches, security to ensure confidentiality and integrity of transactions, business
process re-engineering for holistic benefits of computerisation for the customer, the staff
and management and development of human resources. With movement of funds taking
place electronically between different accounts of customers requirements relating to
security would require paradigm shift and various techniques such as digital signatures,
certification etc., will assume significance. All these would be added requirements and
the well-established practices of today must co-exist with the new requirements. An
effective security policy with the objective of protecting data, information and eventually,
the economic value of the organization, supplemented by education and training of staff
in these areas would have to be put in place and in these areas. Continued security would
have to be ensured by periodical audits and assuduously guarding against computer
crime. The Reserve Bank has already provided detailed guidelines in this regard. I may
draw your attention to the issues of security discussed by the the Basle Committee of
Banking Supervisors in its document " Risk Management for Electronic Banking and
Electronic Money Activities" (March 1998).
7. The banks would be under pressure to increase profitability and explore avenues
for new business by providing new and innovative products, enhancement of efficiency
and reduction in costs. Traditional sectors of the economy, such as agriculture and small-
scale industry are themselves reorienting themselves to meet the demands of the
Information Age. This would spur the need for a re-look at the type of appraisal of
functioning of these sectors and unlock the business potential especially in areas like
agro-processing Infrastructure sector, long term financing, structured finance, issuance of
asset backed/mortgage backed securities, distribution of insurance products,
3bancassurance etc,. While a trained eye and a shift to the lateral thinking would help in
the identification of the opportunities, the pricing strategies would have to be backed by
risk assessment methodologies. Technology would play a pivotal role here too by
providing solutions in the form of data warehousing and analysis for decision support.
8. Considerations of financial sector stability would gradually strengthen prudential
norms relating to capital adequacy, income recognition, asset classification, provisioning
requirements to reach the standard of international best practices. The accounting and
disclosure standards would also require to be enhanced. The supervisory practices would
undergo a shift to become   more risk focussed calling upon banks to have resilient MIS
to meet regulatory requirements. With the progress in liberalisation in banking and
financial sectors, the increasing sophistication and specialisation, emergence of a pure
inter-bank call/notice and term money market, introduction of Real Time Gross
Settlement (RTGS), funds would flow freely from one market to another leading to better
integration of the domestic financial markets among themselves, and with international
financial markets as well requiring the banks to adopt strategies to benefit out of the
developments which would be possible with a technology thrust.
9. Indian banks have always proved beyond doubt their adaptability to change and I
am sure it would be possible for them to mould themselves into agile and resilient
organizations by adopting fine-tuned customer relationship management strategies,
operations based on asset liability and risk management systems, the required
technological capabilities and developing the human resources to meet the challenges of
the paradigm shift.
* Lead Presentation at the Technical Session II – Indian Banking Paradigm Shift – Functional Aspect at the
BECON 2002, on January 15, 2002 made by Shri V.K.Sharma, Regional Director, RBI, Kolkata on behalf
of Shri Kamesam who could not be present in person.
4