March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
*
Understanding Reforms
Y.V. REDDY
I have great pleasure in welcoming you weak economic reform ten years ago, to a
on behalf of Finance Minister, Mr. Jaswant strong consensus for a stronger than before
Singh, on behalf of Reserve Bank of India reform; and this happened smoothly over
and, on my own behalf.  India has been several electoral events, both at State and
playing active role in researching and debating Central levels.  The financial markets did not
issues relating to development, particularly in turn unduly volatile during these electoral
the context of developing nations.  We believe events.  This shows, I believe, the strength,
that holding of the Global Development the resilience, and the stability of the political
Netowrk (GDN) Annual Conference in India is system.  Perhaps one should make a
a tribute to our approach to reform, and is distinction between contextual political stability
also a recognition of the need to continue with and stability of political system, the system
debating on policies with open mind.  It is stability being more conducive to reform.
most appropriate that the complex issue of
The second issue relates to financial
“Understanding Reform” is being addressed
markets. Indian experience shows that
by a global gathering of researchers, policy
domestic financial markets are varied in
makers and institutions.  With your permission,
different developing countries, and actual
I will mention a few issues in understanding
responses of international financial markets
of reform in India.
to a developing country seldom fit the
The first issue relates to political economy assumptions behind the mainstream
considerations. India has the unique distinction economic thinking.  So, while we do
of practicing, with some amount of understand theory and use it as a good tool,
doggedness, freedom of speech and political care is taken in policy to avoid ideological or
freedom in an extremely diverse society and dogmatic approach to reform. The
polity.  In India, compared to most other accountability of policy-maker in reforms in
countries, the electoral cycles have not India is essentially to domestic constituency
significantly impacted economic policy cycles, i.e., to domestic political economy, intellectual
though political debates try to highlight atmosphere within the country; the state of
differences among political parties, especially markets in the country; and  perceptions of
on burden sharing during reform period.  We the media in the country, while at the same
have moved, from a strong consensus for time being sensitive  to global responses to
Introductory remarks by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India, welcoming Dr. Amartya Sen at Global
*
Development Network (GDN) at New Delhi on January 1, 2004.
301March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Indian reforms.  A deep understanding of this of Indian Industry (CII) in Hyderabad a few
aspect,  generally described in literature as weeks ago.  That gave us one view of reform.
“country context” perhaps requires not only We had meetings of World Social Forum a few
intellect but also sensitivity and empathy. days ago in Mumbai, and they gave us several
other views of development and reform.  The
The third issue relates to role of
Global Development Network will have its
economists in public policy. All economic ideas
deliberations here which will also give several
need not be economists’ ideas.  The role of
views of reforms.  The unique feature of India’s
economists in government is very complex,
reforms is that we play host to all views and
and we had the good fortune of having
chart a course  that appears most suitable to
several  distinguished economists associated
the country, recognising that reforms, in the
with reform – Professor Manmohan Singh,
ultimate analysis do not flow from the top but
Dr. Rangarajan and Dr. Bimal Jalan, to name
have to be understood, and  absorbed in the
a few of my predecessors in the Reserve
minds and hearts of the people – through their
Bank. What are the unique qualities that
freewill.
helped them lead the reforms in India?  First,
personal and professional integrity; second, And I will conclude with a few words about
capacity to make appropriate value the distinguished speaker. Dr. Amartya Sen
judgements consistent with national ethos; is not merely a great son of India, not just a
third, and above all, willingness to appreciate nobel laureate in economics, not just an
the non-economists’ views on matters relating outstanding intellectual but and above all a
to reform.  All of them have a broader scholar with a heart.  I believe that reform
perspective of what governance of a country process in India happens to capture some
in a democracy is about and economic reform of the ideas that Professor Sen articulated
is one, very important, but certainly not the in his book “Development as Freedom”. We
sole end of good governance.  Perhaps, the are honoured today, Sir, to be able to hear
word “development” as we understand your words of wisdom that blends high
encompasses both, the means and the ends. intellect and compassionate heart.
The fourth issue relates to the diverse May I express deep debt of gratitude to
dimensions of reform. We had meetings of you, Sir, and also welcome heartily all the
World Economic Forum alongwith Confederation distinguished participants who are here today.
302