March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
*
Capital Flows and Indian Policy Response
Y.V. REDDY
After such an illuminating lecture by Mumbai a couple of days ago for the meeting.
Prof. Krueger and a very lively discussion, I And we are going to meet Mrs. Krueger
would with your permission, dispense with the tomorrow in RBI. Thus, we would be able to
formality of a formal address. However, as is have advantage of understanding diverse
expected of me, I will make a few comments. opinions. That is normally what India believes
in and from the days of Buddha, India has
At the outset, I should confess the main
followed the philosophy of preferring the
reasons for my being here. It is out of my
middle-path. We have imbibed it in our
personal affection, great respect for
policies as well, and have done reasonably
scholarship and admiration for the leadership
well in managing the economy since 1991
as well as diplomatic skills of Prof. Krueger,
when the IMF had to come to our rescue.
that I made it a point to be here. Of course,
Balancing is the crux of middle path and
as the Chairman of the Governing Council
requires an awareness of theory as well as
of NIBM, it is also my duty to be here when
international practice. While theory is indeed
there is such a distinguished visitor. I am
important, at the same time, one should not
fulfilling my responsibilities as Chairman in
become a prisoner of any ideology. Although
several ways; have met the NIBM faculty for
this non-ideological approach or preference
an hour in the forenoon and hope to meet
to pragmatism may create some confusion
and interact with the young students here at
on occasions, even in our own minds in
2.30 pm. Apart from these reasons, being
some ways, it also helps and gives us a
here also gives me an opportunity to be a
certain amount of resilience to the process
little more free in whatever I say, as I can
of change in a complex, uncertain and
claim I was just being an academic and not
dynamic setting.
Governor, RBI. So in case some media is
present and they quote me, I also keep the
While Prof. Krueger’s talk has given
liberty of saying that I was indulging in
some boost to our ‘feel good factor’ she has
academic discourses and not in policy-
at the same time indicated the type of things
statements.
that should be done if we have to feel better,
such as in the area of public debt. We take
You must have heard that we had the
the advice very seriously. I also agree that
World Social Forum meeting in Mumbai. Prof.
the most ideal time to move forward with the
Joseph Stiglitz was a distinguished visitor to
Presidential Comments by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India on the speech “Intolerable Surge?
*
International Capital Flows and the Indian Policy Response” delivered by Ms. Anne O. Krueger, First Deputy
Managing Director, IMF at National Institute of Bank Management (NIBM), Pune on January 21, 2004.
313March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Very often, there may be broad
reform is during good times because good
intellectual agreement on where to go but, the
times are generally associated with progress
problem often is ‘how’ to go. Here, we will
on several fronts. So, adjustments in terms
continue to adopt the middle path. Basically
of burden sharing of the reforms are easier
there are two aspects to the macroeconomics
in a growth process than in a crisis situation.
of reforms: the monetary and fiscal policy and
So in that sense, I would reinforce Prof.
the players are RBI and Government.
Krueger’s point that good times are ideal
Correspondingly, there are two dominant
times to move forward in the reforms
factors in proceeding with the reform; first is
because it is easier to reconcile the differing
how to avoid social or political disruption,
perceptions and differing interests in regard
which is the main concern for Government
to burden sharing during the process of
and second is how to avoid the adverse
transition. And in fact one can see different
consequences of extreme market volatility in
segments of India actually benefiting through
the process of reforms which is the main
liberalisation - with the highly skilled going
concern for RBI. Over a period, therefore,
to USA, the not-so-skilled going to Middle
there should be a social consciousness to
East and semi-skilled deriving the benefit of
accept the logic of reforms and also the
outsourcing through the computers. So it is
markets should be developed enough to be
different generations as well as people of
able to handle the volatility that may be
different skills that are able to take advantage
involved in the process. In fact, you will find
of globalisation. In this context, we certainly
a reflection of this extremely difficult balancing
endorse the view that the signs of revival of
act even in matters related to interest rates.
protectionism in the world particularly among
industrialised economies are extremely
As Prof. Krueger rightly pointed out,
disturbing.
capital inflows play a very important role in
capturing the benefits of globalisation, and in
In emphasising the advantages of
fact, our own assessment is that it is not so
deregulation, globalisation and economic
much the quantity but the quality that is
reforms, a word of caution is necessary; that
making the difference. In the old two-gap
for a society like India, which is complex and
theory, we thought, it is the quantity of money
diverse, comprising different states with
that counts. We are now conscious that it is
different levels of development, social
the technological and managerial skills, the
disruption has to be avoided. The total cost
work culture, and the synergies accompanying
of the social or political disruption or market
capital flows that seem to give a lot more
disruption has to be weighed against the flow
contribution to growth. Even with regard to
of benefits whenever we talk of economic
portfolio flows from Foreign Institutional
reforms. So in that sense again, it involves
Investors (FIIs), the way in which FIIs assess
balancing between benefits over a period
market practices in stock exchanges have
and costs of immediate disruptions.
enhanced our own practices and skills among
314March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
participants to global standards. So one has agree with Prof. Krueger, and I think it has
to look at the capital flows in a broader sense been recognised by the Tarapore Committee
rather than as mere numbers and in any case Report on Capital Account Convertibility also,
the issue has to be evaluated in the country that there is a greater comfort for more rapid
context with a medium-term perspective. In capital account liberalisation when the fiscal
this connection, we believe that of late, there deficit is reasonably under control. So, though
is strong universal endorsement of our policy our financial sector is perhaps a lot more
of calibrated capital account liberalisation. resilient and more efficient now than other
Although the pace of liberalisation required comparable countries, as Governor RBI, I
might be debatable, we feel that there is an would not like to take too many risks on the
agreement on the need for some calibration, financial sector. Therefore, taking an
and Prof. Krueger also confirmed this today. integrated view of the domestic financial as
well as the fiscal situation and the imperatives
Prof. Krueger has also made a very
of the international financial architecture, our
good point about the importance of prudential
carefully calibrated capital account
regulations in the financial sector. In fact, to
liberalisation precisely captures this objective.
give an example, you would have noticed the
recent liberalisation of the external commercial On the question whether the
borrowings. The whole process of permitting international financial architecture is in a
such external debt may be either through the position to give us comfort if we get into or
automatic route or non-automatic route, but happen to have a problem, there are two
slowly the automatic route is being expanded aspects. I entirely agree with Prof. Krueger
and the non-automatic route reduced. Again, that the resilience of the world today to handle
in the capital account apart from the their economies and the private capital market
government’s there are three balance sheets has improved enormously since 1997.
that we take into account whether for residents Government’s macro policies, and approaches
or non-residents: The balance sheet of the of international financial institutions as well as
households, the corporates, and the financial the resilience of the markets have improved.
intermediaries. Though in theory, everything But the risks are not eliminated. They are
may be integrated, in our phase of mitigated to some extent though not to the
development, definitely these three are distinct extent needed for countries like India. So we
in terms of their immediate reactions to market have to take into account the possible risks.
forces. That is the reason, the recent External Indian public policy also takes into account
Commercial Borrowings (ECB) policy makes the geo-political considerations which do
a clear distinction between financial influence the comfort that international
intermediaries and corporates. So, depending financial architecture provides to a specific
on the situation and the nature of balance country in times of crises. This requires a
sheets, one has to define the capital account continuous assessment of the degree or
convertibility. In this context, definitely I would extent of risks that can be taken by any
315March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
the years ahead the debt dynamics can be a
country’s public policy, the capital account
bigger problem for developed countries also.
convertibility has to be packaged within that
Then we are going to have a situation where
overall contextual framework. Therefore, even
we have to revisit the old hypothesis that the
non-domestic economic factors figure as
benefit of globalisation is that capital will flow
inputs in determining the pace and the nature
from developed countries to developing
of capital account liberalisation.
countries to fill the gap between investment
Exchange rate management is again
needs for growth and domestic savings. It is
one of those cases where we totally practice
quite possible that capital can go from
what we preach. We were one of the earliest
developing countries to developed countries
to accept, as advised by Rangarajan
as is seen to be happening in a limited sense
Committee in 1992-93 the principle that the
between Asia and USA now. So the fact
exchange rate should be flexible. In fact, it is
remains that public debt is an important issue.
determined by demand and supply but the
And it has to be handled over the medium
critical question is where does flexibility stop
term and in the global context. The sooner
and volatility begin. That line keeps on
the process starts and is brought under
changing depending on the country context,
reasonable level, the better it is in shaping
especially the views relating to behaviour of
the universal or unanimous perceptions of all
domestic as well as international financial
those concerned. Having said this, I would
markets, and in particular the currency
certainly agree with Prof. Krueger that there
markets. In the last ten years, we have been
is no imminent crisis or problem in India, but
avoiding volatility and also moving to greater
even the most remote case of a threat to
flexibility to the extent the policy and state of
stability can be totally avoided if the fiscal
development of financial markets permit. So I
deficit in the medium term can be brought into
think, it is absolutely right that flexibility in the
shape. More importantly, the growth rate can
exchange rate provides greater comfort, as
be accelerated – to the extent of its exceeding
also freedom to monetary policy but it is a
8 per cent and upto 9 per cent, as is being
contextual and judgemental matter for policy
talked - once we take demonstrably credible
makers to determine when flexibility ends and
actions for a very sound fiscal adjustment in
volatility begins.
totality.
Public debt is another important aspect
Finally, I would touch upon the
of macroeconomics of reforms, which has
importance of the banking and financial sector.
global linkages and global ramifications. It may
Indeed financial sector is important and, in
not be a serious issue for many emerging
particular, banking is important. However
countries though for some it is a matter of
much, the capital market may develop,
concern, either constraining growth or
particularly in the emerging markets, the
undermining stability or both. However, given
linkages are strong in regard to banks with
the demographics and the recent events, in
the real sector and hence banks are very
316March Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
special in their role in maturity transformation, to fiscal adjustment if we want our economy
pooling and monitoring of risks and in to grow and address issues relating to
reducing information gaps or asymmetries. As poverty. Prof. Krueger has emphasised the
banks are special, the National Institute of importance of trade and capital liberalisation
Bank Management has a very important role and as you know, there have been significant
to play. Nowadays it looks very often as announcements of trade liberalisation in
though the practitioners are forging ahead and India, in recent months. Trade and capital
the research catches up in the financial and flows are interrelated in our country. I,
the banking sector. We should, therefore, therefore, welcome the trade liberalisation
attempt more and more of acquisition of measures in the current context of the capital
domain knowledge and in spillovers of codified inflows.
and tacit knowledge. Linkages with
Finally, I would like to conclude with a
practitioners is necessary to be able to grasp
statement. There was a question from one of
and get back into the research. I am sure, in
my colleagues here about the difference in
the next Governing Council, Director Saha
the state of Indian economy in 1993 and
and others would help us and I will do
2003. The answer can be summed up thus:
whatever I can in this regard.
in the past, there was a very strong
Let me conclude with the priorities consensus for a very weak economic reform
indicated by Prof. Krueger (i) fiscal deficit and and the view now is that, there is a very
(ii) capital flows. On fiscal deficit, we agree strong consensus for a reasonably strong
with Prof. Kreuger that we should give priority economic reform. That is good news.
317