INFRASTRUCTURE FINANCING : STATUS AND ISSUES
The process of economic reforms initiated in India in early nineties has focused,
inter alia, on the infrastructure sector especially on attracting private investment.  A
number of policy initiatives have been taken by the Government of India and Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) to attract such private investment. The present paper while listing the
important developments also makes an attempt to focus on some of the important issues
critical to infrastructure financing. The organisation of this paper is as follows: Section 1
deals with the general approach of RBI to infrastructure including link between
infrastructure and Government finance; Section 2 sets out the development in debt
markets which is crucial for financing infrastructure; Section 3 contains the recent
developments and some current issues relating to domestic and external financing of
infrastructure sector. Conclusions are at .
The broad approach of RBI for the development of infrastructure has been
“The financing requirements of infrastructure as a whole are, however, massive and pose
serious problems in the context of the needs to raise more resources both by the public and
private sectors. Currently, the private sector finds regulatory environment and legal as
well as institutional framework non- transparent and complex for its entry. The problem is
compounded by mix-up of the roles as between the owner and regulator in public domain.
These factors in conjunction with the virtual domination of public sector in long term
contractual saving in household sector, and lack of securitisation of debt seem to have
contributed to inadequacies in investment in infrastructure. Injection of resources in public
sector to expeditiously complete the ongoing projects on a selective basis and a more
transparent as well as a definite policy on ownership, regulation and financing to attract
private investor interest, both domestic and foreign, are some of the areas where initiatives
are needed. At the same time, full cost recovery allowing for transparent, and explicit
subsidisation where needed, would make possible adequate flow resources to this critical
area”.
Recognising the importance of infrastructure, while analysing the Government
finances in the Reserve Bank of India Annual Report 1996-97, it was observed that
“Public outlays on infrastructure, especially in non-tradable sectors such as power and
transport not only complement or ‘crowd in’ private investment by improving the
marginal productivity of capital and thereby enhancing the prospective returns on
investment, but also create forward and backward linkages in the economy, leading to a
multiplier effect on the capital stock”.  The Report also observes that “financing a large
order of infrastructure outlay while exercising prudent control on fiscal deficit would
necessitate, inter-alia concomitant efforts to bring about adjustment in current
With regard to the State Government Finances the Report observes “Given the
accent on infrastructure development, State Governments would need to initiate
appropriate policy changes so as to attract a high order of private sector participation. The
Reserve Bank of India Annual Report 1997-98 further stressed the private initiative in the
financing of key infrastructure sectors.
@
 Paper presented by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India in the Workshop on the
Role of Financial Institutions in the Development of Infrastructure at Planning Commission, Yojana
I am grateful to Mrs. Usha Thorat, Dr. R.K. Pattnaik and Dr. A. Prasad of RBI for their valuable assistance.
Bhavan, New Delhi on November 11, 1998.
expenditures, especially the subsidies”.
Infrastructure and Government Finances
articulated in its Annual Report 1996-97 as follows :
I. APPROACH OF RBI: A REVIEW
Section IV
@It is important to recognise that central to the developmen t of infrastructure is the
development in debt market in India. The debt market in India comprises basically three
segments, viz., Government Securities Market, which is oldest and most dominant; PSU
Bonds Market, which is basically a development since late `eighties; and Corporate
Securities Market, which is growing fast after liberalisation, especially in the last two
years. The major focus in the development of debt markets has been the Government
Securities Market for three reasons. First, it constitutes the principal segment of our debt
market. Second, as a market for sovereign paper, it has a role in setting benchmarks in the
financial markets as a whole. Third, it is critical in bringing about an effective and reliable
Since the ‘sixties and until the ‘nineties, the Government Securities market
remained dormant since the Government was borrowing at preannounced coupon rates
from basically a captive group of investors, such as banks. Thus, there existed a passive
internal debt management policy. This, coupled with automatic monetisation of budget
deficit prevented a deep and vibrant Government Securities market. Internal debt
management became an active instrument of policy since economic reform of the
‘nineties. Since the nineties, the Government and the RBI together brought about changes
in instruments and institutional framework in both Government and non-Government debt
markets.
Since April 1997, a number of structural and institutional changes in the different
segments of financial markets have been brought about, and these include debt markets,
As long as automatic monetisation existed, it was difficult to assure a framework
for Government securities market in terms of matching demand and supply through price
mechanism. Hence, the most significant development during 1997-98 has been the
elimination of the practice of automatic monetisation of the Central Government budget
deficit through ad hoc Treasury Bills with effect from April 1, 1997 and the introduction
of a new scheme of Ways and Means Advances (WMA). During 1997-98, special
securities to the tune of Rs.20,000 crore were converted into marketable securities of
varying maturities, in order to augment the stock of marketable securities for active open
market operations. It may be pointed out that during the early part of 1997-98, the RBI
had to resort to sterilised intervention in the management of capital inflows. Also, a
scheme of 14-Day Intermediate Treasury Bills was introduced in the place of 91-Day Tap
Treasury Bills to enable State Governments, foreign central banks and special bodies to
14-Day Treasury Bills were introduced in June 1997 on a weekly auction basis.
Thus, investors now have the option to invest in 14-Day, 91-Day and 364-Day Treasury
Uniform price auction in respect of 91-Day Treasury Bills has been introduced as
an experimental measure. Uniform price auction method is expected to eliminate the
problem of winner’s curse and encourage more aggressive bidding in the primary market.
To foster market clearing rates in the primary market and bringing about more
transparency in auctions, the RBI is now pre-announcing notified amounts in auctions of
In India, State Governments are major non-competitive bidders who have large
and volatile surplus funds positions and these render the pricing pattern and allotment of
bids uncertain for competitive bidders. As another measure towards a more effective
market clearing price, non-competitive bids are now kept outside the notified amount.
2
Treasury Bills (14-Day, 91-Day and 364-Day) and dated securities.
Bills.
Treasury Bills
invest their temporary cash surpluses.
Advances to Central Government
Introduction of Scheme of Ways and Means
especially the Government Securities and money markets.
Reform in Debt Markets since 1997-98
Early Policy Developments in Debt Market
transmission channel for the use of indirect instruments of monetary control.
REVIEW
II. DEVELOPMENTS OF DEBT MARKET IN INDIA: REVIEW AND ISSUESThe Reserve Bank of India has been actively t rying to promote retailing of
Government securities. First, a system of primary dealers and satellite dealers was set up
and liquidity support from the RBI has been made available to them. Secondly, the RBI
announced special liquidity support for dedicated gilt funds. However, not much interest
has been evinced in this channel so far. Thirdly, banks are now allowed to freely buy and
sell Government Securities on an outright basis and retail Government securities to non-
bank clients, without any restriction on the period between sale and purchase. Fourthly,
with a view to enabling dematerialisation of securities of retail holders, institutions such as
National Securities Depository Ltd. (NSDL), Stock Holding Corporation of India Limited
(SHCIL) and National Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. (NSCCL) have been allowed
The RBI has recently enlarged the number of PDs from 6 to 13 by announcing ‘in-
principle’ agreement to register 7 PDs. The addition of 7 more PDs is expected to increase
To widen the participants in the debt market, including Government securitie s,
foreign institutional investors have also been permitted to operate, though such
participation had to be consistent with overall ceilings on external commercial
In our market, two types of repos are currently in operation – inter bank repo
including PDs and the RBI repo which is used for absorption/injection of liquidity. After
the irregularities in securities transactions in 1992, inter bank repos are permitted under
regulated conditions with eligible participants and instruments being generally restricted
In order to further expand the base in the inter bank repos market, the participation
was extended to non-bank entities that had already access to call money market as lenders.
Repos have also been permitted in PSU bonds and private corporate debt securities
provided they are held in dematerialised form in a depository and the transactions are done
in recognised stock exchanges.  This will be operationalised after Government issues a
In the most recent monetary and credit policy, the RBI removed the restriction of a
minimum period of 3 days for inter bank repo transactions. This would further enable
banks and other participants in the repo market to adjust their liquidity in a more flexible
In recent months, open market operations of the RBI, both through outright sales
of Government Securities and repo operations have gained considerable momentum. At
present, the RBI conducts three-day and four-day repos in the market. RBI is also
exploring the possibility of conducting one day repos. The primary objective of these
operations is to absorb or provide liquidity from/to the market, though under certain
circumstances, repos have also been used to signal changes in interest rates.
Since the introduction of the reform measures, the various segments of the
financial market have responded favourably and become increasingly integrated. Although
significant progress has been made in the debt markets also, a number of rigidities persist
The actions required for this purpose may be classified into areas relating to legal,
technology, regulatory and market microstructure, retailing, standardisation, risk
management etc.
A new legislation titled the Government Securities Act proposes to repeal a
replace the Public Debt Act, 1944. The Government Securities Bill has already been
nd3
Repeal and Replacement of Public Debt Act
Legal issues
and major issues still need to be tackled keeping in view a consistent framework.
ISSUES
manner.
clarification regarding applicability of stamp duties on dematerialised instruments.
and now expanded gradually.
Ready Forward Transactions
borrowings.
Investment in Central Government Securities by FIIs
activities in terms of liquidity and depth both in the primary and secondary markets.
Strengthening Dealers System
to open SGL Accounts with the RBI.
Retailing of Government Securitiesapproved by the Cabinet and is awaiting Parliament clearance. However, since the Public
Debt Act, 1944, is applicable for marketable loans raised by the RBI on behalf of both the
Central and State Governments, the proposal requires consent of all State Governments.
The State Governments have to pass a Resolution for the purpose either prior to enactment
by the Centre or subsequently adopt the same by passing a Resolution. Once the new Act
is enacted, the RBI will have substantive powers to design and introduce an instrument of
transfer suited to computer environment. The new Act will also give flexibility to allow
Government Securities to be held in Depositories while at the same time specifically
excluding Government Securities from the purview of Depositories Act, 1996.
(Regulation) Act, 1956
It is held that rescinding the 1969 Notification restricting forward trading in
securities is now necessary for the development of the securities market. Simultaneously,
there is a proposal to amend the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act (SCRA) to add an
enabling provision to provide jurisdiction to the RBI also in the regulation of the debt
markets. With this, the respective regulatory roles of SEBI and RBI in the debt market will
be formalised. The proposed changes in the SCRA will pave way for a more active repos
Development of financial markets is being inhibited by multiple prescriptions of
stamp duty which is creating friction in active secondary market trading by increasing the
transaction cost and administrative hassles. This is a matter of crucial importance and
exemption of debt instruments from stamp duty or alternatively rationalisation of the
procedures by imposing a flat fee would go a long way in increasing secondary market
activity and liquidity in debt instruments. The suggestion that the Indian Stamp Act be
amended to enact a specific provision exempting transactions of all securities in
The RBI has embarked upon the technological upgradation of debt market. This
includes screen-based trade reporting system with the use of VSAT communication
network complemented by a centralised Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) accounting
system. It will be integrated with the regional current account system. The
operationalisation will broaden the participation in the auction system, help enlarging the
investor’s base and increase the competitiveness in the auction system. The centralised
SGL accounting system will improve the speed of settlement of secondary market
The operationalisation of VSAT by end of December 1998 will provide on- line
linkages between offices of RBI, Central Government (Ministry of Finance), monitoring
of Government finance (receipts and expenditures) and also among other participants
(banks/primary dealers/satellite dealers/financial institutions). This will open new areas in
Y2K Compliance by Primary Dealers and Satellite Dealers (Sy stem Software and
Hardware) with the target date December 1998 as also being monitored.
The RBI is actively coordinating with the Primary Dealers Association in
developing an Electronic Dealing System to facilitate dealing in call, notice and term
money, Treasury Bills, Government Securities and repos. This is expected to be
operationalised by March 1999.
There is an increasing recourse by corporates to private placement of their debt
paper. This popularity of private placement may be attributed to the low issuance cost,
ease of structuring instruments, saving on time lag in issuance. Notwithstanding these
benefits, healthy development of the private placement market calls for more
transparency, better disclosure and protection of investors’ interest.
An Informal Group on Primary Market under the Chairmanship of Dr. Shankar
4
Regulation of Private Placement
Electronic Dealing System
technological development of payment systems.
transactions.
Technological upgradation in Debt Market
Technology
Depository in dematerialised form from stamp duty also needs to be seriously considered.
Stamp Duty Reform
market and introduction of new market features like, when-issued trading.
Amendments to Securities ContractsAcharya has recommended that the facility of private placement should be restricted to not
more than 99 qualified institutional investors and should be tradable on OTCEI. The
Group also recommended that financial institutions/banks/mutual funds which participate
in private placement should mandatorily give information on a regular basis to SEBI and
the RBI.
Standard practices in the market need to be evolved with regard to the manner of
quotes, conclusion of deals, etc. Code of best practices has to be evolved for repo
transactions. It is proposed to ensure that the Primary Dealers Association and FIMMDAI
quickly set up a time frame for standardising the documentation and market practices and
if need be the RBI will come forward and indicate a time frame. Most importantly, the
code of conduct will have to be compatible with the contemplated dealing screen and the
Introduction of rupee derivatives will go a long way in providing instruments for
investors to hedge their exposures. The Reserve Bank has decided ‘in principle’ to create
an environment that would facilitate introduction of interest rate swaps. The RBI proposes
to examine in consultation with market participants, relevant aspects such as standard
documentation, benchmark rate, prudential prescriptions, etc., and then allow the product
in the market.
With the amendment to SCRA, 1956 and the establishment of a strong clearing
house, the introduction of T-Bills Futures can be contemplated. The RBI is already
encouraging trading in Government securities through National Securities Depository Ltd.
and National Securities Clearing Corporation Ltd. By allowing them to open SGL
Accounts with the RBI. A committee is also looking at STRIPS in the Government
RBI recognises the importance of benchmark rate but is of the view that any
benchmark rate needs to be developed by the market itself.  In the interest of market
development it is prudent that market participants themselves work out unitedly and come
out with a reference rate. Recently, the NSE has evolved a benchmark rate linked to call
Recog nising the need and importance of new instrument in the debt market
Reserve Bank of India had constituted an internal working group to examine the Pros and
 of implementing STRIPS. The Committee is expected to submit its Report within a
It has been the RBI’s endeavour to ensure that banks increasingly mark their
investments to the mark. Accordingly, the ratio of investments in permanent category has
been brought down to 30 per cent for March 1999. In the next three years, the intention is
to mark the entire portfolio to market. New private sector banks are already required to
mark to market their entire investments from end-March 1997.
Currently, all the market borrowings programme of all States is conducted by RBI
at a common fixed coupon and tenor in two or three combined tranches. While some
States feel that they could get a better deal from the market if they go to the market on
their own, others are skeptical about their capacity to market without a common tranche.
As a long term objective, each State should in RBI’s view, have freedom to complete the
approved programme on its own market standing. As a sequel to consensus in a meeting
of RBI with the State Government Finance Secretaries it has been decided in consultation
with Government of India, to initially implement a flexible approach to State Government
market borrowings. According to this approach, the State Governments have the option to
borrow from the market on their own standing, to the extent of 5 per cent to 35 per cent of
their approved borrowing programme. During the current fiscal two State Governments
have opted for this; hopefully, during fiscal 1999-2000, the scheme will be implemented
5
Flexible approach to market borrowings of the State Government
Encouragement to Trade Through Mark-to Market
month’s time.
Cons
New Instrument Development
money which has been quite popular with some debt issuers.
Development of a Benchmark Rate
Securities market.
Risk Management and Development of Rupee Derivatives Market
technological upgradation.
Standardisation of PracticesAn issue that has significant implication in the context of infrastructure financing
is the guarantees given by the State Governments. Governments grant guarantees to
promote certain economic enterprises for reducing the credit risk for investors especially
in those activities or arrears where the nature of investment is characterised by long
gestation period. While guarantees do not form part of debt these have in the eventuality
of default, the potential of exacerbating even an apparently sound fiscal system. In view of
this, Reserve Bank of India has raised its concern in its Annual Report 1997-98. RBI as a
prudent central bank has been emphasising on prudential limits and transparency in regard
to formal guarantees as well as letters of comfort that have the effect of guarantees. A
Committee has been constituted by the Reserve Bank of India with a few of the State
Finance Secretaries as members to examine various aspects of guarantees and the
As a sequel to the recommendation of the Expert Group on Commercialisation of
Infrastructure, IDFC has been set up to promote infrastructure investment with the Central
Government and Reserve Bank as chief contributors of share capital.  IDFC began
operation in December 1997 and was fully capitalised in March 1998.  The main task of
IDFC is to connect projects and institutions to financial markets in a manner that has not
been possible before and, by so doing, develop and nurture the creation of a long-term
debt market. IDFC would not just be another term lending institution or merely a credit
enhancer but its mandate is also to perceive and meet the gaps in policies, procedures, and
The funding structure of IDFC was deliberately designed to ensure private
ownership and professional management, though largely funded by public sector. The
Government of India and RBI have provided subordinated debt of Rs.650 crore and initial
capital of Rs.350 crore.
In order to promote and strengthen the infrastructure financing, Reserve Bank has
liberalised the term loans by banks for this purpose. Earlier, there were prudential ceilings
on the overall exposure that banking system could take on a single infrastructure project.
These have been removed recently. Each bank is now free to sanction term loans to all
projects within the overall ceiling of the prudential exposure norms prescribed by the
Reserve Bank, viz., 25 per cent of the capital funds in the case of an individual borrower
and 50 per cent in the case of borrower group. The Group Exposure norm of 50 per cent is
also allowed to be exceeded up to 10 per cent provided the additional exposure is for the
purpose of financing infrastructure projects. Further, banks are given freedom to decide
It is necessary for RBI to be assured that, the banks ensure that given their short
term liability structure, their exposure to long term asset is kept within prudential limit. As
the debt market develops depth and liquidity, the asset liability mismatch that banks face
on account of financing infrastructure can be managed through development of derivatives
products. Further, the limitation of exposure norms can be handled through development
of credit derivatives. Such credit enhancement products also help in adoption of
consortium approach and ensure that special skills required for infrastructure financing
Recognising that infrastructure development is a national priority, Governor,
Reserve Bank of India has been having since December 1997, periodic interaction with
financing institutions, and select banks with a view to accelerating the pace of
implementation of infrastructure projects in key sectors by adopting a problem solving
approach.  The objective of these discussions has been to set-up a mechanism to review
sector specific issues on an on-going basis so that viable projects which are at an advanced
stage could be brought to financial closure early. The broad topics which were covered in
6
Informal Meeting on Infrastructure Financing
which may be limited, would be used efficiently.
the period of term loans keeping in view the maturity profile of their liabilities.
Bank lending for infrastructure
system that enable economical and efficient infrastructure financing.
Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation (IDFC)
Institutional Developments
III. FINANCING OF INFRASTRUCTURE
Committee is expected to submit its Report in a month’s time.
State Government Guarantees
by more State Governments.seven of these meetings held so far are as follows : Hedging mechanisms for foreign
exchange loans; Quantum of domestic financing for infrastructure projects (past and
future); Mechanisms that will help to catalyse financing; and Domestic financing for
infrastructure.
In the context of the domestic financing of infrastructure project, it is important to
recognise the quantum of domestic debt for financing these projects and the mechanisms
that would help to catalyse infrastructure financing. According to available information
the amount sanctioned for infrastructure projects during 1997-98 amounted to Rs.22,255
crore. However, the amount disbursed has been Rs.6,505 crore. As per the estimate
worked out by IDFC, the total funds required for infrastructure projects for the next four
years would be Rs.1,63,900 crore of which domestic debt requirement would be Rs.56,734
crore. Of the total domestic fund requirement indicated above IDFC expects that
It is Reserve Bank’s endeavour to facilitate flow of resources of the magnitudes
indicated by IDFC. Reserve Bank of India has to reckon the fact that banks are the
principal repositories of household savings and consequently recognise the liquidity and
interest rate risk faced by them in using short term liabilities for long term financing.
Ultimately the development of a deep and liquid debt market with diversification of
investor base will help in evolving products that can help banks manage such risk and
unbundle the credit risk from the liquidity and interest rate risk. All efforts are being made
by Government of India and the RBI to facilitate the development of debt markets. RBI
wishes to encourage banks and institutions to securitise the receivables, repackage and
offer to investors at various stages of the infrastructure project. The immediate hurdle,
One of the specific proposals made for hedging liquidity risk and interest rate risk
is a take out facility and market making in project debentures, say after a pre-determined
period of five years to give comfort to commercial banks which are willing to deploy their
funds in infrastructure. While RBI encourages the take out facility which could be
replicated in several projects, RBI will have to monitor the extent of such facilities in
relation to the balance sheets of the parties. In any case, the provision of a “liquidity back
stop” by RBI for supporting market making at the end of the pre-determined period has
implications for monetary management.
The current policy of Government on External Commercial Borrowings is to allow
substantial flexibility in case of power and other infrastructure projects. It has been held,
however, that the use of external financing for infrastructure is being inhibited by the
inability to hedge long term exchange risk under current regulation of RBI. While RBI has
been taking several measures to deepen the forward market in foreign exchange, there is
limited forward supply beyond one year. Long term currency swaps have been used
though in a limited way and the market participants have also been encouraged by RBI to
run a swap book subject to prudential limits. In cases where there is a natural hedge such
as export oriented units or where there are foreign exchange receivables the exchange risk
issue does not inhibit external financing. Indian commercial banks with overseas branches
have also been entering into long term reciprocal arrangements with institutions like
HDFC and HUDCO which have availed of external assistance by using the foreign
currency funds at their overseas branches and providing rupee finance in India. True,
banks are encouraged to run swap books as long as the prudential norms are complied
with and a few of them have intermediated such swaps. Financial institutions are
encouraged to do such swaps as long as the counter parties are their clients.
Two specific proposals have been made to get around inadequate hedging
Long term exchange swaps : This envisages raising of long term funds and overseas
placement of these funds at Indian banks’ overseas branches and avail rupee finance there
In this case the borrower has to bear the cost of the difference between the rate at
which the funds are raised and that earned on the funds deployed with the overseas
branch. It is expected that the interest on the rupee funds would cover such differential and
7
against from the bank in India.
opportunities for long term exchange risk. These are analysed :
External financing of infrastructure
however, appears to be the current applicability of stamp duty.
commercial banks support would be around Rs.16,000 crore over the next four years.
Domestic Financing of Infrastructurestill be sufficiently competitive.  The structure is possible only to the extent the overseas
branch is able to absorb such foreign currency funds. While such swaps have been put in
place even earlier, the broader prudential issues relating to bloating of balance sheets,
capital adequacy and exposure norms have to be sorted out before advocating large scale
recourse to this method.
Over borrowing to meet redemption : The proposal is that the project will raise an
amount higher than required and the excess borrowing will be held as a deposit overseas
for the duration of loan which is expected to be 30 years. The reinvestment of the interest
would result in redemption value becoming equal to the principal of the loan. The
exchange risk on the principal is thus automatically hedged. The interest rate risk and
exchange risk on the interest payments would need to be borne/managed by the project.
Further, the proposal assumes the overseas bank would be willing to accept the
deposit/liability for a period as long as 30 years; secondly, if the borrower is not able to
raise funds for longer period than 10 years and is not able to roll over at the end of 10
years at reasonable credit spreads, RBI should provide foreign exchange to enable
It is necessary to recognise that in this proposal, there is an element of addition to
the total external debt of India beyond what is repatriated to India. Once the external
borrowing is approved by the Government of India for 10/30 years period, given India’s
policy and procedures as well as track record, there is no question of non availability of
foreign exchange at the time of redemption. The real issue is, perhaps, raising rupee
resources for the remaining period of 20 years. When there is inability to rollover external
loan after ten years, if rupee resources are raised to meet such a contingency, foreign
exchange can certainly be acquired from the market.
In conclusion we recognise that investment in infrastructure is critical. Financing
requirements are large and of long term nature. While seeking arrangements for
enhancement of financing flows, measures should be consistent with the state of financial
market and prudential requirement.
As explained, we in RBI have been making best efforts in this regard, and we are
8
I solicit your co-operation and advice.
open to your suggestions.
IV. CONCLUSION
continuation of the deposit up to 30 years.