Monetary and Credit Policy Continuity, Context, 
Change and Challenges Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, 
Deputy Governor, at Reserve Bank of India, 
Chennai, on May 2, 1998 
 
Address by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, at Reserve Bank of India, Chennai, on May 2, 1998.  
Monetary and credit policy has, recently been attracting serious public attention and interest. The 
media, the intellectuals, the business community and in fact, people in almost all walks of life in 
India have been showing interest in understanding the policy and its implications and the manner 
in which it affects them. There is also a close observation of the stance of policy by international 
financial community, especially, investors and non-resident Indians. What explains this interest?  
First, as a result of the reform process, the extent of supply of money and credit, the cost and 
conditions at which the amounts are available are increasingly being determined by market 
forces, which respond to the policies of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). This is equally 
applicable to the availability of credit to Government as well, in view of the termination of the 
system of ad hoc Treasury Bills since the end of 1996-97.  
Second, all over the world, central banks' policies have gained in influence and the Reserve Bank 
of India's policies are no exception to the global trend.  
Third, in our country also, there has been a growing national awareness about the need to accord 
autonomy to monetary policy-making authorities.  
Fourth, the Reserve Bank has recently demonstrated that, while conforming to national priorities, 
the actual and detailed conduct of monetary policy would remain, by and large insulated from 
temporary domestic uncertainties.  
Finally, the opinion makers in India and abroad look to RBI as a credible entity which could be 
relied upon for a meaningful and authentic analysis of the state of the economy, and for helping 
decision-making process of economic agents.  
Incidentally, since this (i.e., Monetary and Credit Policy for first half of 1998-99) is the first policy 
of RBI Governor Dr. Jalan, there has been more than ordinary interest in the policy.  
In view of the emerging interest, it is necessary to explain in detail some aspects of the latest 
monetary policy, specifically the backdrop, the identifiable tasks, the elements of continuity, 
contextual response, and change. This will be supplemented with some clarification on 
"perceived gaps" in the policy and I will conclude this presentation with the possible challenges 
before the RBI, banking industry and the corporate sector.  
Backdrop  
The backdrop to the latest monetary and credit policy has been described in a comprehensive 
and analytical manner in the Governor's statement of the policy. To recall, the major 
developments in 1997-98 were:  First, growth in GDP was 5.0 per cent as against the projected rate of 6.0 per cent in October 
1997, and the actual of 7.5 per cent in the preceding year.  
Second, inflation was contained at 5.0 per cent as against the projection of 6.0 per cent, and 6.9 
per cent in 1996-97  
Third, there was higher than projected growth of money supply (M3) in relation to growth in GDP, 
being 17.0 per cent (projected: 15.0 - 15.5 per cent), as against 16.0 per cent in the previous 
year.  
Fourth, contrary to popular impressions, there was substantial increase in financial flows from the 
banking system to corporate sector despite slowdown in industrial growth. The total flow of funds 
from the banking system grew by 17.6 per cent (i.e., Rs.51,353 crore) in 1997-98 as against only 
12.2 per cent (i.e. Rs.31,566 crore) in 1996-97.  
Fifth, the market borrowing programme of the Union Government was higher in 1997-98 
compared to the budgeted amount. The Reserve Bank's support to Central Government in net 
terms amounted to Rs.12,914 crore.  
Sixth, there was unanticipated uncertainties in foreign currency markets, and RBI had to actively 
intervene to reduce volatility and maintain orderly conditions in forex markets. The process had its 
impact on money markets and interest rates. This is reflected in the fact that nominal interest 
rates which had generally indicated a southward tilt during the major part of the year were 
subjected to interruption.  
Finally, the export growth was low, consistent with world trends (being 2.6 per cent in the first 
eleven months of 1997-98) in US dollar terms. This is well below our performance in the recent 
past and our expectations.  
Tasks  
Against this backdrop, what could the Monetary and Credit Policy do during the year 1998-99? 
What are the short-term economic considerations evolving the policy for the current year?  
a. Acceleration in industrial investment and output. GDP growth rate for 1998-99 could go 
up to 6.5 -7.0 per cent from the last year's estimated 5 per cent consistent with the 
potential rate of 7 to 8 per cent.  
b. Maintenance of inflation rate in the range of 5 to 6 per cent so as not to alter inflationary 
expectations.  
c. Reduction in interest rates.  
d. Improvement in credit delivery mechanisms, particularly for agriculture and for medium 
and small sectors.  
e. Laying the foundations for what may be called second generation reforms in the financial 
sector.  
The stance of policy will have to take into account possible fiscal stance which will be unfolded in 
the regular Budget and its influence on liquidity management, and respond to international 
developments and the continuing uncertainties in this regard.  
Design of the Measures  
In designing the measures to perform these tasks, we have to be conscious of the need to 
maintain some continuity for reasons of policy credibility.  Secondly, the measures should meet the immediate tasks, largely dictated by the backdrop of 
previous year's economic conditions or anticipated developments during the current year. That 
constitutes contextual response which we will address separately a little later.  
Thirdly, foundations have to be laid to improve the financial sector so as to enhance its efficiency 
in meeting the national aspirations of moving on to a higher growth trajectory with stability and 
social justice.  
Fourthly, the capacity of the system, especially the institutional structures to respond to the 
challenges that could be thrown up by the proposed measures has to be reckoned.  
Continuity  
Let me start with a narration of the significant elements of continuity.  
1. The basic twin objectives of monetary policy remains, the same, i.e., to achieve price 
stability and to ensure flow of adequate credit to the productive sectors of the economy. 
The relative emphasis on one or the other would, however, depend on the prevailing 
conditions.  
2. Monetary targeting is continued, as money demand functions have remained, by and 
large, fairly stable in our country. However, with financial innovations, the dominance of 
the effect of income on demand for money could undergo a change in future and it would, 
therefore, be necessary to give attention to other variables.  
3. Operating procedures of monetary policy have not been altered. Reserve requirements 
exist and refinance is still being made available. The long-term goal for cash reserve ratio 
(CRR) is to reach 3 per cent, but in the short-term, it will continue to be used flexibily as a 
monetary policy tool. Interest rate signals are operated through the Bank Rate changes. 
Repos/Reverse Repos will continue to be used to manage liquidity, influencing in the 
process market interest rates. In brief, the broad range of instruments will be the same, 
though there would, as always, be refinements in their use. The relative emphasis or 
actual recourse to each instrument will, no doubt, change during the year to reflect 
structural changes taking place in the economy and prevailing circumstances.  
It will be useful, to briefly recall, the measures that clearly signify continuity in the reform process. 
The widening, deepening and integrating of different segments of the financial markets, is being 
continued. Thus, it is recognised that development of money market continues to be important to 
the RBI since the transmission channels of liquidity and interest rate effects of monetary policy 
are felt with limited lags. Call money market in particular is crucial, but the level playing field is 
absent despite a large number of participants. It would probably be necessary to make the call 
money market a pure inter-bank money market since we cannot afford systemic risks, but in the 
short-term, the market needs to have greater flexibility. Therefore, easier norms have been 
announced for routing of funds through PDs for lending. This would further help corporates with 
large balances to deploy their funds in short-term and get some return. Since the minimum period 
of deposits has been reduced to 15 days, the minimum lock in period was also reduced for CDs 
and units of MMMFs to 15 days. This is also intended to help holders of surplus funds for short 
periods to obtain some return, even though it could erode the float available to banks at present.  
Government Securities Market is yet another important segment of the financial market. It is well 
recognised that a zero-risk yield curve which is credible and transparent is of crucial importance 
for efficient functioning of financial markets. We have already introduced Treasury Bills with 
varying maturities while rationalising the auction system, and allowed FIIs to invest in 
Government Dated Securities within limits. As a continuation of these efforts, we are 
reintroducing 182-Day Treasury Bills, so that there is a wide range of options, viz., 14-Day, 28-
Day, 91-Day, 182-Day and 364-Day Treasury Bills. This should help the development of short-term yield curve. Further, FIIs are now being allowed to invest, within the approved limits, in 
Treasury Bills for the reasons mentioned in the latest monetary policy. We also proposed some 
changes in the system of liquidity support to PDs to give them operational freedom and assist 
them to operate smoothly in the secondary markets. Prior to this development, PDs had to 
earmark securities for repo transactions. Now, they merely need to ensure prescribed minimum 
value of securities with RBI as collateral.  
The process of deregulation of interest rates has been given a significant thrust in the current 
policy, which should add to the convenience of customers, infuse more competition and enhance 
efficiency. Thus, to provide banks with greater flexibility for their asset liability management and 
avenues of deployment of short-term funds, the minimum period of term deposit has been 
reduced to 15 days. The penalty structure for premature withdrawal, which can, as per the current 
policy, be decided by banks, will give greater maneuverability for banks in their ALM. In response 
to requests from bankers who felt that cost of transaction differs by size, banks are now permitted 
to prescribe varying rates of interest for different sizes of deposits. Finally, lending rates on loans 
up to Rs. 2 lakh have been partially deregulated bringing the position closer to the system 
prevalent in cooperative banks and RRBs, where these interest rates stand totally deregulated. 
The increase in ceiling for lending against shares and the increase in the minimum level up to 
which investments have to be marked to market are further steps in the direction already 
indicated in earlier policies.  
All these measures reflect steadfastness in our approach towards reform process which is 
gradual and well orchestrated, and a movement towards an accepted direction to achieve well-
defined goals.  
Contextual  
In a dynamic world, movement towards goals needs to take into account the prevailing 
circumstances. Let me illustrate this point. The current monetary policy had to respond to 
domestic and international developments. In the domestic arena, the major challenge was to 
ensure flow of adequate credit to finance productive activities and at the same time preserve the 
hard-won gains in regard to inflationary expectations. Gaining confidence with regard to 
maintenance of price stability takes years but it can be lost by events in a single year. In the 
international arena, the implications of the recent East Asian crisis cannot be wished away. We 
took special measures in January 1998 to contain volatility in exchange markets, and now as 
orderly conditions in the market have been restored, there has arisen the need to unwind the 
measures.  
As stated earlier, the primary task is to accelerate industrial investment and output, keeping 
inflation in the range of 5-6 per cent. It was felt that M3 growth of 15.0 - 15.5 per cent in 1998-99, 
consistent with GDP growth of 6.5 to 7 per cent, would be enough taking into consideration the 
comfortable/easy liquidity conditions at the beginning of 1998-99.  
The market borrowing programme of Government indicated in the Interim Budget is high as 
admitted by the Finance Minister as well. RBI support to Government, therefore, needs to be 
contained so that there is some reduction in the monetised deficit of Government, as a proportion 
of GDP. Bank Rate has been brought down by one percentage point to act as a signal that near 
normal conditions have been restored in forex markets.  
CRR is not changed now since there is ample liquidity. There is no point in releasing CRR at a 
time when huge volumes of banks' funds are in repos.  To signal a fillip to export sector which has been an area of concern, RBI cut pre-shipment rates 
and restored export refinance limits at the reduced rates so that banks have adequate funds at 
assured margins below prescribed lending rates for exports.  
In response to the unprecedented situation arising out of the recent Asian crisis, a number of 
initiatives have been taken. Thus, the contextual response to this had to take the shape of 
changes or new initiatives.  
Change  
There are, broadly, four areas of change, viz., the strategy, the instruments, specific measures, 
and foundations for reform.  
(i) Strategy  
The strategy of monetary policy explicitly states the need to respond flexibly in a dynamic 
situation - a need that was felt and a strategy that had actually to be used in 1997-98. A more 
formal view has been taken of the changed circumstance and the need for flexibility. Thus, while 
specific measures will be announced as and when need arises to respond to evolving situation, 
the practice of bi-annual statements will continue. The Annual Policy at the beginning of financial 
year (April) will give greater importance to structural measures and announcement of short-term 
measures, if any, as part of the Annual Policy Statement will be only coincidental. The Policy 
Statement for the Second Half of year (October) will be confined to mid-year review. It will review 
monetary developments and suggest structural changes only if necessary and take up short-term 
measures, if they happen to coincide.  
(ii) Instruments  
As regards instruments, the present monetary policy has equipped itself with a range of short-
term instruments with maturities ranging between 14 to 364 days. The RBI has also an option to 
conduct one-day repos and reverse repos in addition to the present 3-4 days repos. It has also 
strengthened its armoury to conduct repos on fixed rate basis or auction basis. The system of 
daily repos and reverse repos will ensure that liquidity in the system and the short-term interest 
rates are influenced more effectively by the deliberate policy of the RBI.  
(iii) Specific Measures  
In the foreign exchange market, for the first time, RBI has used differential ceilings for interest 
rates as a tool for encouraging long term FCNR B deposits and discouraging short-term deposits. 
This objective could have been achieved by imposing differential CRR for varying maturities of 
FCNR B deposits to signal our policy stance, but interest rate as a tool is a direct price based 
instrument, likely to be effective in differentiating deposits by maturity through an appropriate rate 
structure.  
In order to avoid pressures on balance sheets of corporates, in the event of exchange rate 
volatility, and to obviate the consequent transmittal of exchange risk as a credit risk to banks, the 
policy advises banks to monitor unhedged positions of banks. This would help provide the 
required freedom to participants to take advantage of market developments, while alerting banks 
to exercise caution and prudence and to maintain well balanced exposures.  
(iv) Second Generation Reforms  In terms of financial sector reforms, the need to consider the next phase of reforms has been 
recognised. In fact, this was the central theme of the Bank Economists' Conference held last 
year. A few issues that have clearly come up in recent times relate to credit delivery to agriculture 
and small industry, problems of weak banks, non-performing assets and the relative roles of 
banks and financial institutions.  
The recommendations of the Working Group for Harmonising the Role and Operations of DFIs 
and Banks (Khan Committee), the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Narasimham 
Committee), the High Level Committee on Agricultural Credit Through Commercial Banks (Gupta 
Committee) and the High Level Committee to Improve Delivery System and Simplify Procedures 
for SSI (Kapur Committee) will all pave way for changes in the institutional structure of the 
financial system. The policy has indicated that while some recommendations can be accepted, on 
some fundamental issues involving structural changes, the RBI will prepare a discussion paper to 
enable wider debate. By flagging a discussion paper; the current policy has signified initiation of a 
consultative process. It is also useful to recognise that those measures suggested by the 
Committees which are within the purview of RBI and which could be implemented forthwith have 
already been taken up. For example, follow-up measures on lending to agriculture fall in this 
category. Similarly, Narasimham Committee's recommendations on greater freedom to banks on 
lending rates, reducing the minimum maturity for term deposits to 15 days, reducing the minimum 
lock-in period for Certificates of Deposit and units of Money Market Mutual Funds to 15 days; 100 
per cent mark to market in three years and allowing foreign institutional investors' access to 
Treasury Bills have already found a place in this policy.  
Perceived Gaps  
While the policy has been favourably received by experts, and public in general, some observers 
perceived a few `gaps' in the policy. It will be useful to recognise the perceived gaps and analyse 
the implications. I will clarify why some of the measures were not implemented in the present 
policy.  
First, the market expected a cut in CRR. As mentioned in the Policy, the long-term direction has 
to be to reduce the average CRR level. The main reason for not reducing the CRR at this stage 
is, as articulated in the policy, the comfortable liquidity position. It does not seem appropriate to 
release CRR when banks have been deploying large surplus funds in repos with the RBI. An 
announcement on a future schedule of CRR cuts could have given a sense of satisfaction to the 
markets, but, for reasons already explained, a deliberate view has been taken not to link the 
measures, which includes cut in CRR, to annual or mid-year announcements. There are good 
reasons for not committing to either a specified date for, or any particular magnitude of a 
reduction in CRR in the presence of domestic and international uncertainties. As clarified by 
Governor, subsequent to the policy announcement, appropriate reduction in the CRR would be 
made if needed.  
Second, there were some expectations of roll back in General Refinance Limits (GRF) to the pre-
January 1998 position. At the outset, it needs to be noted that the experience during 1997-98 has 
been that GRF has not been fully utilised by banks, reflecting easy liquidity conditions. On its part, 
the RBI would prefer to follow the CRR route rather than the refinance instrument to meet 
requirements for funds, because that would be in line with the policy to move to a lower CRR 
prescription. Further, as I have already mentioned, once the system of daily repos and reverse 
repos proposed to be introduced this year stabilises, there may be a need to review the 
continuation of GRF. Thus, there was no immediate compulsion to change GRF.  
Third, there were also expectations of measures for the development of term money market. 
During the last year, a number of measures were introduced with a view to developing a term 
money market in India. Banks were exempted from maintaining CRR and SLR on inter-bank 
liabilities, subject to the maintenance of the statutory minimum of reserves on the net demand and time liabilities. Even in this policy, the major measures that would help banks manage their 
resources more effectively and in the process assist the development of term money market 
relate to freedom given to banks to determine their own penalty structure on premature 
withdrawal of term deposits and the reduction of the minimum period of term deposits from 30 to 
15 days. Moreover, as the CRR would over time move to the statutory minimum of 3 per cent, all 
liabilities including inter-bank liability of banks will be equal to it. It may also be desirable to make 
the inter-bank money market purely `inter-bank' in which case there will be level playing field 
among participants.  
Fourth, there is a feeling in some quarters that the policy should have given a clear thrust for 
financing of infrastructure. For example, there have been representations for excluding 
infrastructure from the definition of net bank credit for purposes of priority sector advances. There 
are conflicting views on priority sector lending, ranging from total abolition, to elimination of sub-
categories, on to increasing the share of priority sector advances or expanding the coverage in 
terms of sectors such as inclusion of infrastructure. A clear view needs to be taken about the 
effectiveness and scope of priority sector lending on which Narasimham Committee has made 
observations. Also, merely adding infrastructure to be eligible for priority sector within the existing 
ceiling may mean no additional flows, and if it does, it would be at the expense of agriculture or 
small industries, which is by itself not a desirable option. One has to explore whether there are 
other ways for RBI to encourage flows for infrastructure development without hurting financing of 
immediate productive activities. Prudential requirements would warrant RBI to recognise that in 
the banking system, liabilities are largely of short duration and financing of infrastructure would 
imply long-term assets which are relatively illiquid in the present state of financial markets. There 
are also issues of payment-risks in the absence of adequate cost recovery arrangements in 
utilities like Electricity Boards. The Infrastructure Development Finance Corporation which has 
been promoted by RBI along with Government only last year is in fact expected to play a leading 
role in financing infrastructure projects. To address these complex issues, Governor, RBI, has 
sponsored an Informal Group with chiefs of financial institutions and banks to address these 
issues. Naturally, RBI would respond with measures as and when circumstances warrant.  
Fifth, some observers have felt that capital markets ought to have been encouraged in this policy. 
During 1997-98, the RBI kept banks' investments in debentures and bonds of PSUs and 
corporates outside the 5 per cent limit, which has been very productive. In this policy, banks have 
been allowed to lend to individuals increased amounts against shares in dematerialised form. The 
policy has had to reckon with conflicting objectives here. After the recent experience with the 
Asian crisis, central banks have become adverse to encouraging lending in asset markets where 
prices have a potential to be volatile. The utilisation of existing limits is a factor in deciding the 
need for and extent of enhancement in such ceilings. The preference for dematerialisation 
reflects both learning from experiences of several malpractices, and a deliberate policy choice to 
encourage dematerialisation. If circumstances warrant, and depending on utilisation, further 
enhancement of limits could be considered favourably subject to prudential regulations.  
Sixth, a suggestion has been made that the RBI could have provided a framework for 
encouraging financing of mergers and funding of takeovers. The issues involved in mergers and 
acquisition, entails more detailed examination and an overall policy framework needs to be 
evolved. In particular, banks in our country, as compared to financial institutions, may not have 
comparative advantage in this area to take a lead. Finally, there is an underlying philosophy of 
encouraging directly productive use of bank credit or use of bank finance for asset creation, and 
as such financing for uses such as industrial restructuring are exceptions rather than the rule in 
our banking system. A broader view of end-use of funds has, therefore, to be taken if such 
funding were to be encouraged. These issues need further careful examination.  
Challenges Before the RBI  The measures announced have, as usual, thrown a number of challenges before the RBI and let 
me mention a few important ones.  
It is essential to develop the physical infrastructure, and arrangements for growth of institutional 
financial markets to enable the transmission channels of monetary policy to be more effective 
than at present. The gradual movement towards indirect instruments of monetary control requires 
that interest rate channels are more effective. Physical infrastructure to facilitate screen based 
trading, in consultation with Primary Dealers' Association, should be put in place soon. The RBI 
has to ensure early repeal of the 1969 notification for allowing short selling of securities and usher 
in a when-issued market for Primary Dealers. The introduction of one-day repos and reverse 
repos would imply that RBI would have a better institutional apparatus to gauge liquidity in the 
system on a contemporaneous basis. Forecasting of liquidity would become a prerequisite for 
effective repo operations. The quality of forecasting could be enhanced by the implementation of 
the recently concluded recommendations of the Internal Group of the RBI on Liquidity Analysis 
and Forecasting. At the same time, a view needs to be taken of the best measure of money 
supply. It is expected that the Working Group on Money Supply would complete its work soon. A 
credible zero-risk yield curve will need to be developed so that other securities can be correctly 
priced off this curve. The review of Treasury Bills to rationalise the short end of the market would 
need to be completed soon. Implementation of institutional reforms, of-course, would require legal 
changes. Liberalisation of markets also means that RBI should recognise the importance of 
changes in the regulatory and supervisory framework to ward off systemic threats. The RBI 
should be able to react flexibly to emerging domestic and international developments, as the 
Asian crisis has demonstrated. This would require constant monitoring of a number of macro 
variables.  
Challenges Before the Banking System  
The measures introduced in this policy have facilitated increased competition among banks, 
particularly, those related to reduction of minimum maturity of deposits to 15 days and reduction 
in lock-in period of CDs and units of MMMFs. These measures will have the effect of increased 
competition among banks for mobilising resources. It will be a challenge before banks to tackle 
the implications for deposit mobilisation arising from the reduction in the minimum maturity of 
term deposits from 30 to 15 days to the extent the float funds of banks will be reduced. The 
freedom given to banks to offer varying interest rates for deposits of varying sizes will give 
depositors greater mobility across banks. Each bank will have to be alert to the situation. Banks 
will have to be careful while fixing their penalty structures for premature withdrawal of deposits. 
The rates should be fixed judiciously by each bank, taking into account that they could adversely 
affect spreads and profitability of banks unless efficiency is improved. Appropriate mechanisms 
will have to be mounted to prevent loss of income. Proper ALM mechanisms would also need to 
be instituted.  
Challenges Before Corporates  
Some of the measures introduced in this policy pose a number of challenges as well as 
opportunities to corporates. For instance, the reduction in the minimum maturity of term deposits 
and lock-in period on money market instruments to 15 days and the more flexible norms for 
lending through Primary Dealers in the call money market will exhort corporates to tone up their 
treasury management. With the freedom given to banks to charge their own penalty structures for 
premature withdrawal, corporates will have to plan their resources more carefully. Finally, the 
inexorable integration of domestic and international markets has increased the potential for 
volatility in the foreign exchange markets. Corporates will have to evolve clear strategies for 
hedging their forex markets and convince their bankers that they have adequately hedged their 
forex exposures.  Let me conclude with a word of appreciation to the officers and staff of the RBI who worked with a 
spirit of devotion, in formulating the monetary and credit policy. I am thankful to the senior officers 
of RBI, Chennai, the RBI Staff Training College and Dr.P.L.Sanjeeva Reddy, Secretary to 
Government of India for giving me the benefit of this interaction. Finally, I thank Dr.A.Prasad, who 
assisted me in the design and draft of this address. 
 