Inaugural address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy 
Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Primary 
Dealers Association of India on March 23, 1998 at 
Taj Mahal Hotel, Mumbai 
 
Inaugural address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Primary 
dealers association of India on March 23, 1998 at Taj Mahal Hotel, Mumbai  
Chairman Mr.Mukherji and friends,  
I am happy to be here at the inaugural function of the Primary Dealers Association of India. This 
is a culmination of the continuous efforts made by the first set of Primary Dealers registered in 
1996. I consider today's event as an important landmark in the development of Government 
Securities market and I trust that the Association will play a vital role in the current process of 
financial markets integration. Let me congratulate all those who have taken the initiative and offer 
my felicitations to the Association.  
Market Performance  
The Government Securities market need to be made specially vibrant, broadbased and efficient 
in view of its role in setting a benchmark for the development of the financial markets as a whole 
and in bringing about an effective and reliable transmission channel for the use of indirect 
instruments of monetary control. The whole set of primary dealer obligations and the facilities and 
support provided to them are conceived on this basis. We should all be happy to observe that the 
performance of the Primary Dealers(PDs)so far has been satisfactory and a healthy relationship 
between the Reserve Bank and the PDs has evolved.  
During the last two years, PDs' presence in the Government Securities Market has brought about 
an element of dynamism, both in the primary and secondary segments. During 1996-97, the PDs 
bid Rs.9,275 crore in Central Government dated securities and Rs.24,230 crore in Treasury Bills 
and achieved a success ratio of 81 per cent and 51 per cent, respectively. During 1997-98 (upto 
end-February), the bids tendered by PDs were Rs.19,302 for Government dated securities and 
Rs.17,000 crore for Treasury Bills and they achieved a success ratio of 62 per cent and 66 per 
cent respectively. On the whole, including devolvement, PDs purchased securities in the primary 
market to the extent of 16 per cent of the gross issues in auction Treasury Bills and 38 per cent of 
the gross issues in Central Government dated securities.  
In the secondary market, during 1996-97, PDs achieved a turnover of Rs.26,730 crore in 
Treasury Bills and Rs.63,723 crore in Government Dated Securities (This includes both 
purchases and sales including repos). During 1997-98 the corresponding figures were Rs.26,318 
crore and Rs.70,709 crore, respectively.  
In the backdrop of this performance, I would quickly like to recount the general environment in 
which the PDs conducted their operations in the recent past.  
First, liquidity conditions were relatively easy through most of the period reflecting the reduction in 
CRR and other inflows into the system.  Second, PDs were assured for most of the time, liquidity support through reverse repos with the 
Reserve Bank, in Central Government dated Securities and auction Treasury Bills related to the 
annual bidding commitments made by them. Only after January 16, 1998, as a response to 
extraordinary circumstances in the exchange market, was the liquidity support made 
discretionary.  
Third, the system of payment of commission on purchase of securities has been replaced in 
1997-98 by a system of payment of underwriting fees on the amounts underwritten by them, 
through competitive bids. Incidentally, we are using uniform pricing approach in accepting bids for 
underwriting as compared to discriminatory pricing approach in regard to auctions in Government 
Securities. In order to facilitate continued presence in auctions, we had invited bids for 
underwriting in respect of all auctions. Upto end-February 1998, they had offered Rs.35,918 crore 
for underwriting, and as against the bids received, accepted bids to the tune of Rs.15,762 crore, 
in respect of both Treasury Bills and Government dated Securities. The amount that has devolved 
on PDs so far is Rs.6,488 crore.  
Fourth, routing operations in the call money market were allowed through all PDs, which I believe 
have generally served to increase the profitability of PDs. Fifth, to facilitate ease of operations, 
PDs have been allowed to open one current account and two SGL accounts.  
Sixth, PDs have been allowed the facility of transfer of funds from one centre to another under the 
RBI's Remittance Facility Scheme as also the facility of collection of cheques through clearing.  
We could perhaps agree, therefore, that the conducive environment and the extent of support 
provided to PDs have also contributed to their impressive presence in the Government Securities 
market. We should reinforce these as we go along, for mutual benefit.  
Current Issues  
There is a continuous dialogue between PDs and the Reserve Bank at the operational level and 
periodic meetings with the top management of the Bank. A number of issues affecting PDs' 
operations and the market in general are discussed, and joint efforts are made to find solutions. I 
am confident that the formation of the Association will strengthen the coordination between the 
Reserve Bank and the PDs.  
A couple of weeks ago, I had the pleasure of meeting all the PDs for a free and frank discussion. 
Today, I would like to flag three issues that were raised in this meeting, viz., liquidity support, 
when-issued market and underwriting.  
Liquidity Support  
Liquidity support to PDs is currently linked to bidding commitments. There is a suggestion that it 
should be linked to allotment of securities. There is some merit in this argument in terms of linking 
liquidity support to actual performance. A suitable mechanism could be evolved after considering 
both the incentive effect and the monetary impact. I would welcome your views.  
When-Issued Market  
There has been a constant demand for the introduction of the when-issued market. In an 
environment where short selling is not permitted, when-issued market is not possible. We are 
actively pursuing this matter with the Government. In the meantime, there are a number of related 
operational issues on which I urge upon this audience to contemplate. In the event of introducing 
a when-issued market, a crucial question that arises is whether to allow exclusive access to PDs in primary issues or continue the wider participation as it exists now. If exclusive access is a 
preferred option, then it may be feasible only with an increase in the number of PDs. Changes 
may also be required in the form of liquidity support, underwriting, mode of bidding, possible 
ceiling on the amount bid, etc. All these require deeper examination.  
Underwriting  
There is an opinion among PDs that the level of underwriting currently permitted could be 
increased, or underwriting bids could be received without any specific limit, within the notified 
amount of issue. There is no doubt, scope for increasing the underwriting offers even up to 100 
per cent of the size of the issue and also allow both the PDs and SDs to underwrite, since the 
ultimate objective of the Reserve Bank is to completely withdraw its support in the primary issues 
of Government. A related issue is whether a sub-ceiling should be placed on the extent of 
underwriting by a single PD and if so, what should be the basis for such a sub-ceiling. I presume 
that in the event of the introduction of a when-issued market, the system of underwriting will need 
to be re-examined. I would be happy to hear your views on this.  
Role of Primary Dealers Association  
Befitting the occasion, let me address a few issues specifically relevant to the Primary Dealers 
Association of India. There are certain critical areas in the development of the financial markets 
which should be addressed by self regulatory organisations like Primary Dealers Association.  
The first among them is achieving a harmonious integration of different segments of the markets. 
Such integration implies among several factors, the evolution of consistent and prudent policies 
for market participation, trading and settlement of financial instruments. It is a matter of 
satisfaction for us, that the establishment of sound policy and practices in the market has been 
included as a stated objective in the Memorandum.  
The second area is building a healthy relationship between different segments of market 
participants. For example, let us consider PDs' relationship with Satellite Dealers. Earlier, two 
models were considered; one, linking Satellite Dealers' functioning to each PD and second, a free 
relationship between Satellite Dealers and PDs. The guidelines evolved evidently favoured the 
latter model. Here, the Satellite Dealers are free to deal with any of the PDs depending upon the 
forms of their business and their geographical concentration of business. Satellite Dealers' 
guidelines also provide for the integration of Satellite Dealers as part of PDs Association in 
membership and in its activity. The PDs Association should bring about this healthy business 
relationship. This kind of relationship could be extended to other counterpart bodies like FIMMDA 
which is in its formative stage. The objective should be to bring about a harmonious blend of such 
entities in achieving orderly functioning of the entire financial market.  
The third important role is in the area of removing some legal, procedural and administrative 
bottlenecks in the efficient functioning of the market. Illustratively, the TDS on Government 
Securities was one such impediment which was removed after a long dialogue with the 
Government. There are several other impediments which are constantly discussed like stamp 
duties and tax incentives. The Association should focus upon building up a strong ground for 
removing such impediments by consultations with appropriate authorities in Government.  
Thus, while the role of Primary Dealers has been carved out essentially in the area of 
Government Securities market, the PDs' Association may have to expand their horizon to other 
segments of the market. That would lead us to some micro issues which may need to be 
addressed.  
Market Making  One of the basic obligation of PDs is to offer firm two-way quotes in Government Securities, 
thereby providing continuous liquidity in the market. In the UK, Gilt Edged Market Makers 
(GEMMs) are required to make on demand and in any trading conditions, continuous and 
effective two-way prices at which they stand committed to deal. Some countries require PDs to 
deal at the prices they display; in others the displayed prices are only indicative. The UK requires 
market making across the whole range of Government Securities, including index-linked 
securities whereas in some other countries such as the USA and France, the obligation is to 
make a market in leading securities only. I would like to impress upon you that there is need for 
greater transparency in the market making function of PDs in order to impart credibility to PDs' 
operations. The Primary Dealers Association should focus on this important aspect of market 
making and frame transparent operational rules.  
Retailing of Government Securities  
One of the objectives of PDs was to encourage voluntary holding of Government Securities 
amongst a wider investor base. Some countries require evidence of commitment from PDs in the 
retail market, particularly for individual investors. Although there are no such explicit guidelines in 
our case, PDs are expected to be proactive in retailing Government Securities. PDs were allowed 
to open a second SGL account with the Reserve Bank in order to facilitate retailing but are yet to 
make any significant headway in this respect. I admit that it would be entirely reasonable for 
spreads on retail business to be wider than in the wholesale market because of the relatively high 
cost of retail market making and distribution. Perhaps, there may be a case for linking PDs' 
performance to retail clientele since serving a captive market may not be an efficient benchmark 
for assessing the performance of PDs. I understand that one of the objectives of the Association 
of Primary Dealers in Sri Lanka is to sponsor workshops, seminars, training courses and 
meetings and develop material for the members of the trade and the general public as the case 
may be, in order to promote awareness and understanding of the Treasury Securities and 
encourage wider participation in the market.  
The issue of arranging publicity about Government Securities was discussed with PDs. The 
Primary Dealers Association must consider taking initiatives and move ahead in building 
awareness of individual investors about the Government Securities market. The Reserve Bank 
would consider specific requests for any support or backing that is necessary for this purpose.  
Dematerialisation  
The Reserve Bank of India is in the process of giving a final go ahead to the National Securities 
Depository Limited (NSDL) for the dematerialisation of Government Securities through the NSDL. 
We believe that this facility will greatly enhance the ability of the non-banking entities such as the 
provident funds, trusts, corporates and other participants in the securities market to deal in 
government securities on a nationwide basis. This is of particular importance to the PDs. On the 
one hand, increased ability to trade in these instruments will encourage investors to participate in 
the primary auction of securities and on the other hand serve to increase the client base for 
Government Securities.  
It is not difficult to envisage the PDs putting in bids on behalf of a number of clients and, if 
successful, distributing the allotment amongst various clients in an effortless manner using the 
NSDL system in a when-issued system. About 15 banks, nationalised and private, have already 
joined the NSDL system as Depository Participants. I understand that a few more are on the way 
to doing so. The dematerialisation of Government Securities through depositories like the NSDL 
offers an excellent opportunity for the clients of these banks to hold the securities in 
dematerialised form and derive the benefits of trading on a nationwide basis.  
Screen-Based Dealing  While transactions of Government Securities across countries take place both in exchanges and 
outside, OTC or over the counter trading is the most popular in a number of countries such as 
Canada, China, Germany, Sweden and the UK. In other countries such as Australia, Belgium, 
France, Japan, Switzerland and the USA, trades in Government Securities are effected through 
OTC and also through stock exchanges. In the Indian scene, the National Stock Exchange 
(NSE)has provided the screen for exchange trading. The OTC market outside the NSE entirely 
depends upon telephone deals.  
Screen based dealing lends transparency and efficiency to market operations. Ideally, the screen 
could cover OTC deals in money market instruments like call and notice money, term money, 
repos, as also Government Securities including Treasury Bills. Besides banks, PDs, financial 
institutions and other market participants, the Reserve Bank could also use the screen in the 
conduct of its open market operations.  
It is felt that self regulatory organisations like Primary Dealers Association (PDA) and Fixed 
Income Money Market and Derivatives Association (FIMMDA) should be closely associated with 
the implementation of this system. The Reserve Bank has already opened a dialogue with you in 
this regard and we would be prepared to consider funding of this project in an appropriate 
manner, if you take prompt initiatives. We accord high priority to this.  
Information Dissemination  
You would agree that all central banks expect its PDs to provide it with relevant market 
information. A system for exchange of information is already in place. Iam sure that PDs would 
continue to provide the Reserve Bank with relevant and meaningful information on market 
developments, via contact with the operational staff and through periodic meetings with the 
Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank on its part is constantly endeavouring to provide more and 
uptodate information to all through its publications.  
Standardisation of Practices  
I would like to flag the vital issue of the need to evolve standard practices in the market with 
regard to the manner of quotes, the conclusion of deals, the manner of pricing and accounting 
standards. Code of best practices has to be evolved also for repo transactions. The Association 
and the Reserve Bank should jointly set up a time frame for standardising the documentation and 
market practices and develop a code of conduct so that when the dealing screen is set up, it is 
made compatible to such codes of best practices.  
I am happy to hear the emphasis placed by Shri Mukherjee on professionalism and internal 
regulation or self-regulation. We in RBI will fully support such self-regulation.  
Let me hasten to add that RBI will discharge its duty to ensure that PDs Association does not 
undermine competition and does not give an impression of cartelisation.  
I would like to mention here that recognition of PDs is a continuous process. I expect some 
addition to the number of PDs soon, and thus RBI will help you in expanding your membership.  
I have attempted to broadly identify the future role and agenda for further course of action by the 
Association. The agenda may seem formidable, but, you will admit it is not overambitious. On my 
part, I assure you that the Reserve Bank will extend all support to the Primary Dealers 
Association in the endeavour of developing and modernising the Government Securities market.  Before I conclude, I must place on record my deep appreciation of the cooperation extended by 
PDs to the RBI. Also, I must record the excellent progress being made in the reform process in 
the Government Securities Market with guidance from Shri Subrahmanyam, our Executive 
Director, Shri Patil and Shri Kanagasabapathy, Chief General Managers and their team of 
dedicated and professionally competent staff. I have no doubt about a long and fruitful 
relationship between the Reserve Bank and Primary Dealers. I am also thankful to Dr. Prasad 
who helped me immensely in today's task.  
I wish the Association all success in its endeavour. 
 