Address by Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank 
of India at the inauguration of the business 
session on "Trends in International Banking" 
International Banking Conference organised by 
Indian Banks' Association, New Delhi September 
16, 1998 
I am very happy to be with you on this occasion. I would like to commend the Indian Banks' 
Association for organising the International Banking Conference at a very timely and critical 
juncture.  
The theme of the Conference assumes great significance in the current international 
environment. In the context of the Asian financial crisis and the continuing turbulence in the 
international financial markets, the formulation and application of international rules for sound 
banking practices has become a critical issue. The ongoing efforts in this direction are supported 
by extensive enquiry into the identification of the causes of banking crises, the conditions under 
which these crises are likely to occur and early warning systems which can trigger preemptive 
policy action.  
As you know, international financing through bank lending grew at a vigorous pace in 1997 with a 
sharp increase in banks' involvement in the securities markets. Thus, international syndicated 
loan facilities reached a record volume of US $ 1.1 trillion and, credit flows intermediated by 
international banks rose to an all-time high of US $ 1.2 trillion, almost entirely through inter bank 
business. This picture has changed dramatically in 1998. In the first quarter of the year, there was 
a decline of US $ 0.4 billion in credit flows as against an expansion of US $ 451 billion in the last 
quarter of 1997. The decline in bank lending as well as overall private financing has been even 
sharper in Asia. During the first quarter of the current year, gross private financing from all 
sources to Asian economies is estimated to be 10 to 15 per cent of the monthly average of the 
previous year.  
The unsettled environment in which international banking has operated in 1998 has underscored 
the complementarity between macroeconomic stability and financial sector strengthening. 
Domestic banking systems worldwide are going through a major restructuring. Over the recent 
years various committees of national experts supported by the BIS have focused increasing 
attention on the recommendation of international standards and practices for banking sectors to 
adopt in the context of the globalisation of financial markets. The Asian crisis has provided 
impetus for bringing forward these initiatives.  
It is also interesting to know that with the phenomenal advances in telecommunications and the 
synthesis of information and computer technology, capital movements have completely dwarfed 
the cross-border movement of goods and services and have become the new engine of global 
integration. These developments have fundamentally changed the structure of the banking 
system, its orientation and its vulnerability to risks.  
Until lately, banking systems were domestically oriented. National policy objectives embodied in 
the mobilisation of domestic saving, the adequate provision of credit with directed lending 
targeted at specific sectors of the economy, extending the geographical spread of the banking 
function and raising resources for financing public sector deficits primarily guided the conduct of 
banking activity. This necessitated specialisation, and segmentation between banks and other financial institutions was clearly defined. Foreign exchange constraints necessitated recourse to 
exchange control. Managed exchange rate and interest rate regimes also limited the exposure to 
external crises.  
However, in the nineties, banks have become more global in their reach and in the diversification 
of their portfolios. They operate with greater freedom than before. Furthermore, there is more 
universal banking today than in the past. Banks' balance sheets have become more vulnerable to 
external shocks. The cross border diversification of assets and liabilities has thrown up the 
potential of mismatches. In the globalised financial system, opportunities to maximise profits are 
accompanied by an explosion in the volume and nature of risks and banks are confronting 
increasing pressures in this high yield and high risk market environment.  
At present there exists a large disparity in the risk management practices pursued by banks 
across countries. Given the growing integration of financial markets and the danger of contagion 
spreading from one country or region to other countries, for the regulators, identifying "best 
practices" reflecting the country specific requirements vis-à-vis the international norms has 
become necessary. In the management of systemic risk, coordinated international banking 
supervision is, therefore, gaining importance. Development of credit derivative markets and 
securitisation of bank assets are areas which increasingly absorb regulators' attention and 
involvement. Sound accounting and transparent financial disclosure constitute the key to the 
health of the banking system in a globalised market. As financial innovations render traditional 
techniques for assessing capital adequacy less appropriate, banks' internal risk measurement 
systems could provide valuable information for prudential oversight.  
The process of achieving global convergence towards international rules for the banking sector 
has been provided strong momentum by the initiatives undertaken in the BIS under the Basle 
process, the Willard Working parties, the Institute of International Finance and the Federal 
Reserve System Task Force on Internal Credit Models. Efforts are underway to reach a broad 
consensus on the recommendations of these groups. In this process, emphasis has been placed 
on securing the participation of national experts from a large number of countries.  
The multilateral accord on financial services which came into being under the aegis of the World 
Trade Organisation in December 1997 also has significant ramifications for the alignment of 
domestic banking systems into the global order. Over 65 WTO members have made 
commitments in banking services involving an estimated US $ 38 trillion in global bank lending. 
As this process of closer external linkages gathers momentum and competition intensifies, 
domestic banking systems could expect to face increased competition with an emphasis on 
improving customer services, reduction of costs and strengthening of prudential norms, better risk 
management, higher level of professional expertise, technological upgradation and overall 
efficiency.  
Banking Sector Reforms in India  
It is against the above background that we have to consider the urgent need to accelerate the 
process of financial reform in India. Initially, in India, banking sector reforms were undertaken as 
part of a comprehensive package of structural reforms. They took the form of modifications in the 
policy framework to improve the operational efficiency of the banking system, strengthening of the 
financial health of banks, building the infrastructure in terms of supervision, audit and technology 
and upgrading the level of managerial competence.  
Significant progress has been made in the first phase of reforms introduced since 1992. The 
major achievements in the first phase are:  The Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) has been brought down from a pre-reform peak of an effective 
level of 37.5 per cent to an overall effective level of 25 per cent by October, 1997.  
• Banks' lending rates have been progressively rationalised over the years. Beginning in 
October, 1994 lending rates have been deregulated and the structure of lending rates 
has been progressively linked to the bank rate. The bank rate has been activated to 
serve as a reference rate as well as an effective signaling mechanism for the stance of 
monetary policy. Today, the only lending rates which are regulated are for very small 
borrowers and for pre shipment and post shipment rupee export credit. Deposit rates 
have also been freed.  
Refinance facilities have gradually shifted from sector specific facilities to a general 
collateralised facility with interest rates linked to the bank rate. Export credit refinance 
continues to be the only sector-specific facility with a concessional interest rate.  
In order to improve the financial health of the banking system, the risk based capital 
standard for banks was introduced in 1992-93, drawing from the Basle Committee 
recommendations. Indian banks with branches abroad were required to achieve the norm 
of 8 per cent. Out of 27 public sector banks, 25 achieved the norm at the end of March, 
1997. For this purpose, eight banks have accessed the capital market and four banks 
have been allowed to raise subordinated debt through private placement for inclusion 
under Tier II capital.  
Prudential accounting norms relating to income recognition, asset classification and 
provision of bad and doubtful debts were introduced in a phased manner, beginning 
1992-93. These norms have been progressively tightened with a view to achieving 
international best practices. Banks have now met with the new provisioning requirement.  
• The mark-to-market proportion of the approved securities has been enhanced over the 
years from 30 per cent in 1993 to 70 per cent in 1998-99 and this would be raised 
progressively to 100 per cent over the next three years.  
Credit delivery systems have been significantly improved with banks being endowed with 
greater freedom in assessing working capital requirements. Delivery systems for rural 
credit have been revamped. A Rural Infrastructural Development Fund was constituted at 
NABARD in 1995, the process of recapitalisation and restabilisation of RRBs has been 
carried forward and the share capital of NABARD has been increased. Several policy 
initiatives have been taken to accelerate the flow of credit to the agricultural sector in the 
light of the recommendations of the Committee on Credit to Commercial Banks. The 
system of extending credit to small scale industries has been simplified and 
recommendations for improving the delivery system are being examined.  
To infuse competition into the banking system private sector banks have been allowed to 
enter the industry. Non bank financial companies have emerged as a competitive force. 
In January 1998, a new regulatory framework was introduced to ensure compliance of 
NBFCs with prudential norms. A comprehensive mechanism of off site supervision is 
under implementation.  
• A strong system of external supervision has been put in place by setting up the Board for 
Financial Supervision with the Reserve Bank and by encouraging the strengthening of 
internal control mechanisms.  
The first phase of banking sector reforms is now coming to a close and the second phase 
of reforms has been launched with the setting up of the Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (Chairman: Shri M. Narasimham). The thrust of the second phase of reform is 
on improvement in the organisational efficiency of banks. In the Monetary and Credit 
Policy for the first half of 1997-98, we have expressed our resolve to further strengthen 
the existing capital adequacy, income recognition and provisioning norms, the disclosure 
and auditing requirements of banks in the light of the recommendations of the 
Committee. The Reserve Bank proposes to move towards international best practices in 
these areas as early as possible.  
The most critical area in the improvement of the profitability of banks continues to be the 
reduction of non-performing assets (NPAs). In fact the issue is intimately connected with 
the overall stability of the financial system. The NPAs of all public sector banks 
constituted 23.2 per cent of total loan assets in 1992-93 when the financial sector reforms 
were implemented. By the end of March, 1997 the NPAs have declined to less than 18 
per cent, despite the tightening of norms for asset classification and income recognition. 
Furthermore, it is important to note that the bulk of NPAs are provided for in the banks' 
capital. Net NPAs amounted to 8.69 per cent of net advances at the end of March, 1998 
as against 9.18 per cent in 1996-97 and this is comparable with banking systems in other 
more developed countries. It needs to be recognised that reducing the level of NPAs is a 
time consuming process. Apart from internal factors such as weak credit appraisal, non-
compliance and wilful default, there are several external factors such as preponderance 
of certain traditional industries in the portfolio of certain banks, natural calamities, policy 
and technological changes which increase the incidence of sickness, labour problems, 
non availability of raw materials and other such factors which are not within the control of 
banks. Moreover, there are problems in effecting recoveries and write-offs and in 
compromise/negotiated settlements. Nevertheless, it is of utmost importance that no 
efforts are spared to reduce the extent of NPAs in the banking sector. The Government 
and the Reserve Bank are committed to persevere with efforts in several directions which 
would bring down the level of NPAs. Debt recovery tribunals will be strengthened and 
more tribunals will be set up to cover all States. Legal amendments in key laws would be 
worked out by experts to enable faster adjudication and recovery.  
Looking beyond the problem of NPAs and prudential norms, there is need to move 
towards a more competitive, customer-friendly, and transaction-efficient financial system 
with standards of transparency and accountability that are comparable to the best in the 
world. The Reserve Bank is fully committed to this goal, and I will urge the chiefs of 
banks assembled here to develop a time bound and concrete plan for achieving our 
country's objectives in this area.  
The financial sector reforms are directed towards making the Indian banking system 
stronger, more resilient and geared to meet the challenges of globalisation. The lessons 
emerging from the recent international developments have vindicated our approach to 
financial sector reforms over the past four years and reinforce our commitment to 
broaden and deepen the reform process. As the reform measures get firmly entrenched 
over the next few years, the Indian banking system can be expected to emerge as among 
the best in the world.  
Once again, I congratulate the IBA for organising this Conference and wish you success 
in your deliberations. 
 