Valedictory Address by Bimal Jalan, Governor, Reserve
Bank of India to the National Management Convention at
Calcutta on September 19, 1998
It is a privilege to be in the midst of this distinguished gathering to deliver the valedictory
address to the National Management Convention this evening. This is the Silver Jubilee year of
this Convention, and represents an important event in the history of the All India Management
Association.
It is a fitting tribute to the Silver Jubilee year that this convention is devoted to such an
important theme as strategies for strengthening competitiveness of Indian economy. The theme
chosen for this convention constitutes the very substance of the recent Indian economic reform
and the hope on which building a strong and prosperous Indian economy is based.
I am sure the deliberations in the convention over the past two days would have produced
many valuable clues to our understanding of the competitive strength of Indian economy and
current management challenges facing the economy. The Indian economy has been on the
threshold of a major change since 1991-92. We are about to cross over the present millennium
with some achievements. But the big question facing us is the challenges of the next millennium.
This question is inextricably linked to how quickly and effectively we respond to the emerging
global competition and constantly reorient ourselves to the changing requirements of the world
economy. What I propose to do in my address is to highlight some of the management issues that
are likely to assume importance in facing the challenges of the next century against the
background of our history, current achievements and future requirements.
Management Challenges : The Core Issue
As we cross over to the next millennium in a few years from now, we would be faced
with a world economy, which is more integrated, more competitive and substantially transformed
in terms of trade opportunities. While most of the existing trade barriers among nations would
have been significantly relaxed with the coming into being of a multilateral regime of free trade,
the cross border restrictions on movement of capital, labour and technology are also likely to
diminish over a period of time. What implication does this have for India?
It is clear that the expansion of global market and dismantling of protective barriers to
trade and commerce would create a major impact in terms of enhancing growth opportunities for
Indian economy. While trade opportunities grow, the protection advantages that a large domestic
market offered to Indian industries would decline in importance as a source of growth of Indian
industry. Our ability to penetrate both domestic and world market would depend on our relative
competitive strength vis-à-vis other nations. Secondly, the source and nature of competitive
strengths of nations in the Twenty-first century is going to be characteristically different from
that of the nineteenth and early twentieth century. In the earlier century, the world leaders in
business mostly derived their competitive strength from breakthrough in major scientific
inventions and their slow dissemination across countries. In the Twenty-first century scientific
innovations are not going to be based on capital alone, nor on the monopolistic position of a fewnations. Today, both capital and technology are fluid. It is the disembodied technology rather
than the hard ware, which is moving faster across countries in bridging technological gaps. In
today’s world – and more so in the next century – apart from technological leadership,
competitive strength of nations would more and more depend on the strategic behaviour of firms,
their adaptability to changing world environment and how they promote their core competence in
several spheres. These challenges are to be primarily fought on management and technology
front.
For countries which are deficient in investment, improving saving and investment
performances poses an important challenge for building national capabilities to face global
competition. This is a core issue for India at present, considering that our investment needs are
high in several sectors. The stress on investment however, has to be tempered with emphasis on
productivity growth for facing competition. It has been an old dictum in economics that factor
accumulation alone can not sustain the long-term impetus to growth. Or, the steady state growth
conditions are not solely influenced by how much capital an economy is able to accumulate. The
law of diminishing return would eventually bring down the rate of return on capital and slow
down the growth rate in the absence of productivity growth. On the contrary, long-run growth
depends on how effectively and efficiently the scarce capital and labour has been put to use.
Hence efficiency, and its relative measure viz., competitiveness, forms a vital aspect of the long-
run growth process of an economy. Technological progress, innovation and human skill
development are some of the dominant forces that sustain long-run growth conditions and
international competitiveness of an economy.
While in all this, firm-level performance plays a critical role, it’s effectiveness also
depends on the nature of public policy environment under which firms operate and whether such
policy conditions allow them to achieve the needed economies of scale and allocative efficiency
in production. This is why macro-economic policies and the nature of governance have received
increased attention in the growth strategies of developing economies. It is not surprising,
therefore, that much of today’s struggle for survival and progress in economic field is centered
around how to improve the relative competitive strength of an economy by adopting policies that
are efficiency enhancing in nature and instil confidence among investors and promote long term
stake in the economy. And the fact that the global markets have been getting increasingly
integrated, the risk from non-performance on the policy front is high compared to a situation of
autarky and closed financial market system. No country can afford to ignore this fact in today’s
competitive world.
Let me at this stage briefly draw your attention to our long experience with economic
management and the lessons that we learnt, which could help us in meeting challenges of the
next century.
India in the Midst of Change
Even before a new modern nation state came into existence India had a remarkable
history in the maritime trade, or what used to be called as emporia trade in the medieval times.
India was not only exposed to free trade from a very early time it also maintained its competitive
position in world trade in several goods. Even during the colonial times, India’s competitive
strength remained fairly intact. It however, lacked exposure to modern technology and a well-
organised market and was to face internal price repression and a deluge of non-competitiveimports. It would be surprising to note that even with this disability, India generated a large order
of export surplus in most part of nineteenth and early twentieth century ; the export surplus in
some years rising to as high as about 40 per cent of export values. This was also a period, when a
slow process of transformation was taking place in the industrial, educational and administrative
infrastructure, that eventually gathered momentum in the post-independence period to provide a
necessary base for the growth of a strong and competitive industrial economy. While the lack of
technology and infrastructure - except perhaps railways - stifled India’s industrial strength, the
policy regime that the country had to face in the pre-independence period was not conducive for
the healthy growth of a competitive industrial sector and whatever competitive strength that
India came to possess was due to her access to cheap labour and raw materials.
In the post-independence period, the problem of transforming an agrarian economy to an
industrial one, building domestic capability in crucial sectors and addressing the immediate need
and aspirations of people weighed heavily as a management challenge to a newly independent
nation. The role of government in the economic management therefore, grew in relative
importance. Nevertheless, a strong foothold for private sector was maintained alongside a
dominant public sector.
The management challenges in recent years are significantly different in nature than in early
years of our independence. The role of market forces in the economy has increased considerably
with the dismantling of industrial licensing and control system, liberalisation of foreign
investment and technology transfer, gradual deregulation of financial sector and reduction of
domestic protection through lowering of tariffs. The industrial sector has been exposed to both
internal and external competition. As a result, a process of restructuring has started with respect
to firms’ core competence and long-term strength, need for diversification, leveraging position,
strategic alliances, marketing strategy and research and development need. This change in
approach is seen in both private and public sector. The industry has become more and more
conscious of building advantages in technology, technical skill and cost competitiveness. A
perceptible difference is observed in the attitude of entrepreneurs and mangers in giving
importance to consumer preferences, forward looking planning, and devising unique firm
specific strategies to improve the share in the market.
The growth of a consumer - focussed management culture has been at the heart of the
modern day economic liberalism. Its necessity stems from the primacy of ‘choice’ and
‘individual initiative’ as the basis for improving efficiency. Hence, the role of government
management has accordingly changed to a more complementary position of providing
macroeconomic stability, protecting citizens’ rights and creating equal opportunities.
India’s long history of economic management has led to consolidation of strength in
many areas. Among the significant areas of strength are the emergence of a strong and
diversified industrial sector, gaining of self-sufficiency in food, growth of indigenous
technological capability in several core areas and a steady growth of higher education which has
helped create a large pool of technical talent. The country has a fairly developed institutional
infrastructure in financial, legal and corporate governance, which are essential for the growth of
markets. The overall growth of the economy remains good. Domestic saving and investment
rates are high. In the productivity front, although long term trends do not indicate a strong
position, in recent years there have been evidences of significant improvements. For example,
some studies have estimated the total factor productivity growth in the Indian economy at 2.3percent during the eighties, surpassing that of many fast growing economies.
There have been also areas of weakness. These mainly relate to instituting a stable and
sustained investment environment, providing for enough physical and social infrastructure,
promoting competition and demonstrating the required degree of managerial drive that could let
the domestic capabilities translate into international competitive advantages. Our share in world
exports remains very small. India’s competitiveness score as revealed by the global
competitiveness indicators also remains low. However, it is interesting to note that in terms of
subjective assessment of business respondents’ India’s ranking of competitive strength is high
(according to Global Competitiveness Report, 1997). This indicates that investors’ perception
regarding the growth prospects of Indian economy remains stronger than what is indicated by the
competitiveness index. This is a positive indication as far as long term investment prospects are
concerned. Our high potential competitiveness needs to be translated to quantitative
performances in future.
In short, India has come of age through its long development experience. It has acquired the
potential that would require a society to emerge as a competitive economy. The steady progress,
which has been recorded by the economy in the recent years show positive indications of India’s
rising competitive strength. With its present level of domestic strength India is poised to take
maximum advantages of the greater cross border flow of trade, capital and technology created by
growing openness of world economy. A growing open economy also exposes firms, investors
and the economy to external competition. It poses the challenge of cutting through several
rigidities that could pose potential risk to the industry and the economy. This is where the
management challenges are at their toughest test.
Meeting Management Challenges
As I have tried to bring out in the previous sections, our management challenges are
primarily on the front of improving international competitiveness of firms through strategic
orientation and by adopting policies and practices that improve productivity and efficiency in the
economy. As the cream of the best professional talents in India, I am sure, the distinguished
gathering here is more informed and competent than me to judge our present competitiveness
standards and chart out a road map for future. In what I have to say in this regard, I would merely
repeat some of the obvious aspects.
The Indian industry has already demonstrated the kind of resilience and strength required
in withstanding external competition and eking out a strong presence for them in both domestic
and international market. The industry has been going through a process of restructuring in the
recent period and the managers have responded to growing competition with enthusiasm and
competence. This is reflected on the cost of transition to the economy, which has been
exceptionally low, compared to many developing countries in Latin America and Africa that
have recently embarked on reforms. Let me place before you a few of my thoughts on the
possible ways we should respond to the intensified global competition that is to follow in the
next century.
The primacy of ‘professionalism’ and "organisational effectiveness" as national standards
can not perhaps be over-emphasised in the context of meeting global challenges. Competition, by
its very nature, distinguishes the weak from the strong. With growing openness of worldeconomy, this aspect will receive even more significance, since what is strong domestically may
not be that strong internationally. It is the professional standard – be it in dealing with customers
and client groups or improving quality standards and business effectiveness – from where the
western countries derive most of their competitive advantages. Professionalism is a product of
both individualist pursuits such as respect for values and mutual trust and the organisational
effectiveness of a group or firm that harnesses these individual attributes collectively. This
organisational effectiveness of a society is often referred to as social capital of a nation. It has
been argued by sociologists that although United States and Japan belong to two different social
values - the former driven by individualism and the latter by group-oriented society – they share
the common spirit of high trust societies and high professional standards, that give them an edge
over others in terms of improving professionalism and organisational effectiveness. As Francis
Fukuyama, a noted social scientist observes
"The future may belong to neither large nor small companies per se, but rather to those
societies that can innovate and create the appropriate organisations to meet needs of
21st century business."
Improving professionalism and organisational effectiveness applies both to private and public
sector and this is where our social values will play an important role in shaping our
competitiveness in future.
Another challenge stems from preparing for greater degree of openness in trade and
moving away from a protection syndrome. The successive tariff liberalisation attempted since
1991-92 has already reduced the degree of domestic protection to industry to a substantial extent.
Industry has also responded well to this challenge by readjusting to competitive environment.
With global trade integration and obligations under Uruguay Round of GATT agreement, India’s
tariff rate would have to be further aligned to international level. This would require further
adjustment by way of improving the flexibility with which an industry can diversify its operation
to gain competitive advantage.
The most important element of sustaining competitiveness is to build internal strength of
a company by imparting a long-term focus to its planning and developing its unique strength in
the market. This requires identifying our core competence and investing to strengthen this unique
strength. Given the long history of India’s corporate strength, building core competence on the
lines of our comparative advantages should not pose an uphill task. The Indian firms already
enjoy a pre-eminent position in several products. There are many Indian business firms that have
excelled in quality and cost competitiveness in these products to sustain a long-term domestic
and international clientele. In order to face increased global competition, it is important to
concentrate on our long-term competitive strength and gear our research and development,
technological requirement and managerial strength towards that end.
Meeting challenges on the policy front also assumes a great deal of importance in a more
open world economy. It needs to be mentioned that firm specific strategy to be successful
requires an enabling policy environment, which promotes competitiveness and efficiency. Here
the role of government comes into focus as a confidence builder, a catalytic agent and a
mediating agent. Let me note three major areas which assumes significance in this context. First,
in an interconnected global market, macro-economic policies need to be geared towards reducing
uncertainty and risk to investors and savers. This would require ensuring internal and externalstability in the economy through maintaining sustainable policies and putting in place a proper
safeguard system for the financial sector against adverse international shocks and limiting
exposure to risk. The macro-economic fundamentals of the Indian economy remain strong as
reflected in our relatively low inflation rate, low current account deficit in balance of payments,
the large order of fiscal compression that has taken place and the prudential norms in the
financial sector limiting exposure to systemic risks. These fundamentals will assume much more
significance as the world economy becomes more integrated.
The second important area of policy priority is increasing investment in physical
infrastructure. It is difficult to think of gaining a long-term competitive strength without
substantial improvement in the power, transport and communication situation. There is at present
a large gap between the demand and supply of infrastructure and compared to some of the fast
growing developing nations our infrastructure deficiency is very apparent. For example,
according to available statistics the electric power generation per 100 persons was 9.2 million
kilowatts in India in 1992 compared to 165.4 million kilowatts in Japan, 154 million kilowatts in
Hong Kong and 61.7 million kilowatts in Korea and 22.1 million kilowatts for Thailand.
Reducing this infrastructure disparity is a task, which needs to be addressed through both public
and private investment. World over the general trend has been to involve the private sector in
infrastructure investment. For example, in some Latin American countries private sector
investment in infrastructure is as much as or even more than the public sector. While in Chile
and Argentina about 50 per cent and 70 per cent, respectively of infrastructure investment is
private, this share is comparatively less around 12 to 18 per cent in East Asia, and lesser than that
in India. Increasing public investment in infrastructure and involving private sector in
infrastructure development is a key task for the future.
The third major area of policy emphasis for meeting challenges of the next millenium is
on building social infrastructure. Our ability to face competitive pressures of a globlised world
depends on our effort to raise productive efficiency of the human capital. Sustainable economic
growth is linked to the productive efficiency of the labour force which, in turn, is positively
influenced by nutritional adequacy, health care, educational attainment, skill formation and other
basic needs of the people. High investment in physical and human capital has been the
centerpiece of many success stories of the world. The general quality of life in India has
improved substantially during the past several years of development effort. The next millenium
would present us with the challenge of bringing about a significant improvement in this regard, if
we were to remain globally competitive.
Conclusion
Let me conclude. India has a history, surpassing hundreds of years. It has come through
several difficult challenges with many achievements in different spheres. It has a strong
industrial base, a highly educated and skilled lot of professionals, rich technological capability
and entrepreneurial skill, and a mature democracy with sound rule of law. The management
challenges for the next century are in the field of technology, organisational restructuring, skill
development and public policy. India’s current position in these spheres, though impressive,
would require further strengthening in order to enable us to face the next millenium with
confidence. In the context a more open world economy, it is the relative competitive strength that
would matter. India now has the skill and the will to take maximum advantage of the new
opportunities in technology, industry and services.************
 