 
 
Price Stability and Financial Stability 
?
An Emerging Market Perspective  
  
“A system of credit which has slowly grown up as years went on, which has 
suited itself to the course of business, which has forced itself on the habits of 
men, will not be altered because theorists disapprove of it, or because books 
are written against it.” Walter Bagehot, Lombard Street,1873.  
It is indeed an honour for me to be addressing the distinguished members 
of the Board of Directors and Senior Management of the Central Bank of 
Nigeria. I thank Governor Sanusi Lamido Sanusi for this opportunity. The recent 
global financial crisis has generated an intense debate on the role and 
responsibility of central banks in maintaining financial stability. Over the 
centuries, the world has experienced periodic financial crises, prompting 
changes in the way we think about monetary and financial stability. Yet, we are 
not immune from crisis. 
In the present context, several questions arise. What ought to be the 
objectives of central banks or more specifically that of monetary policy? Is there 
a trade-off between price stability and financial stability? Were central banks 
blindsided by the success of price stability to the neglect of financial stability? 
Do central banks have the necessary mandate and instruments to handle multiple 
objectives and at the same time maintain credibility? How does one ensure 
accountability with multiple objectives? Is there a need to revisit the best 
practice in monetary policy? While we currently grapple with these issues, they 
are by no means new.  
Against this background, I sequence my presentation as follows. First, I 
briefly trace the evolution of central bank objectives over the centuries. Second, 
I review central bank objectives and practices in emerging market economies 
(EMEs). Third, I highlight our experience in India in the conduct of monetary 
                                                            
?
 Address by Shri Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director, Reserve Bank of India, in the 2012 
Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) Board Retreat, Cape Town, South Africa, June 27, 2012. The 
assistance provided by J.K. Khundrakpam and Rajeev Jain is acknowledged. 
1 
 policy and how we have combined it with financial stability. Finally, I conclude 
by drawing three practical lessons in central banking in terms of monetary policy 
framework, institutional design and communication in pursuit of both monetary 
and financial stability.  
Evolution of Central Bank Objectives 
  
Let me first turn to central banking history for some insights. What was 
th
the motivation for setting up central banks in the 17 century? While the early 
central banks were set up for issuance of currency and financing governments, 
financial stability considerations got embedded as trade expanded and the 
banking and financial sectors developed. For instance, the Swedish Riksbank, 
the first central bank, was set up in 1668 as a joint-stock bank to lend funds to 
the government and to act as a clearing house for commerce.  The Bank of 
England (BoE) was set up in 1694 to act as the government's banker and debt-
manager.  
th
How did central bank objectives change in the 19 century? Most central 
banks began assuming financial stability function though it was not articulated 
the way we understand it now. Drawing from the criticism on its functioning 
during the panics in 1825, 1837, 1847, and 1857, the BoE adopted the 
“responsibility doctrine” proposed by Walter Bagehot. The doctrine required the 
BoE to subsume its private interest to that of public interest of the banking 
system as a whole. As per the Bagehot’s rule, the BoE was to lend freely on the 
basis of any sound collateral offered, but at a penal rate to prevent moral hazard. 
Thus, the role of the central bank as the lender of last resort (LOLR) as espoused 
1
by Bagehot remains the cornerstone of financial stability function even today.  
th
How did central banks change in the 20 Century? The functions of 
central banks came to be further aligned with public policy objectives. Frequent 
bank panics in the US led to the creation of the Federal Reserve in 1913 with 
                                                            
1 The term was first used by Francis Baring (1797) but systematically explained by Thornton 
(1802) who first identified it as a function of Bank of England.  Thornton, H. (1802), An 
Inquiry into the Nature and Effects of the Paper Credit of Great Britain, edited with an 
Introduction by F.A. von Hayek. New York: Rinehart and Co., 1939. 
2 
 LOLR as one of its main functions. However, the Fed could not prevent the 
Great Depression as monetary policy followed the “Principle of Real Bills 
2
Doctrine”. After the Great Depression, central banks transformed themselves as 
growth and employment facilitators and put in place deposit insurance. This kept 
the world economy insulated from any major banking crisis from the late 1930s 
until the mid-1970s. But fiscal activism and the belief that employment can be 
permanently increased at the cost of inflation, supported by the early version of 
3
the Phillips Curve, led to accommodative monetary policy. This manifested in 
high inflation in the 1970s. 
In order to address the inflation surge and the accompanying economic 
stagnation, intellectual opinion swung in favour of price stability supported by 
the work of economists like Milton Friedman, which advocated a dominant role 
4
for monetary policy. Thus, price stability emerged as a primary objective of 
most central banks during the 1980s. How did financial stability fit into this 
framework? The understanding around that time was that monetary policy 
directed at maintaining price stability would lessen both the incidence and the 
severity of financial instability. The argument was that price stability obviates 
the information problems for both borrowers and lenders and ensures financial 
stability through efficient allocation of resources. Studies based on the 
experience of advanced countries such as the US, the UK, Canada and Japan 
also concurred with the view that price instability contributed to financial 
5
instability (Bordo and Wheelock, 1998) .  
st
Did the financial crisis of the 21 century with its epicenter in the 
advanced countries change the world view of central bank objectives? The 
                                                            
2
 If only real bills are discounted by banks, the expansion of bank money will be in proportion 
to the needs of trade.  It was assumed that monetary system will be self regulating. 
3
 Phillips, A. W. (1958). "The Relationship Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of 
Money Wages in the United Kingdom 1861-1957", Economica, 25 (100): 283–299. 
4 Milton Friedman (1968), “The Role of Monetary Policy”, AEA Presidential Speech, 
Amercian Economic Review, Vol  LVIII, No.1. 
5 Bordo, Michael D. and David C. Wheelock (1998), “Price Stability and Financial Stability: 
The Historical Record”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, September/October. 
. 
 
 
3 
 dominant view, particularly among the advanced economies, was that monetary 
policy should ideally have a single objective, a corresponding single tool, and an 
operationally independent and accountable central bank. In fact, following this 
wisdom, many countries, both advanced and emerging markets, set explicit 
inflation targets and mandated inflation control as the paramount objective of 
monetary policy since the 1990s. Explicit emphasis on price stability often came 
with certain legislative changes in central banks and emphasis on fiscal rules in 
many countries. Although central banks were cognisant of the importance of 
financial stability for conduct of monetary policy, a distinction between 
monetary policy and financial stability policy was generally maintained. 
The current global crisis seems to have undermined the view that 
monetary policy should only have a single objective of price stability. The pre-
crisis view, also called the “Jackson Hole Consensus”, was that central banks 
should respond to asset prices and financial imbalances only to the extent that 
they affect the shorter term inflation forecast. However, such perception was 
6
belied by the recent crisis (Gali, 2011). It became clear that financial stability 
can be jeopardised even if there is price stability and macroeconomic stability 
7
(Subbarao, 2009). Consequently, post-crisis assessment increasingly veered 
towards explicit recognition of the financial stability objective.  But there are 
unsettled issues and the jury is still out.  
First, should financial stability be considered as an explicit objective of 
the central bank or, more specifically, as an additional objective of monetary 
policy? It has been argued that central banks are not only the lenders of last 
resort, but also better equipped to look at both financial system and economic 
cycles. In this context, Eichengreen, Prasad and Rajan (2011) suggest a dual 
mandate of price stability and financial stability so that “monetary policy is 
8
recognised as a legitimate element of the macroprudential supervisor’s toolkit.” 
                                                            
6 Gali, Jordi (2011), “Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles”, Barcelona GSE 
Working Papers Series  No.592. 
7
 Subbarao, D. (2009), “Financial Stability: Issues and Challenges”, RBI Bulletin, October. 
8
 Eichengreen, Barry, Eswar Prasad and Raghuram Rajan (2011), “Central Banks Need a 
Bigger and Bolder Mandate”, Opinion, Brookings Institution, October. 
4 
 Similarly, Woodford (2012) argued that monetary policy might indeed lessen the 
9
severity of risks to financial stability. Gokarn (2010) was of the view that 
broader mandates for central banks will need to be made explicit and conditional 
10
on the priority of the core mandates .  In contrast, Svensson (2010) argued that 
it was important to distinguish financial stability policy from monetary policy to 
avoid conceptual and practical confusion between the two policies. Using 
 11
monetary policy for the financial stability objective can lead to poor outcomes.  
Second, how compatible is inflation targeting framework with financial 
stability as an additional objective?  The views are quite diverse. While some 
recommend eschewing of inflation targeting altogether, Woodford (2012) 
suggested modifying inflation-targeting practice for making interest rate policy a 
12
more effective tool for financial stability . In contrast, Svensson (2010) opined 
that flexible inflation targeting remains the best-practice monetary policy before, 
13
during, and after the financial crisis .  
Third, should financial stability be the sole or shared responsibility of  the 
central bank? A BIS survey shows that in practice an overwhelming majority of 
central banks have either full or shared responsibility for financial stability, but 
14
the mandates are rarely explicit.  Similarly,  ?ihák (2010) found that the remit 
for central bank’s role in financial stability was weaker than in the case of price 
15
stability. The dominant view, however, seems to be that financial stability 
should be a shared responsibility, as monetary policy instruments of central 
banks can only have a partial impact on the ultimate objective of financial 
stability.  
                                                            
9
 Woodford, Michael (2012), “Inflation Targeting and Financial Stability’, NBER Working 
Paper 17967, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
10
  Gokarn, Subir (2011), “Monetary Policy Considerations After the Crisis: Practitioners’ 
Perspectives”, RBI Bulletin, January. 
11 Svensson, Lars E O (2010), “Monetary Policy After the Financial Crisis”, Speech at the 
Second International Journal of Central Banking (IJCB) Fall Conference, Tokyo, September. 
12
  As in footnote 9. 
13
  As in footnote 11. 
14
 Bank for International Settlements (2009), Issues in the Governance of  Central Banks, A 
Report from the Central Bank Governance Group, www.bis.org/publ/othp04.htm. 
15
 ?ihák, Martin (2010), “Price Stability, Financial Stability, and Central Bank Independence” 
38th Economics Conference at the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna. 
5 
 Fourth, do central banks have the instruments to ensure both price 
stability and financial stability? Central banks functioning with a single 
instrument of short-term interest rate, particularly those with inflation targeting 
framework may not be equipped to achieve multiple objectives following 
16
Tinbergen’s assignment rule . In this context, many have argued that interest 
rate is too blunt an instrument for dealing with overall financial stability issues 
17
(for example, Bernanke, 2011) . Goodhart (2008) opined that many central 
banks with only one instrument of monetary policy may find these two 
18
objectives often conflicting with each other.  In contrast, it is argued that 
though identifying the bubble is difficult, and therefore a risky strategy, the 
cleaning up cost after the bubble burst may be costlier than leaning against the 
19
bubble (Stark, 2010).  
Finally, there are additional complexities in the context of EMEs as asset 
price bubbles are often accompanied by exchange rate appreciation emanating 
from large capital inflows or trade surplus. Therefore, raising interest rate in an 
attempt to burst asset bubble may engender further capital inflows aggravating 
the bubble itself. Thus, it has been emphasised that even if monetary policy is 
used to lean against the wind, it needs to be supplemented by counter-cyclical 
instruments. Some economists believe that combining financial supervision with 
monetary policy tasks, as indeed the case in many EMEs, can lead to synergies 
20
, and it can be 
and a more effective conduct of monetary policy (Borio, 2009)
usefully connected to the central banks’ lender-of-last-resort function (Blinder, 
21
2010). Danthine (2012) suggested that central banks should be endowed with 
                                                            
16
  Tinbergen, J. (1952), On the Theory of Economic Policy, 2nd Edition, North-Holland, 
Amsterdam. 
17
 Bernanke, B. (2011), “The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and 
Practice,” Speech at the Federal Reserve of Boston 56th Economic Conference. 
18
 Goodhart, Charles A.E. (2008), “Central Banks’ Function to Maintain Financial Stability: An 
Uncompleted Task”, http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/1263. 
19 
 Stark,  Jürgen (2010), “In Search of a Robust Monetary Policy Framework”, Keynote Speech 
at the 6th ECB Central Banking Conference “Approaches to Monetary Policy Revisited – 
Lessons from the Crisis”, Frankfurt am Main, November 19. 
20
 Borio, C. (2009), “Implementing the Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation and 
Supervision”, Banque de France Financial Stability Review No. 13, 31-41. 
21
 Blinder, A. (2010), “How Central Should the Central Bank Be?”, Journal of Economic 
Literature, 48(1),123-133. 
6 
 macroprudential instruments that directly target the root causes of the problems 
22
generated by excessive risk taking in times of low interest rates .  
In this regard, Mohanty (2011) argued that while interest rate continues to 
be the dominant instrument for implementing monetary policy, supplementing it 
by other quantity or macroprudential instruments even in normal times will 
23
enhance the flexibility of monetary policy to attain multiple objectives . 
Therefore, post-crisis, there has been greater emphasis on introducing additional 
instruments for central banks to deal with aspects of financial stability. In short, 
the role of central banks in ensuring overall stability of the financial sector has 
now got a fresh impetus.  Against this background, I turn to the experience of 
EMEs. 
Central Bank Objectives in Emerging Markets 
How have the central bank objectives in EMEs been different?  
Historically, price stability has been a key objective for central banks in EMEs 
as in the case of advanced economies. However, given the level of financial 
market development and institutional structure, financial stability has been 
important to policymaking, considering the greater incidence of financial crises 
th
in EMEs in the 20 century. Moreover, many of them were also responsible for 
macroprudential regulation even though only a few of them directly derive it 
from the explicit mandate (Table 1).   
                                                            
22
 Danthine Jean-Pierre (2012), “Reconciling Price and Financial Stability”, Speech at the 
University of Zurich, Zurich, January 24. 
23
 Mohanty Deepak (2011), “Lessons for Monetary Policy from Global Financial Crisis: An 
Emerging Market Perspective”, Paper Presented in the Central Banks Conference of the Bank  
of Israel, Jerusalem, RBI Bulletin, April. 
7 
  
Table 1:  Financial Stability as Objective in Central Banks  
 (Per cent of total number of  central banks) 
 Central Bank All  Advanced Others 
Economies Economies 
1. Explicit Mandate for Financial Stability 3 9 2 
2. Derives Responsibility for Financial Stability from 34 89 18 
Interpretation of Law 
    (i)   from monetary policy objectives 10 26 5 
    (ii)  from payment system tasks 8 20 4 
    (iii) from banking supervisory tasks 12 26 8 
    (iv) other interpretations 5 17 1 
3. Oversees Payments system(s) 100 100 100 
4. Supervises banks 47 34 51 
5. Supervises all financial institutions 16 11 18 
6. Publishes a financial stability report 29 77 15 
7. Separate organisational unit for financial stability 32 83 17 
8. Has clear general accountability (to 45 63 40 
shareholders/government/public) 
9. Has clear accountability for financial stability 2 6 1 
Source: A survey of 157 central banks by Martin ?ihák, 2010. 
Indeed, the resilience of the financial systems in the emerging markets 
during the recent global financial crisis owes to financial stability already being 
24
an important monetary policy objective (De Gregorio, 2011) . Even as many 
EMEs formally adopted inflation targeting (e.g., Chile, Brazil, South Africa, 
Indonesia, Thailand and Mexico), in practice they followed a ‘flexible inflation 
targeting’ framework, as discretion was used to respond to shocks and also to 
25
pursue other objectives. EMEs which did not formally adopt inflation targeting 
(e.g. China, Nigeria, Malaysia and India) have price stability as one of the key 
objectives of monetary policy (Table 2).  
                                                            
24
 De Gregorio, José (2011), “Price and Financial Stability in Modern Central Banking”,  
Keynote Speech, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the joint Latin American and 
Caribbean Economic Association (LACEA)-Latin American Chapter of the Econometric 
Society (LAMES) Conference 2011, University Adolfo Ibáñez, Santiago, November 11. 
25
 Flexible inflation targeting (IT) framework which requires achievement of the desired 
inflation target over the medium-term makes it easier for central banks to look not only for 
price stability, but also consider other variables, such as the output gap or the exchange rate. In 
a sense, flexible IT also implies a departure from the corner solutions of the ‘Impossibility 
Trinity’ of fixed exchange rates, independent monetary policy and perfect capital mobility. 
8 
  
Table 2: Emerging Market Economies: Central Bank Objectives and Policy Tools 
Country Mission/Main Policy Trend Other Functions 
Objectives Instruments Inflation 
1. Brazil  Currency PR 5.3% 
• Bank Regulation 
(IT since 1999) stability and OMO (2005-11) 
• Payment System 
4.5% since financial RR 
2005 stability 
2. Chile  Currency stability PR 3.9% 
• Payment System 
IT (1991) OMO (2007-11) 
• Financial System  
3% since 2007 RR  
• Fiscal Agent 
• Foreign Exchange 
3. China Currency stability PR 3.1% • Payments System 
and growth OMO (2005-11) 
• Financial Markets  
RR 
• Debt Manager 
4. India Currency and PR 6.6% 
• Payment System 
financial stability OMO (2005-12) 
• Bank Regulation  
and growth RR 
• Debt Manager 
 
• Money Market 
5. Indonesia   Currency stability PR 5.2% 
• Bank Regulation  
IT since 2005 OMO (2010-11) 
• Payment System 
5% in 2010-11 RR 
6. Malaysia Currency  and PR 2.8% 
• Bank Regulation  
financial stability  OMO (2005-11) 
• Banker to Government 
RR 
• Financial Inclusion 
Currency stability PR 4.3% 
7. Mexico • Bank Regulation 
IT (3% medium- OMO 2003-11) 
• Payment System 
term since 2003) 
8. Nigeria Currency stability PR 11.5% 
• Banker to Government 
 and management OMO (2005-11) 
• Payment System 
of the financial RR 
• Bank Regulation 
sector  
9. Russia  Currency stability PR 10% 
• Bank Regulation 
(Moving OMO (2005-11) 
• Foreign Exchange   
towards IT) RR 
10.South Africa  Currency and  PR 5.5% 
• Bank Regulation 
Flexible IT financial stability  OMO  (2000-11) 
• Payment System 
(2000) RR 
• Banker to Government  
3-6%  
• Exchange control 
(y-o-y) since 
2009 
Note: PR: Policy Rate;  RR: Reserve Requirement;  OMO: Open Market Operations 
Source: Author’s own compilation and World Economic Outlook, International Monetary Fund. 
Multiple instruments, including quantitative tools such as the cash reserve 
ratio, were used to moderate the pace of domestic credit growth as well as 
monetary impact of large capital inflows in China, India and Russia. In the East 
Asian EMEs, the importance of financial stability and the need to prevent 
financial imbalances by active use of macroprudential policy measures was 
emphasised after the Asian crisis. Accordingly, central banks were given either 
the sole or shared responsibility in pursuing financial stability in addition to the 
9 
 26
traditional mandate of monetary stability (Watanagase, 2012). In South Africa, 
the prudential regulation and supervision of banks assisted and complemented 
the central bank in its pursuit of financial system stability. Similarly, the Central 
Bank of Brazil actively used macroprudential measures to deal with emerging 
financial risks, particularly from excess capital flows in the economy. According 
to a BIS survey (2010), EMEs significantly outnumbered advanced economies 
27
as users of some type of macroprudential instrument.  
Global financial crisis highlighted the importance of using a broader set 
of instruments for financial stability. In this regard, most central banks in EMEs 
where monetary policy and prudential supervision were within their purview 
seem to have been better equipped to address financial stability issues as 
compared to advanced economies. Now, I turn specifically to our experience in 
India. 
Financial Stability: Indian Framework  
The core functions of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) are enshrined in 
the preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 as, “to regulate the issue of 
bank notes and keeping of reserves with a view to securing monetary stability in 
India and generally to operate the currency and credit system of the country to its 
advantage”. In addition, the RBI is also microprudential regulator as the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 entrusts it with the power to regulate and supervise 
commercial banks and co-operative banks. The RBI also regulates and 
supervises non-banking financial companies (NBFCs) under the Reserve Bank 
of India Act, 1934.  Similarly, the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
empowers it to regulate the foreign exchange market and the oversight of the 
payment systems is derived from the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 
2007.  
                                                            
26
 Watanagase Tarisa (2012), Remarks at Monetary Policy Workshop on Strengthening 
Macroprudential Frameworks organised by IMF Regional Office for Asia and Pacific (OAP) 
March 22–23, Tokyo, Japan.  
27
  Bank for International Settlements (2010), “Macroprudential Instruments and Frameworks: a 
Stocktaking of Issues and Experiences”, CGFS Papers, No. 38. 
10 
 Drawing from a wider mandate, monetary policy in India has evolved to 
have multiple objectives of price stability, financial stability and growth.  These 
objectives are not inherently contradictory, rather mutually reinforcing.  The 
Reserve Bank’s approach recognises that price and financial stability are 
important for sustaining high levels of growth which is the ultimate objective of 
public policy. The Reserve Bank’s approach to financial stability has been 
proactive and preventive rather than reactive. Its role as monetary policy 
authority, well integrated with macroprudential regulation and microprudential 
supervision, with an implicit mandate for systemic oversight has enabled the 
Reserve Bank to exploit the synergies across various dimensions (Subbarao, 
28
2011).
Even before the crisis, the institutional arrangement in the financial sector 
was already in place for inter-regulatory co-ordination to monitor financial 
stability in the economy. A High Level Co-ordination Committee on Financial 
Markets (HLCCFM) was set up in 1992 with the Governor of the Reserve Bank 
as Chairman, and the Chiefs of the Securities and Exchange Board of India 
(SEBI), the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority (IRDA) and the 
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority (PFRDA), and the 
Finance Secretary to Government of India as members. However, post-crisis, the 
collegial approach to financial stability has been further strengthened by 
constituting the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC).  
The FSDC, headed by the Finance Minister, was set up in December 2010 
in the wake of the global financial crisis with a specific mandate, inter alia, for 
systemic financial stability. The FSDC is expected to deal with issues relating to 
financial stability, financial sector development, inter-regulatory co-ordination 
and macroprudential supervision of the economy including the functioning of 
large financial conglomerates. A Sub-Committee of the FSDC, headed by the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank, replaced the HLCCFM and is the primary 
                                                            
28
 Subbarao, D. (2011), “Financial Stability Mandate of Central Banks: Issues in the 
International and Indian context”, RBI Bulletin, July. 
11 
 operating arm of the FSDC. This Sub-Committee has also set up a dedicated 
Crisis Management Framework.  
In addition, various committees of the Reserve Bank’s Central Board 
monitor financial stability issues:  the Board for Financial Supervision reviews 
the Reserve Bank’s supervisory and regulatory initiatives and the Board for 
Payment and Settlement Systems oversees the overall functioning of the 
payment system. 
Another development signifying the Reserve Bank’s role in the context of 
financial stability is the setting up of Financial Stability Unit in the Bank in July 
2009 with a mandate to conduct effective macroprudential surveillance of the 
financial system on an ongoing basis and enable early detection of any incipient 
signs of instability. The Reserve Bank also brings out biannual Financial 
Stability Reports. Incidentally, the IMF has just concluded a Financial Sector 
Assessment Programme, which in fact comes close on the heels of a 
comprehensive self assessment of financial sector carried out by the Reserve 
Bank. Thus, the RBI is one of those central banks to recognise financial stability 
as one of the objectives of monetary policy even before the crisis. 
Lessons for Central Banks  
In my opinion, the global financial crisis has fundamentally altered the 
way we used to view monetary policy and financial stability and the interface 
between them. However, there are issues which entail further work in three key 
areas.  First, a relook at monetary policy framework in terms of both objectives 
and instruments towards a clear recognition of financial stability.  Second, to put 
in place an appropriate institutional mechanism drawing upon countries’ own 
experience and history for better co-ordination among the concerned regulatory 
entities to deliver on financial stability.  Third, address the communication 
challenge of multiple objectives to preserve central bank credibility to ensure 
price and financial stability.  Let me now elaborate on each of these three 
aspects. 
12 
 (i) Monetary policy framework 
The view that monetary policy framework should allow policymakers to 
lean against the build-up of financial imbalances, even if near-term inflation 
expectations remain anchored, is gaining importance. While there is little doubt 
that monetary policy framework of central banks needs to change, the moot 
point is what should be the ideal monetary policy framework for better analysis 
of the macroeconomic effects of financial imbalances?  One approach could be 
to formally broaden the set of information variables for monetary policy decision 
making: in a way, for example, the two pillar approach of the ECB or the 
multiple indicators approach of the Reserve Bank of India that factors in 
29
financial considerations into monetary policy. The multiple indicators 
approach has the advantages of broad-basing monetary policy operations on a 
large set of information such as money, credit, asset prices, interest rates and 
exchange rate and providing flexibility in the conduct of monetary management. 
Such approach, however, may involve a greater element of judgment.   
At an operational level, the most widely accepted presentation of 
monetary policy reaction function that combines both inflation and growth 
objectives is the “Taylor Rule”.  The Taylor rule can be augmented by adding 
financial variables to the standard monetary reaction function based on inflation 
and the output gap so as to enhance central banks’ ability to react to financial 
stability concerns. However, efficiency of such a formulation needs to be tested. 
Whichever framework is adopted, there should be flexibility for the central bank 
to respond to potential imbalances and the risks, apart from growth and inflation 
control.  
(ii) Institutional design for better coordination 
The recent crisis and the subsequent response have shed new light on the 
critical role of central banks in promoting financial stability. However, it needs 
                                                            
29
 For discussion on multiple indicators approach, please see: Mohanty (2010), “Monetary 
Policy Framework in India – Experience with Multiple-indicators Approach”, RBI Bulletin, 
March. 
13 
 to be recognised that this added responsibility should not come at the cost of 
their conventional role for price stability. This is more relevant particularly for 
central banks in EMEs which admittedly, are yet to achieve that level of 
credibility as their advanced economy counterparts. For many EMEs, exchange 
rate stability is an important objective, and without price stability it is not 
possible to maintain exchange rate stability.  Furthermore, the financial markets 
and institutions have grown in complexity, the oversight and regulation of which 
could be beyond a single entity such as the central bank. Hence, financial 
stability would have to be a joint responsibility, though the central bank could 
have a dominant role by virtue of it being the natural lender of last resort. 
However, there is a need to explicitly incorporate the financial stability role of 
the central bank into its statute to establish an accountability framework. 
The challenge for a central bank is to achieve multiple objectives without 
losing credibility as a monetary authority solely responsible for price stability. 
This would be possible only if policies implemented by various stakeholders in 
financial stability are coherent. Accordingly, an appropriate design for co-
ordination mechanism is required to derive synergies between monetary policy 
and macroprudential policy and make more effective use of policy tools 
available with multiple bodies having the mandate of financial stability.  
The design of co-ordination mechanism may, however, vary across 
countries depending on the nature and size of their financial systems and their 
own historical experience.  In fact, efforts towards greater institutionalisation of 
co-ordination mechanism have already begun. Most prominent examples are the 
newly created bodies, both in advanced countries and EMEs, like the Financial 
Stability Oversight Council in the US, the Financial Policy Committee (Interim) 
in the UK, the European Systemic Risk Board for the European Union, Financial 
Regulation and Systemic Risk Council in France, Financial Stability Council in 
Chile, Council for the Stability of the Financial System in Mexico and Financial 
Stability and Development Council in India (Table 3). In some other countries, 
financial stability framework has been strengthened by setting up committees in 
central banks to gauge systemic risk (e.g., Brazil in 2011).  
14 
 Table 3: Financial Stability Framework after the Crisis 
Country/ Objective and Functions Structure 
Institution 
1. Belgium • To be responsible for the Chairman: Central Bank Governor 
Committee for Members:  
prudential supervision of 
Systemic Risks and systemic financial • Central Bank’s Board of Directors  
System-relevant 
institutions 
• Management Committee of the Commission 
Financial 
Bancaire Financière et des Assurances  
Institutions 
• One member from Ministry of Finance as an 
(CSRSFI), July 
observer 
2010 
2. Chile Chairman: Treasury Minister  
• To oversee the integrity and 
Financial Stability solidity of the financial Members:  
Council, July 2011 
system, providing the • Superintendent of Securities and Insurance 
mechanisms for co-
• Superintendent of Banks and Financial 
ordinating and exchanging 
Institutions   
the information necessary to 
• Superintendent of Pensions (In addition, the  
ensure the adequate 
Central Bank is invited for meeting). 
management of systemic risk 
and the resolution of critical 
situations involved in the 
carrying out of the functions 
and powers of the 
superintendents in the 
economic area 
3. EU  ESRB is part of the European Chairman:  President of the ECB 
The European System of Financial Supervision Members: 
Systemic Risk (ESFS). It  
•  Vice-President of ECB 
Board (ESRB), 
• ensures supervision of the • Governors of the member national central banks  
November 2010 
Union’s financial system; 
• One member of the European Commission  
• is responsible for the 
• Chairperson of the European Banking Authority 
macroprudential oversight of 
(EBA)  
the financial system within 
• Chairperson of the European Insurance and 
the European Union and 
Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) 
contributes to the prevention 
• Chairperson of the European Securities and 
or mitigation of systemic 
Markets Authority (ESMA)  
risks to financial stability in 
• Chair and the two Vice-Chairs of the Advisory 
the Union that arise from 
Scientific Committee (ASC)  
developments within the 
• Chair of the Advisory Technical Committee 
financial system; 
(ATC)  
• presents Annual Report to 
the European Parliament and 
the Council. 
4. France Chairman: Finance Minister 
• To foster co-operation and 
Financial Members:  
information exchange and 
Regulation and 
consider French • Governor of the Banque de France  
Systemic Risk 
market/institution 
• President of the Financial Markets Authority  
Council (FRSRC) 
developments from a 
• President of the Accounting Standards Authority 
macroprudential perspective 
15 
 5. India  • To strengthen and Chairman: Finance Minister 
Financial Stability Sub-Committee under the Chairmanship of Governor 
institutionalise the 
and Development mechanism for maintaining of the Reserve Bank  
Council (FSDC) Member of the Council: 
financial stability and 
• Reserve Bank of India 
strengthen the institutional 
framework for co-ordination 
• Securities and Exchange Board of India, 
among all regulators and the 
• Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Government. 
• Pension Fund Regulatory and Development 
Authority 
• Finance Secretary and/or Secretary, Department 
of Economic Affairs,  
• Secretary, Department of Financial Services, 
• Chief Economic Adviser 
6. Mexico Chairman: Secretary, Secretariat of Finance and 
• To analyse risks and identify 
Council for the Public Credit  
opportunities that may 
Stability of the Members: 
disrupt the functioning of the 
Financial System 
financial system, and thus • Under Secretary, Secretariat of Finance and 
(CESF), 2010 reduce the impact on the Public Credit 
economy. 
• President, National Banking and Securities 
Commission 
• President, National Insurance and Surety 
Commission 
• President, National Commission for the Pension 
System 
• Executive Secretary, Institute for the Protection 
of Banking Savings 
• Governor, Central Bank 
• Two Deputy Governors, Central Bank 
7. US  • Identifying and mitigating Chairman: Secretary of the Treasury 
Financial Stability Member Agencies: 
risks to the stability of the 
Oversight Council 
US financial system. • Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(FSOC), October 
To publish Annual Report 
• Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
2010 
which covers: 
•  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
• the activities of the Council, 
• Federal Housing Finance Agency   
• significant financial market 
• National Credit Union Administration Board 
and regulatory 
• Office of the Comptroller of the Currency   
developments, 
•  Securities and Exchange Commission 
• potential emerging threats 
• Treasury Department 
to the financial stability of 
• Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
the US. 
8. UK  Structure of Interim FPC 
• As per the Financial 
Interim Financial Services Bill (January Chairman: Governor of the Bank of England (BoE) 
Policy Committee Members:  
2012), a Financial Policy 
(FPC), February Committee (FPC) will be • BoE’s Deputy Governor for Financial Stability 
2011 
charged with identifying, 
• BoE’s Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy 
monitoring and taking 
• Chief Executive of the Financial Services 
action to remove or reduce 
Authority 
systemic risks with a view 
• the Chairman of the Financial Services Authority 
to protecting and enhancing 
• the BoE's Executive Director for Financial 
the resilience of the UK 
Stability  
financial system. 
• BoE's Executive Director for Markets 
• Responsible for the Bank of 
• External Members : Four 
England’s bi-annual 
• Non-Voting members: One member each from the 
Financial Stability Report. 
Financial Conduct Authority and a representative 
of the Treasury. 
Source: Compiled from  respective central banks’ website. 
 
16 
  Under the new institutional design, as shown in Table 3, though financial 
stability has been recognised as a shared responsibility, central banks have been 
assigned the lead role in most of the countries. Even as details of the newly 
created bodies differ, the thrust is the same, i.e., better co-ordination to gauge 
systemic risks and plan an appropriate response.  Furthermore, with increasing 
sovereign risk concerns in a number of economies, particularly the advanced 
economies, better policy response is expected as fiscal authorities are also a part 
of the new institutional framework for financial stability. However, even under 
the more collegial approach to financial stability, policy co-ordination is not 
going to be so easy, especially when there is a problem of time-inconsistency 
and the objective functions of the authorities may not always be the same (Praet, 
30
2011). It is also important to guard against the risk that active involvement of 
governments should not bring back fiscal dominance and compromise the 
autonomy of each regulator and the central bank. 
(iii) Central bank communication 
In a market-determined system, central banks have placed a greater 
reliance on transparency and communication to enhance monetary policy 
transmission and establish accountability to the public for their decision-making.  
So far the experience shows that communication on monetary policy issues has 
moved from complete secrecy, to constructive ambiguity to transparency. For 
instance, the Fed and the ECB have in recent years frequently provided fairly 
direct indications about future interest-rate decisions in their official statements. 
We, in the RBI, have also started giving forward guidance since September 
2010.  However, there are several challenges. 
It is not easy to communicate clearly on a single objective. Going 
forward, as central banks broaden their mandates and institutional design grows 
in complexity, so also will the communication challenges. For example, if a 
central bank were to ease monetary policy on financial stability concerns even 
                                                            
30
 Praet, Peter (2011), “The (Changing) Role of Central Banks in Financial Stability Policies”, 
Speech at the 14th Annual Internal Banking Conference, Organised by the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Chicago and the European Central Bank, Chicago, November 10. 
17 
 when inflation is high, it risks unhinging of inflation expectations, which in turn 
could complicate financial stability. 
During the recent crisis, there were many instances of communication 
challenges faced by central banks. For instance, the US Fed faced 
communication challenge with regard to quantitative easing and the exit policy 
of its unconventional measures. We, in the RBI, had to face communication 
challenge when we reduced cash reserve ratio (CRR) of banks in January and 
March 2012 on liquidity concerns even when inflation was above our tolerance 
level.  While some interpreted it as premature reversal of tight monetary policy 
stance, others saw this as a pure liquidity action not inconsistent with our 
monetary stance.   
If the policy measures are not properly guided and not understood as 
intended, they may not transmit the right signal and eventually prove to be a 
noise to financial market entities. Guidance by central banks, at best, could be 
conditional because of the provisional nature of immediate available information 
set, limitations of macro models, incomplete knowledge and uncertainties about 
the evolution of the economy and periodic unanticipated shocks. Thus, 
transparency in communication is a double-edged sword which at times could 
produce unintended consequences.  As central banks broaden their objectives so 
also they have to hone their communication skills. 
Conclusion 
To sum up:  Financial stability as an objective of central banks has turned 
a full circle from being the predominant objective, to a virtual neglect to being 
reinstated recently as an important objective drawing on the lessons of global 
financial crisis.  However, financial markets and institutions have grown in 
complexity making it difficult for a single entity to deliver on financial stability.  
Therefore, financial stability has to be a shared responsibility wherein central 
banks have a predominant role. This necessitates a fresh look at monetary policy 
framework, institutional design for policy co-ordination and effective 
communication. Moreover, there is a need for explicit recognition of financial 
18 
 stability objective, particularly in the statute of the central bank, to establish an 
accountability framework. While it is not very apparent whether price stability 
can ensure financial stability, it is clear that price instability could jeopardise 
financial stability. Financial stability objective, therefore, cannot or should not 
override the price stability objective, which should continue to be the 
predominant objective of monetary policy.  
Thank you. 
 
19 
 