1
Corporate Debt Restructuring- Issues and Way Forward
Ms. Soundara Kumar, Deputy Managing Director, State Bank of India, Mr. Siby 
Anthony, Managing Director & CEO, Edelweiss Asset Reconstruction Co. Ltd., Mr. 
R. Sundaram, President (Finance) & Company Secretary, Indo Count Industries 
Limited, Mr. T.R Madhavan, Executive Chairman, Centrum Group, and, seated in 
front of the dais, Mr. Chandir Gidwani , Promoter, Centrum Group, other 
distinguished guests, members of the print and electronic media, ladies and 
gentlemen, I wish all of you  a very good morning . I must also remember in 
absentia, Mr. K. V. Krishnamurthy, ex-Chairman and Managing Director, Bank of 
India, because of whose request I am here today. It is indeed my pleasure to be here 
today to discuss this very topical subject of Corporate Debt Restructuring – a subject 
in which I also have a lot of personal interest.  
 
2. Corporate Debt Restructuring (CDR) or simply restructuring of loans and 
advances, with all its pros and cons, is an effective financial tool, especially during 
the times of crisis, for smoothening the adverse effects of economic downturns on 
the borrowers of credit as well as their lenders. I congratulate the organisers of the 
Seminar for choosing this very relevant topic at a time when the world economy has 
completed five years since the sub-prime crisis in the USA in mid-2007, which gave 
way to the full-fledged global financial crisis of 2008 and the global recession of 
2009, the fourth such recession since World War II. The present crisis and the global 
recession of 2009, like the previous three global recessions of 1975, 1982 and 1991 
and the great depression of the 1930s, have necessitated the banks all over the 
world to deleverage as also to restructure a large number of their household and 
corporate debt. But, any kind of restructuring has to be accompanied by prudence on 
the part of the lenders and financial discipline on the part of the borrowers. Absence 
of these conditions results in dead weight loss to the society in general.  
 
Ethics and the Role of Finance Professionals 
                                                 
1
  Address  by  Dr.  K.  C.  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  at  the  Corporate  Debt 
Restructuring Conference 2012 organized by Centrum Group at Mumbai on August 11, 2012. Assistance 
provided by Shri M.P.Baliga, Ms Dimple Bhandia and Shri M. K. Poddar in preparation of this address is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
1 
 3. I will also like to quote two statements from the corporate mission of the organiser 
(Centrum Group) of this Conference , which interconnect the reasons for and 
solutions to the woes of the financial sector and which is also relevant to the topic of 
my discussion.  
• Challenge the status quo and provide financial consultancy and syndicated 
products to deliver value beyond expectations. 
• Focus on conducting business ethically. 
Firstly, challenging the status quo and delivering value beyond expectations require 
innovation in products and services. However, ethics help in preventing misuse. 
These facts can be seen in the genesis of the global financial crisis. It was not the 
innovative financial products but the lack of ethics in their design and sale which led 
to the crisis. CDR was also a beautiful innovation to protect the values of both the 
corporates under distress and the credit portfolio of their lenders. However, due to 
the extraordinary rise in the number and volume of advances being restructured 
under the scheme in recent times, it has come under media scanner, and engaged 
the attention of the financial market players, the borrowers, the regulators and the 
policy makers. However, it appears that the provisions of the CDR mechanism have 
not been used very ethically and judiciously, giving rise to the unprecedented 
increase in cases under CDR.  
 
4. Viability criteria, a critical element in any restructuring, and its assessment brings 
into picture a number of professionals apart from the essential counterparties to a 
loan agreement, i.e. the borrowers and the lenders. Financial services companies 
and professionals comprising of investment bankers, Chartered Accountants, 
Company Secretaries, Surveyors, Chartered Engineers, Financial Analysts, Cost 
Accountants, Lawyers, etc., play a very important role in assessing the viability of 
restructuring proposals. Due to constraints of time and skills as also because of 
statutory requirements, lenders have to rely on the due-diligence done and 
certificates given by such professionals. However, such decisions are prone to Type 
I and Type II errors of statistics, i.e. an unscrupulous borrower with an unviable 
account may avail the benefit of restructuring and at the same time, a bonafide 
2 
 borrower with a viable account may be denied the opportunity to resurrect his 
account. Therefore, ethics and professionalism of individuals in such positions go a 
long way in ensuring that such errors do not occur. Centrum and other professionals, 
therefore, must ensure that their mission statements and professional codes of 
conduct do not remain mere fancy statements but become their raison d'être. 
 
5. Against this backdrop, I will structure my discussions in various segments. First, I 
will elaborate on what constitutes debt restructuring and the genesis of restructuring, 
including that of corporate debt restructuring, in the country. I will then discuss why 
restructuring is important and also what is the role of regulators in debt restructuring. 
Debt restructuring, in particular corporate debt restructuring, has become a subject 
of discussion of late. I will touch upon the reasons why this is so, going on to talk 
about why the Reserve Bank is concerned in this regard. Finally, I will outline what I 
feel is the way forward if restructuring is to continue as an instrument for ensuring 
the well being of lenders, borrowers and the society at large. 
What is Restructuring and its Genesis  
6. As I briefly mentioned a little while ago, any change in the Terms and Conditions 
of the loan or credit, especially in respect of its servicing, is called restructuring of 
loan/ debt. Corporate debt restructuring is a specialised institutional mechanism for 
restructuring large exposures involving more than one lender under 
consortium/multiple banking arrangements. 
7. Stijn Claessens of the World Bank has defined and explained in detail the term 
‘restructuring’ in his seminal paper  “Policy Approaches to Corporate Restructuring 
around the World: What Worked, What Failed?” I quote “Restructuring refers to 
several related processes: recognizing and allocating financial losses, restructuring 
the financial claims of financial institutions and corporations, and restructuring the 
operations of financial institutions and corporations. Recognition or resolution 
involves the allocation of existing losses and associated redistribution of wealth and 
control. Losses—that is, differences between financial institutions’ and corporations’ 
market value of assets and nominal values of liabilities—can be allocated to 
shareholders by dilution, to depositors and external creditors by reduction (of the 
3 
 present value) of their claims, to employees and suppliers by payment of lower 
wages and prices, and to the government—that is, the public at large—through 
higher taxes, expenditure cuts, or inflation. Financial restructuring for corporations 
can take many forms: rescheduling (extension of maturities), lower interest rates, 
debt for equity swaps, debt forgiveness, indexing of interest payments to earnings, 
and so on. The main aims of financial restructuring are separating and treating 
appropriately viable and nonviable firms and creating the right incentives for 
operational restructuring. Operational restructuring, an on-going process, includes 
improvements in efficiency and management, reductions in staff and wages, sales of 
assets (for example, reduction in subsidiaries), enhanced marketing efforts, and so 
on, with the expectation of higher profitability and cash flow”. Unquote. 
8. Before I go into the details of the issues involving CDR in India, I will like to 
elucidate, in brief, the evolution of restructuring. Restructuring of loans and advances 
is not a new phenomenon in India and terms such as rescheduling / renegotiation / 
rehabilitation / restructuring have been used interchangeably by the Reserve Bank of 
India (RBI) and banks since long. Reserve Bank’s prudential guidelines on 
restructuring of advances have evolved over a period of time from simple instructions 
to reschedule the loans of people affected by natural calamities in the late 1970s to 
comprehensive guidelines on restructuring of loans to large corporates under 
consortium/multiple banking arrangement. The guidelines gradually evolved in tune 
with the changing dynamics of the financial and real markets by taking into account 
the international best practices, recommendations of various committees and 
feedback from the stakeholders. CDR is a specialised institutional arrangement for 
restructuring of large credit exposures of multiple banks to corporates. 
9. The need for such a specialised institutional mechanism arose in the background 
of difficulties faced by banks while restructuring their large exposures involving more 
than one lender, under consortium/multiple banking arrangement. While it was easier 
for banks to negotiate the terms of restructuring of their own exposure with their 
customers, they found it difficult to co-ordinate their negotiation and monitoring 
efforts where restructuring involved multiple lenders. Therefore, a need was felt to 
devise a system where restructuring of large corporate exposures from multiple 
4 
 banks under consortium/multiple banking arrangements could be carried out. The 
Reserve Bank was seized of the matter and it put in place the scheme of CDR in 
August 2001 based on the mechanism prevalent in countries like the U.K., Thailand, 
Korea, Malaysia, etc. These guidelines were finalised after extensive discussion 
between Government of India, Reserve Bank, Banks and FIs.  
10. The objective of the CDR framework was to ensure timely and transparent 
mechanism for restructuring the corporate debts of viable entities facing problems, 
outside the purview of BIFR, DRT and other legal proceedings, for the benefit of all 
concerned. In particular, the framework aimed at preserving viable corporates 
affected by certain internal and external factors, thereby minimizing the losses to the 
creditors and other stakeholders through an orderly and coordinated restructuring 
programme. Viability of the account was an important condition for restructuring with 
malfeasance/fraud and cases of wilful default being barred from the CDR 
mechanism. These guidelines also adopted the existing asset classification benefit 
available to fully secured standard accounts, on restructuring, which was previously 
permitted vide a March 2001 circular.  These guidelines on CDR were subsequently 
reviewed and revised on the basis of recommendations of a High Level Group under 
the Chairmanship of Shri Vepa Kamesam, in February 2003 and a Special Group 
under the Chairmanship of Smt. S. Gopinath, in November 2005. Subsequent to 
these reviews, guidelines on CDR mechanism allowed restructuring of exposures of 
Rs.10 crore and above and restructuring of accounts even classified as Doubtful, 
subject to their viability, under category 2 CDR System. Through these guidelines, 
RBI also delegated the authority to approve the corporate debt restructuring 
packages to CDR Standing Forum and CDR Empowered Group and retained with 
itself only the authority to issue the broad guidelines. The current comprehensive 
guidelines on CDR as well as non-CDR restructuring were issued in August 2008. 
 
Why is Restructuring Required? 
11. Let me now turn to the question of why restructuring is required. You would 
agree that it is a societal convention to attempt to assist anyone in distress. Similarly, 
restructuring is a tool to lend a hand of assistance to borrowers who are temporarily 
5 
 in distress, in particular, where the distress is caused by circumstances beyond the 
control of the borrower. Thus, debt restructuring may be required under certain 
circumstances viz. a general downturn in the economy or in any particular sector, 
which result in the deterioration in the financial health of borrowers. It may also be 
warranted in case of emergence of legal or other issues that cause delays, 
particularly in cases of project implementation. External developments, such as 
global factors may also result in widespread impact on the financial health of 
borrowers and may necessitate use of restructuring as a tool to help the borrower 
tide over difficult circumstances. 
 
Restructuring of Accounts – Role of the Regulator 
12. Let me now turn to the role of the regulator in restructuring of accounts. But first 
let me explore some myths which are commonly accepted about restructuring in the 
country. First, it is a prevalent misconception among the industry and borrowers that 
restructuring can be carried out only in cases of standard accounts. The Reserve 
Bank has clarified time and again that even the accounts classified as substandard 
and doubtful can be restructured, if found viable. However, the asset classification 
benefit of retention of standard account classification after restructuring, although it 
being an event of impairment, is a regulatory forbearance. Such regulatory 
forbearance is available on certain conditions laid down by the Reserve Bank’s 
guidelines. But accounts can always be restructured outside the regulatory 
forbearance, if found viable.  
13. Even the accounts which are compulsorily downgraded on restructuring due to 
absence of regulatory forbearance can be upgraded after satisfactory performance 
during the specified period. Industry, borrowers as well as banks approach the 
Reserve Bank for granting them the permission to restructure their accounts on 
account of some hardship. As the RBI guidelines on restructuring are comprehensive 
and applicable to all borrowers and they already provide some regulatory 
forbearance, such requests imply a request for further relaxations in our guidelines.  
Such frequent tweaking with regulatory guidelines is not an ideal practice and 
therefore, the Reserve Bank generally does not agree to such requests. At times an 
impression is created that such refusals imply that these accounts cannot be 
6 
 restructured. However, the fact remains that restructuring of viable accounts is 
always in the domain of the banks and it is the duty of the banks to nurture a viable 
account even in the absence of asset classification benefit. 
14. Having presented some of these common misconceptions about the regulatory 
approach to restructuring; let me know turn to why regulators are interested in what 
is, after all, a bilateral commercial decision between the borrower and the bank. The 
regulator’s interest in restructuring emerges from the close linkages between 
restructured accounts and non-performing advances (NPAs). Let me elucidate. If the 
terms and conditions of loans, especially in relation to repayment are not adhered to, 
especially for a specified period of time, account is classified as an NPA. If accounts 
are restructured, then too, the terms and conditions of the loans are not fulfilled. But 
such accounts are not always classified as NPAs. From an operational perspective, 
there can be two types of restructured accounts: the first type of accounts are those 
which are restructured and classified as NPAs; the second type are those which are 
restructured but asset classification is retained as standard. 
15. In the first case, regulatory concerns are few and limited to the issue of 
upgrading the account to the standard category. In general, a NPA account, can be 
upgraded when the terms and conditions of the loan are fulfilled by the borrower. In 
the case of restructured accounts, however, the original terms and conditions are 
changed. Hence, the issue of the conditions under which the account can be 
considered as standard or upgraded to the standard category become pertinent. 
Regulatory guidelines attempt to lay down the broad parameters under which 
restructured accounts can be treated as standard.  The second type of restructured 
accounts, however, attract greater regulatory attention, due to the associated moral 
hazard problems – that of the  potential of an account being restructured, at times 
repeatedly, to avoid classification as an NPA. This give rise to the need for 
regulatory and/or  prudential guidance. Hence, the role of the regulator in case of 
restructuring of accounts arises with regard to the issue of prudential guidelines for 
determining the asset classification of account at the time of restructuring and the 
time frame for upgradation of restructured NPA accounts. The regulator also comes 
7 
 into the picture for the purpose of granting regulatory forbearance with respect to 
asset classification under exceptional circumstances. 
Trends in Restructuring  
16. As I mentioned at the outset, CDR, has come under the attention because of the 
extraordinary rise in the number and volume of advances being restructured under 
the scheme in recent times. The guidelines on restructuring have generally been 
used to the advantage of both the borrowers and the banks in situations of economic 
downturns and temporary cash flow problems. However, due to extraordinary rise in 
the cases referred to and restructured under CDR mechanism during the current and 
previous fiscal years, questions are being raised as to whether this indicates a 
general downturn or gross misuse of the CDR Mechanism by banks and corporate 
borrowers. 
17. Slowdown in the country amidst overall global slowdown is generally being cited 
as the reason for the recent increase in restructured accounts. In fact, an analysis of 
the data and trends in restructured accounts, especially standard restructured 
accounts, seem to suggest differently. The reason for choosing the data on standard 
restructured accounts is that possibilities of unviable accounts getting restructured is 
greater when some kind of regulatory forbearance is available on asset quality and 
provisioning. 
18. The increase in resorting to restructuring can be partially attributed to excessive 
leveraging by some borrowers during boom period. An analysis of the trends in 
leverage of the larger borrowers in the country during the first decade of this century 
certainly seems to suggest this. Again, there are deficiencies in the manner in which 
project appraisal is conducted especially with regard to cash flow analysis and 
determination of the date of completion of projects. When commercial operations are 
delayed, a host of factors including the uncertainties surrounding the project are 
cited as the reason. But, when there are uncertainties, these have to be accounted 
for during the appraisal of the project and a proper cushion needs to be built to take 
care of these uncertainties.  Instead, the effort is to appraise a project keeping in 
view an aggressive repayment schedule resulting in a very short term focus of 
8 
 borrowers, banks and financial analysts who appraise the project. This short term 
focus, in many cases, is the reason for the need for successive restructuring. 
19. Let us look at some of statistical trends in restructured advances in the last few 
years. From the data available with RBI (Table 1), it is observed that between March 
2009 and March 2012, while total gross advances of the banking system grew at a 
compound annual growth rate of less than 20 per cent, restructured standard 
advances grew by over 40 per cent. Resultantly, the proportion of Restructured 
Standard Advances to Gross Total Advances increased from 3.45 per cent in March 
2011 to 4.68 per cent in March 2012. 
Table 1: Trends in Restructuring 
Particulars March March March March 
2009 2010 2011 2012 
Gross Advances  Gross Advances (Rs. 27,53,365 32,27,287 39,82,954 46,55,271 
 Crore)    
    
Growth Rate (%)  17.21 23.41  16.88 
  
Compound annual  
growth rate (2009- 19.13 
2012) (%) 
 
Restructured Restructured Standard 75,304 1,36,426 1,37,602 2,18,068 
Standard Advances Advances (Rs. Crore)   
    
Growth Rate (%)  81.17 0.86 58.48 
  
Compound annual  
growth rate (2009- 42.54 
2012) (%) 
Restructured Ratio (%) 2.73 4.23 3.45  4.68 
Standard to Gross 
Advances 
 
20. A further analysis of data suggests distinct trends in restructured accounts in 
public sector banks and in private sector and foreign banks. Restructured accounts 
have growth at a compound annual growth rate of 47.86 per cent in public sector 
banks as against a growth rate of credit of 19.57 per cent. The corresponding figures 
for private sector and foreign banks are 8.12 per cent (restructured advances) and 
19.88 per cent (credit growth) and (-) 25.48 per cent (restructured advances) and 
9 
 10.96 per cent (credit growth) respectively. Further, as on March 2012, the ratio of 
Restructured Standard Advances to Total Gross Advances is highest for PSBs at 
5.73 per cent, while the ratio is significantly lower for private and foreign banks at 
1.61 per cent and 0.22 per cent, respectively (Tables 2 and 3).  
Table 2: Trends in Restructuring across Bank Groups - Growth Rates in %  
Particulars  2009-10  2010-11  2011-12  
 Gross Restructured Gross Restructured Gross Restructured 
Advances  Standard Advances  Standard Advances  Standard 
Advances  Advances  Advances (*) 
All Banks  17.21  81.17 23.41 0.86 16.88  58.48 
(42.54) 
Public Sector 19.81  96.59 22.98 3.86 16.02  58.33 
Banks  (47.86) 
Private Sector 12.80  5.60 26.60 (-)28.48 20.65  67.35 
Banks  (8.12) 
Foreign Banks  (-)1.38  (-)25.06 19.06 (-)27.56 16.35  (-)23.76 
((-)25.48) 
(*) Figures in brackets are the compound annual growth rates between 2009 and 2012 
Table 3: Ratio of Restructured Standard Advances to Gross Advances (%) 
across Bank Groups 
Particulars  March 2009  March 2010  March 2011  March 2012  
All Banks  2.73 4.23 3.45  4.68 
Public Sector Banks  3.03 4.97 4.20  5.73 
Private Sector Banks  2.19 2.05 1.16  1.61 
Foreign Banks  0.73 0.55 0.34  0.22 
 
21. A further granular breakup of the data on restructuring over the last few years 
indicates that the ratio of restructured accounts to gross advances is the highest for 
the Industries sector at 8.24 per cent (with medium and large industries sector being 
at 9.34 per cent). The ratio for agriculture stood at 1.45 per cent, while that for 
services stood at 3.99 per cent (with micro and small services being 0.94 per cent). 
While the ratio stood at 2.24 per cent for priority sector advances, it stood at 5.83 per 
cent for non-priority sector loans. The data clearly highlights the fact that 
restructuring is resorted to liberally in case of industrial sector (particularly large 
10 
 industries), while smaller borrower accounts such as agriculture and micro and small 
enterprises see less of restructuring (Tables 4 and 5). 
Table 4: Trends in Restructuring across Sectors - Growth Rates in %  
Particulars  2009-10  2010-11  2011-12  
Gross Restructured Gross Restructured Gross Restructured 
Segments 
Advances Standard Advances Standard Advances Standard 
Advances Advances Advances 
Agriculture  25.74  64.91  15.65  11.16  15.09  20.74  
Industries  24.14  93.87  26.96  (-)0.23  19.52  64.70  
 Industries - Micro and Small  13.06  52.79  12.84  (-)3.61  20.32  (-)17.51  
Industries - Med and Large  26.79  99.21  29.96  0.11  19.38  72.59  
Services  29.02  79.91  31.99  35.67  20.74  134.34  
Services - Micro and Small  53.87  49.44  42.19  1.50  14.74  1.02  
Services - Med and Large  22.03  89.36  28.37  44.04  23.10  157.35  
Others  1.08  49.37  16.78  (-)14.80  11.20  (-)16.04  
Total  17.21  81.17  23.41  0.86  16.88  58.48  
 
Table 5: Ratio of Restructured Standard Advances to Gross Advances (%) 
across Sectors 
Particulars March 2009 March  2010 March 2011 March 2012 
Agriculture  1.10 1.44 1.38 1.45  
Industries  4.87 7.60 5.98 8.24  
    Micro and Small  2.91 3.93 3.36 2.30  
    Medium & Large  5.34 8.39 6.46 9.34  
Services  1.43 2.00 2.05 3.99  
    Micro and Small  1.54 1.50 1.07 0.94  
    Medium and Large  1.40 2.17 2.44 5.10  
Others  1.78 2.62 1.91 1.45  
Total  2.73 4.23 3.45 4.68  
 
 
11 
 Trends in Restructuring – Regulatory Concerns 
22. The above trends clearly underscore the reasons for the regulatory discomfort 
with the manner in which the extant restructuring guidelines and the associated 
regulatory forbearance are being used. While clearly there is cause for concern 
given the pace and quantum of restructuring over the last few years, the concerns 
are aggravated by the fact that the restructuring is neither being permitted in a 
transparent and objective manner by banks nor is it being resorted to in a non-
discriminatory manner. 
23. It is clearly observed that public sector banks share a disproportionate burden of 
such accounts. If the reason for the recent increase in restructured accounts is 
indeed the economic downturn, then it should have been reflected across all bank 
groups and not just public sector banks. The trends are arguably a reflection of the 
fact that public sector banks have not been as judicious in the use of restructuring as 
a credit management tool as the private sector and foreign banks. Recently 
announced Q1 results for 2012-13 also indicate that private sector banks have 
managed their credit portfolio in a better way than the PSBs. 
24. The data on restructuring also throws up an important question as to whether the 
small and marginal borrowers are discriminated against by the banks for 
restructuring of their accounts, even if found viable. Again, if the economic downturn 
were the sole reason for the increase in restructured accounts of late, then the 
downturn should logically have affected the weaker segments of the economy more, 
leading to a higher share of restructured accounts in the SME and priority sectors, 
which is not the case. The data on restructuring, on the contrary, seems to suggest 
that, when it comes to restructuring, our banks have a substantial bias towards more 
privileged borrowers vis-à-vis small borrowers. It seems to suggest that restructuring 
of accounts is being resorted to avoid classification of accounts as NPA. 
CDR – An Instrument of Misuse / Abuse? 
25. This brings me to the issue of misuse/abuse of CDR Mechanism by banks as 
well as corporates. We may note that even the best of intentions gets defeated when 
a system is not used judiciously. The CDR Mechanism was devised as there was a 
12 
 need for an institutional mechanism to support the large, viable accounts facing 
temporary problems as also to preserve the values of large exposures of banks. As 
previously stated, restructuring has been a prominent central banking tool in the 
times of crisis across most jurisdictions despite its moral hazard aspects. It is also 
accompanied by the regulatory forbearance on asset classification, provisioning and 
capital adequacy in order to provide the banks and corporates the much needed 
leeway to rejuvenate their productive assets during times of crisis.  
26. Regulatory forbearance on asset classification in India, however, has become a 
standing feature irrespective of the presence or absence of a financial 
crisis/economic downturn. Rather, it has been observed lately that even at the 
slightest sign of slowing down of the economy or any particular sector of the 
economy, banks as well as corporates start demanding even further relaxations in 
the regulatory forbearance on restructuring. It may be recalled here that CDR 
Mechanism has been given some special dispensation regarding asset classification 
on repeated restructuring which is not available to non-CDR restructuring.  
27. In view of the foregoing observations, I am compelled to infer that, perhaps, the 
availability of standing regulatory forbearance to CDR Mechanism has prompted 
banks to avoid using other means of credit management judiciously, i.e., proper due-
diligence before sanctioning a credit facility, regular and proper monitoring of 
accounts after disbursal and taking prompt corrective action on the first signs of 
weakness in the accounts.   While establishing viability of the account before 
restructuring the same is a mandatory condition, it seems that proper due-diligence 
is not carried out on this front in a number of cases. In order to ensure the highest 
levels of integrity and diligence, the Reserve Bank’s guidelines on CDR Mechanism 
have delegated the authority to evolve policies and guidelines on corporate debt 
restructuring to CDR Standing Forum, consisting of Chairman level representation 
from banks; and the authority to approve individual cases of corporate debt 
restructuring to CDR Empowered Group, consisting of ED level representation from 
banks. Despite these safeguards, it appears that, in the recent past, many unviable 
accounts were restructured by establishing viability only with some kind of financial 
engineering. 
13 
 28. Our guidelines on CDR Mechanism have evolved in the context of international 
experience. Most of the countries have based their framework for corporate debt 
restructuring on the UK’s London Approach, wherein, under the leadership of the 
Bank of England, UK banks developed a set of informal guidelines on a collective 
process for voluntary workouts to restructure debts of corporates in distress, while 
maximizing their value as going concerns. They also took into account the 
international federation of insolvency practitioners (INSOL International)’s ‘Statement 
of Principles for a Global Approach to Multi-Creditor Workouts’. 
 
29. An informal out of court system like CDR Mechanism is always a preferable way 
for loan resolution, if used prudently and ethically. In this regard, I would like to quote 
from the ‘World Bank Principles and Guidelines for Effective Insolvency and Creditor 
Rights Systems’ which states that “A country’s financial sector (possibly with the 
informal endorsement and assistance of the central bank or finance ministry) should 
promote the development of a code of conduct or an informal out-of-court process 
for dealing with cases of corporate financial difficulty in which banks and other 
financial institutions have a significant exposure, especially in markets where 
enterprise insolvency has reached systemic levels. An informal process is far more 
likely to be sustained where there are adequate creditor remedy and insolvency 
laws. The informal process may produce a formal rescue, which should be able to 
quickly process a packaged plan produced by the informal process. The formal 
process may work better if it enables creditors and debtors to use informal 
techniques.” 
30. However, issues of moral hazard are also likely to emerge from such informal out 
of court systems. Internationally, corporate debt restructurings can also be viewed in 
the continuum between an excessive creditor oriented approach and an excessive 
debtor oriented approach. An excessive debtor oriented approach gives rise to the 
aspect of moral hazard as it may encourage the debtor to take excessive risks in the 
knowledge that the burden of any losses will fall disproportionally on creditors.  
31. RBI’s CDR guidelines attempt to strike a balance between these two approaches 
by requiring both the debtors and creditors to make sacrifices and by requiring the 
14 
 promoters to increase their stake in the form of guarantee or equity. However, these 
norms have been circumvented to some extent. While the debtors and creditors avail 
the benefits of asset classification, provisioning and capital adequacy on 
restructuring, they have tried to avoid the painful sacrifices in terms of provisioning 
on diminution in fair value and promoters’ sacrifice. Such circumvention of norms not 
only camouflage the weakness of credit portfolio of banks but also weaken their 
defence against expected losses. The inherent credit weaknesses of such accounts 
are further aggravated due to lower stake of the promoters in the restructured 
business. Taken together, both these aspects decrease the efficiency of the financial 
system and increase its vulnerability to external shocks. 
Working Group to Review the Existing Guidelines on Restructuring of 
Advances 
32. The need for one more review of our guidelines on restructuring arose in the light 
of the above discussed issues. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank constituted a Working 
Group (WG) to review the existing guidelines on restructuring of advances. The WG 
has examined the issues confronting the restructuring of advances by banks both 
under CDR and non-CDR mechanisms. Its recommendations are in the right 
direction and forward looking. It has recommended the withdrawal of regulatory 
forbearance on asset classification on restructuring; but considering the current 
domestic macroeconomic situation as also global situation, this step is suggested, 
say, after a period of two years. During the interregnum, it has recommended 
increasing the provision on accounts which get the asset classification benefit on 
restructuring. These are right steps towards discouraging the banks from taking up 
the cases of unviable accounts as they will be compelled to use their resources 
judiciously and only for viable accounts. In remaining cases, deleveraging should be 
the correct option.  
33. The Working Group has also made its recommendations for putting a cap on 
conversion of debt into preference shares; increasing the promoters’ stake in 
restructured accounts; making the ‘right of recompense’ mandatory, bringing more 
clarity in calculation of diminution in fair value, disclosure of only ‘material’ 
information, etc. These recommendations, once accepted, will remove the incentives 
15 
 for ‘adverse selection and moral hazard’. Regulatory forbearance and Government 
incentives will not be available on ‘tap’ but only in cases of a severe economic crisis.   
The Way Forward 
34. Let me now turn to what I believe is the way forward with respect to restructured 
accounts. I have, over the last few minutes, outlined a series of trends in restructured 
accounts, which are from a public policy standpoint and from a broader economic 
and societal perspective, disquieting.  Does this mean that restructuring should not 
be allowed ? The answer to that is “no” and as I have mentioned earlier restructuring 
can play a valuable role for both the borrowers and the banks in situations of 
economic downturns and temporary cash flow problems.  
35. However, restructuring should be considered only under certain specific 
conditions. First, the need for restructuring should arise only due to circumstances 
beyond the control of the borrowers and not generally for errors / mismanagement by 
them. In any case, the restructuring proposals should be considered from a purely 
commercial angle albeit with bias towards giving benefit of doubt to customer. Also, 
a uniform approach needs to be adopted for both Standard and NPA accounts while 
examining the restructuring proposals. Further, the viability of the project should be 
established and only after that should any restructuring proposal be considered. For 
this, it is important that project appraisal standards are significantly enhanced. 
Finance professionals such as those working in Centrum have an important role to 
play in this regard.  
36. Important in the context of evaluation the project is the need to examine the 
effective levels of leveraging in the project. Higher leveraging raises the risks of a 
project especially in an uncertain environment. There have been many instances of 
even the promoter’s equity component being financed out of debt. There have also 
been instances of debt flows being structured as equity and of the “private” 
component of Public Private Partnership projects being debt finance. Borrowing from 
another bank is not equity and adds to the burden of debt servicing. It is thus 
important to ensure, at the time of restructuring that projects are not over leveraged.  
16 
 It would also be important to establish that the borrowers are sincere about the 
project, in particular, that the borrowers, or at least the senior management of the 
borrowing companies, are willing to tighten their belt and share the burden of 
restructuring.  
37. Also, lenders must ascertain the amount of the sacrifice required to be made on 
their part. Restructuring proposals could be considered much more favourably if 
there is no sacrifice on the part of the lender except postponement of the repayment 
date of the principal. Banks would do well to adopt the money lender principle of 
greater concern in the interest income in such situations if the borrower is servicing 
the loan regularly. Even where the banks has to make some sacrifice by sanctioning 
the restructuring proposal, there must be some provision for re-compensation when 
the borrower/ borrowing unit comes out of trouble. Of course, there are prudential 
provisions which have to be built up to protect the lender in case of the failure of the 
restructured unit. 
38. Further, our entire approach to restructuring has to be reoriented to show more 
compassion to the small customers. SMEs and priority sector advances are an 
important segment of the economy and viable accounts facing temporary problems 
in such sectors must not be discriminated against when they request for 
restructuring. Nurturing of viable accounts is in the long term interest of both the 
lenders and the borrowers.  This will not happen automatically. There is a need for a 
structured mechanism for considering restructuring of retail, SME and agricultural 
loans just as there is the CDR for considering restructuring proposals for larger 
accounts. This structure will need to be built in at various levels –at the state, the 
district, the region and the bank level. The functionaries at various levels will need to 
be empowered to assess and approve viable restructuring proposals. Without such 
delegation, it would be extremely difficult for the benefits of restructuring to percolate 
to the smaller accounts. 
39. Again, for restructuring proposals to be successful in assisting the borrower to 
tide over temporary difficulties, it is critical that the assessment of the proposal and 
its approval are completed within a specific time frame, say 90 days. Time is very 
often the very essence in ensuring the turnaround of projects and an elongated 
17 
 process of assessment of the restructuring proposal could itself erode the viability of 
the project.  
Conclusion 
40. Before concluding, I would like to emphasise that resources of the banking sector 
are precious and limited and they cannot be allowed to be used in an imprudent way. 
CDR is a necessity especially when economic upturn and downturn are a way of life 
and part and parcel of business cycles for individual companies. Corporate Debt 
Restructuring has been in existence for more than a decade in India, and this system 
has fulfilled its objectives to a large extent. It is a mechanism evolved for preserving 
the economic values of banks’ assets should not be used against its noble 
objectives. Similarly, regulatory forbearances are discretionary tools which should be 
used only in the most demanding times. It goes without saying that its future success 
and failure will depend upon the ethics and integrity of its members and the 
professionals involved in the restructuring process.  
41. The restructuring process is a tool for assisting distressed sections of the 
economy to tide over difficulties which are temporary in nature and due to 
circumstances beyond their control. For us to justify that restructuring is for the larger 
benefit of the economy and the society, it is imperative that it is available to all 
classes of borrowers and is made available in a timely and non-discriminate manner. 
This will be possible only if we develop the necessary structures, systems and 
processes to adhere to the above objectives. A viable time bound action plan for 
implementing all of this is critical and I hope the finance professionals will play a 
major role in doing this. 
I wish the deliberations in the Seminar all success. Thank you. 
 
 
18 
 