Governance deficit and financial crisis 
 
1. It is always a pleasure to return to one's home state, that too if the state is God's own 
country. Thank you for inviting me to address this august gathering of the cream of 
professionals and management experts of the state under the common banner of Kerala 
Management Association. I was however slightly apprehensive of what I should talk at a 
gathering like this. This apprehension started bordering worry when I saw the list of 
illustrious speakers who have addressed this forum in the past. We are living in interesting 
times. These days, if any official from the financial sector arrives on any forum like this, the 
audience expects naturally to hear about the present status of the global financial crisis that 
is yet to run its full course.    So I too chose to speak on this subject. But with so much 
having been said and written about the crisis, my dilemma was to select issues relevant to a 
group of management professionals. To me the most virtuous meaning of management is 
good governance. Good governance more often than not, reduces the risks from an 
uncertain environment around us. If one is to review the events related to the financial crisis, 
what emerges encompasses important management and governance principles. These are 
also important lessons that we perhaps need to keep in mind as the state discusses the 
"Kerala 2030" or "Emerging Kerala" themes. 
2. The Global Financial Crisis that began in 2008 has caused large erosion in asset 
value, failure of financial firms, contraction of output and slowdown in growth, 
unemployment, and fiscal burden on countries, world-wide. Even as the world was 
hesitatingly recovering from the crisis through coordinated actions of governments around 
the world, the sovereign debt problem in the peripheral eurozone countries surfaced and 
now threatens to derail the recovery and has the potential to plunge the world into a fresh 
crisis. Amidst the sufferings brought on by the crisis, the only positive feature is that it 
provides all of us with an opportunity to draw the necessary lessons to be wiser and to put in 
place institutional mechanisms that can avert the possibility of a similar crisis in future. A 
crisis after all is a laboratory for policy making where the received wisdom are put to test, old 
paradigms assessed and new paradigms shaped. Thus, as has been said, a crisis is not 
wasted if it leaves us wiser.    
3. Post the Global Financial crisis, policy makers, regulators and academics have put 
their heads together to mull on the fault lines that precipitated the crisis and what remedial 
steps need to be taken. The extensive reports from official institutions and influential think-
tanks as well as the legislative and regulatory reforms that are in various stages of 
conception and implementation in different jurisdictions are well known and it is not 
__________________________________________________________________________________ 
Address by Shri G. Padmanabhan, Executive Director, at the Conference of the Kerala Management 
Association at Kochi on February 17, 2012. The assistance provided by G. Mahalingam and Himansu 
Mohanty is gratefully acknowledged. 
 necessary for me to repeat them here. What I intend to discuss is something more 
fundamental – the issue of governance, which provides the framework for all forms of human 
organizations and infirmities which in turn can lead to disastrous consequences. Specifically, 
analysis of recent crises, as also of those fresh in memory such as the Latin American crisis 
or the East Asian crisis, invariably point to governance failures either at a macro level or a 
micro level.  
4. In a great deal of academic and policy discourse, good governance has been 
generally linked to economic growth and development.  The growth and productivity in 
developed nations have often been said to have had their roots in institutions and legal 
systems of good governance. And as a corollary, the lack of development and crises of the 
emerging market countries have often been ascribed to the prevalence of oligarchies, crony 
capitalism, corruption and generally the absence of good governance. Thus good 
governance has not only been advocated as a necessary condition for economic 
development but for the developing countries, it has been promoted as following the 
institutional practices of the developed countries. But the crisis clearly shows that even the 
rich developed countries, with their much coveted institutions can have governance failures 
that result in crisis of much graver proportion than the failure of a corporation here or there, 
and bring on great misery on their own people and to the rest of the world. 
5. What is governance all about? The subject has spawned reports, legislations and a 
large volume of research papers. A google search on ‘corporate governance’ yielded 33, 
700, 000 results and Google scholar, 8,99,000 articles!   You will find complex legal-
sounding definitions to mathematical equation ridden research papers discussing corporate 
governance. But what is the central idea behind corporate or any other type of governance? 
I would put it in one word - ‘confidence’. Governance is about commanding confidence of all 
those we do business with, all those upon whom we depend. Confidence that promises shall 
be kept, contracts honoured and assurances delivered upon. If your shareholders have 
confidence in you, they will not be shy of putting money in your venture. If you enjoy the 
confidence of your lenders, you will not be starved of capital. If your employees have 
confidence in you, you can attract talent and perhaps would not face attrition. We can go on. 
What creates confidence, then? If it is an individual, character evokes confidence. If it is an 
organization – a corporation, a state or even an NGO – good governance is what creates, 
and sustains that confidence.  
6. If it is about creating and sustaining confidence, we can list three cornerstones for 
confidence in the edifice of good governance. First, there must be total transparency. 
Information asymmetry is at the root of all governance problems and therefore, access to 
complete information for all stakeholders is a sine qua non. If a company you have put your 
money in declares a loss, you will be disappointed; but if it fudges its account to mislead you into believing everything was fine, you will surely lose your confidence in that company when 
you discover the truth, as you ultimately will. Second, the tension between temptation of 
immediate gain and long-term survival must be resolved. Lastly, there must be a set of 
checks and balances to achieve the first two. The salient features of any good governance 
would therefore require certain basic elements of checks and controls to be enshrined and 
followed meticulously in the day-to-day functioning of any financial firm or for that matter by 
any entity which is answerable to a number of stakeholders. These elements are not 
complex or esoteric by any stretch of imagination. They are governed by, pure and simple 
common sense, easy to understand,  but require  a good bit of persuasion, perseverance 
and patience to be followed meticulously. But often the sheer simplicity of these principles 
makes the implementer question their very need and dilutes the essence of implementation.
  
Financial Crisis 
7. Let me now turn to the recent crises, and recount some of the most common and 
rather obvious elements of governance that unfortunately have received scant attention. 
8. The seeds of the 2008 financial crisis were sown by the easy and super-
accommodative monetary policy practiced by the US for a protracted period of time in the 
early part of the last decade, which in conjunction with certain other factors led to a 
desperate search for yields and gave rise to the problem of adverse selection. The adverse 
selection problem is nothing new in the lending industry and is usually resolved by careful 
screening and appraisal of the credit proposal. There is possibly no financial firm in the world 
which does not swear by tight lending standards in order to protect the quality of its balance 
sheet assets. But this elementary principle was given a systematic go-by by the US 
mortgage lenders in pursuit of easy returns. It is not that the lenders were unaware of the 
borrowers’ creditworthiness. Indeed, these loans were labelled ‘sub-prime’. All of you are 
aware of the onerous documentation process that precedes a loan sanction. The US 
mortgage industry had even devised a class of loans called ‘Alt-A’ loans, where in disregard 
of all norms of lending, the documentation requirement was diluted. This aggravated the 
adverse selection problem, because not having to produce any proof and documentation, 
the borrowers were inclined to misrepresent or skew their incomes and assets to obtain a 
larger loan than merited.  
9. How could such a folly be committed? The entire mortgage activity was based on the 
housing sector boom and bubble in house prices. Rising house prices appeared lucrative to 
the lenders and the borrowers alike.  Those rising house prices created positive home equity 
for the early entrants who merrily drew upon it, not for adding to the asset value but to 
indulge in consumption expenditure as if the house property was an ATM machine! But there 
have been bubbles in real estate prices in US and elsewhere in the past which ultimately burst. Neither the lenders nor the borrowers reckoned that the housing boom of the early half 
of the last decade could also end one day and behaved as if the there is only one way for 
the housing prices to go. This reflects the triumph of obsession with immediate gains and an 
utter disregard for long run sustainability! 
10. The problem was compounded by the fact that the originators of the mortgages were 
taking them out of their books and selling it to not gullible, but extremely knowledgeable 
investors on the strength of ratings accorded by the rating agencies. Now, take the case of 
credit rating agencies. Any issuer of a debt instrument cannot access the market without first 
obtaining a rating from an agency. The rating is supposed to serve the investor but is 
obtained and paid for by issuer. Is this not a clear conflict of interest? What is there to 
prevent an agency from issuing an unfairly favourable rating against a suitable payment by 
the issuer? The argument in favour of the arrangement traditionally has been that the 
agency has considerable reputational capital at stake and therefore would not sell pernicious 
ratings. But this argument has limitations. Reputational risk will act as a deterrent if the 
investors have some way of punishing poor rating agency performance or if the long run 
downside due to loss of reputation outweighs the short-term gains. Yet as the crisis has 
shown, there was universal reliance on credit ratings without any mechanism to address the 
associated infirmities. RBI has always been stressing the need for due diligence and 
meticulous appraisal mechanisms (even if ratings are available) for the banks. That the US 
mortgage investors were solely led by the ratings in their investment decisions was a major 
reason for the accumulation of toxic assets, which eventually paved the way for crisis. The 
governance failure in this case is nothing but the failure of simple due diligence mechanism 
in asset book build up. 
11. Credit Default Swaps (CDS) played a significant role in proliferation of the crisis.   
CDS, in economic essence, is an insurance against credit risk. The CDS seller buys the 
credit risk of any single or pool of credit instrument and compensates the CDS buyer for any 
credit event that reduces the value of the instrument. The beauty of the CDS market is that 
the protection seller could be anybody! As you are aware, banks have elaborate processes – 
pre-sanction screening and appraisal, post sanction monitoring, documentation etc. – to 
protect themselves against credit event. What processes does a CDS seller have? The CDS 
is supposed work on the actuarial principle. But what data goes into computation of the 
actuarial table? Knowing that credit events depend upon the business cycle, would it not be 
necessary to exercise care if you are on the ascending phase? Now, if a CDS has been 
bought for a credit exposure to an entity, it is transformed to a credit exposure on CDS seller 
and not the entity. If the CDS seller happens to be an institution like the AIG, rated AAA by 
an approved credit rating agency, there is little residual credit risk on the books of the CDS 
buyer. This frees the amount of capital held against potential losses due to credit events, which can then be leveraged to acquire more lucrative (and risky) assets-Ad infinitum. The 
Federal Reserve, in 1996, permitted banks to use CDS to reduce capital reserves. Following 
this decision, the CDS market boomed and by 2007 the overall CDS market reached a 
notional value of $ 62 trillion. However, problem arises here because given the active trading 
in CDS it was sometimes difficult to identify the actual counterparty when the credit event 
occurs. Also some counterparties like AIG developed massive exposures to CDS which 
raised concerns about their ability to meet their obligations in times of crisis. 
12. The run up to the financial crisis saw a hey-day for financial innovation that saw the 
creation and exuberant trading of a large number of complex instruments supported by 
opaque institutions. The transactions were mostly bilateral, over-the-counter with no 
common knowledge of who is having how much of which asset.  All financial instruments 
bear risk and when they are ripped and parceled into new products. Hence, it is important to 
understand what happens to the underlying risk and where it may be residing at any time. 
Financial markets cannot function unless participants know each other’s risk profile. When 
complex instruments are traded in an opaque market, the problem is further aggravated. 
Financial distresses require regulatory intervention; the least that the regulator needs to 
know to intervene effectively is who is affected by how much. Yet, the crisis revealed that not 
only the market participants had no knowledge about their counterparty’s exposure to the 
toxic assets, even the regulator did not! Fortuitously, DTCC which had created a platform for 
information on CDS for providing post trade services to its reporting clients could provide the 
information to the regulators and save the day.    
13.  The Dealing Rooms have been the epicenter of several governance disasters across 
the world. Surprise of surprises, this possibility has always been recognized and the 
practices that govern the dealing room are codified, audit-trailed and audited with unfailing 
regularity. Yet they remain the most vulnerable to deviations. It has been said that the small 
derivative trading unit of AIG in London with just 400 employees, virtually brought down this 
mammoth institution of over 100,000 employees in 130 countries. Besides, rogue dealers of 
financial institutions have virtually ripped the balance sheets apart and yet, the senior 
managers and the heads of treasuries pay only lip service to the separation of front office 
from other sequential functions, mandatory leave requirements, broker limits for each 
dealers, and what not. Even in the post crisis period, when banks and institutions would 
have been in a state of high alert, a rogue trader brought on a 2.3 billion loss to UBS that 
cost the CEO his job. If we sit back and analyze why these governance systems fail, we will 
come across only a few major issues: the perfunctory nature of compliance, an incredible 
build-up of trust amongst individuals and often, their activities.  If the financial crisis of 2008 
could spread its tentacles so easily across the world, the major issue that crystallizes is the impunity with which the treasuries of even major financial institutions functioned and the 
amazing level of complacency that set in over a period of time. 
14. This naturally leads me to the issue of compensation. It has been alleged that the 
non-linear compensation arrangements in vogue in most hedge funds, merchant banks, and 
other asset managers, where a fund manager’s rate of bonus increases with the return he 
earns was a harbinger of the crisis because it incentivized them to take on more risk.  There 
was an adage in the good old days that lawyers, bankers and doctors should not be 
soliciting clients. There is a lot of sense in it, because of the perverse social incentives such 
an arrangement would create. The blogosphere is full of dismay and consternation at the 
exponential rise in the share of financial sector and the outsized compensations. There is 
also a view that imposition of restrictions on compensation may have unintended 
consequences such as migration of financial activities to offshore centers. While the issue is 
unresolved, the adverse incentives and long run implications of compensation packages 
need to be kept in view.  
15. Another fertile ground for the governance failure has been the complex and 
sometimes, creative accounting practices employed to hide simple misdemeanors. Financial 
reporting is at the heart of corporate governance – It is the most important communication 
between the corporation and its stakeholders. Yet, errant corporations have used, often with 
active support of auditors and accountants, various stratagems to misrepresent the actual 
financial condition of the company, thus stalling the stakeholders from taking timely action. 
Maxwell Communications in UK and Enron in US are cases in point.  The Satyam debacle 
back home is a classic case where an individual-centric top management could hide its 
misdemeanors for an extended period of time, taking a few audit firms as their accomplices 
paying a suitable price to buy their honesty. 
 
The European Debt Problem 
16. No discussion of crises or governance today can exclude the sovereign debt problem 
of the peripheral Eurozone countries. If we take a careful look at the present sovereign debt 
crisis roiling the Eurozone, it should not take us too long to realize that this crisis also owes 
its origins to governance failures. The only point of difference between this and the 2008 
crisis is that the entities which are at the root of the present crisis are Sovereign 
Governments and not the usual suspects which are ‘profit-seeking’ corporations.  How did 
Greece manage to get into the Eurozone? Was there any fudging of figures? How did the 
others permit this? Again, there was a clear element of acquiescence on the part of core 
euro members to enlarge the circle of Eurozone at the cost of non-compliance with the 
tenets of Maastricht Treaty. How did the crisis surface? By admission of the Greek Government that the fiscal statistics it had earlier presented may not be true and the true 
position could be significantly worse.  
17. The European debt crisis has prompted an interesting discussion on governance and 
sovereign debt. There seems to be interplay between governance performance and the debt 
level. Better governed countries can afford higher levels of debt. Conversely, badly governed 
countries can tolerate only lower levels of debt. This hypothesis also helps to partly explain 
the ostensible paradox of why countries with higher debt levels can carry the burden and 
why countries with lower debt levels may face a market reluctant to invest in its liability.  
18. This view seems to suggest that mere financial and economic measures may not be 
sufficient to address the problems countries like Greece face, if not accompanied by 
governance reforms. This is also why even after the Greek parliament passed the austerity 
measures as a precondition for further assistance, the market is reluctant to accept it as a 
watershed and displays a great deal of skepticism.    
 
Governance and regulations 
19. Regulations are a necessary adjunct to corporate governance. The processes 
associated with corporate governance are internal to the organization.  Regulations are 
designed to serve the same end, but are external to the organization and seek to provide a 
nudge to enforce the governance process. While regulation of non-financial firms is 
structured around the basic themes of disclosure, investor protection and management of 
bankruptcy, regulation of financial institutions, particularly banks, are usually much more 
stringent because of the grave consequences of their failure. Prior to the onset of the crisis, 
there was a critical intolerance for regulation by the proponents of market-based economic 
systems. This was reflected in the lax regulatory framework governing the financial markets 
and institutions. It is now widely acknowledged that, weak regulations were responsible for 
the sub-prime crisis and efforts are under way to make regulations and supervision more 
comprehensive and robust.    
20. Merely having a strong regulatory and supervisory framework is not enough. It is also 
equally important as to how the rules and regulations are enforced. Manipulation of the due 
process by incumbent oligarchs or crony capitalists to their advantage has been a recurrent 
theme in the context of developing or emerging market economies. But the financial crisis 
has shown that this can happen even in the US. It is well known that the five major 
investment banks – Goldman Sachs, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Bear Sterns and 
Morgan Stanley – commanded tremendous clout with the policy makers, but they are also 
suspected of tweaking the regulatory apparatus to their advantage.  As reported in New York 
Times, these five “big guys”- led by Hank Paulson Jr of Goldman Sachs, who would take 
over as the Treasury Secretary two years later - met the five commissioners of the SEC in the afternoon of April 28, 2004 in the basement hearing room of the SEC office in New York 
to discuss the issue of freeing of capital from their brokerage arms that could be leveraged to 
buy even more complex instruments.  After 55 minutes of discussions the demand was 
acceded to. As Dani Kaufmann laments, it is a case of ‘legal corruption’. No bribe has been 
paid, no laws broken, yet the effect is the same. 
 
21. An Indian perspective 
Now, let us look at the Indian perspective. The Indian financial sector may not be as 
sophisticated as those of the developed countries. There are barriers to entry to several 
market segments imposed by the compulsions of capital account restrictions. The range of 
products is narrow and their liquidity limited. Our approach to further development of the 
markets is marked by cautious gradualism. But as far as governance and regulation are 
concerned, we can perhaps boast of a resilient system alive to the potential problems we 
have discussed. Let me recount some of the measures that we have taken in support. 
a. With a view to promoting transparency in the OTC derivatives market, we had mandated, 
as early as in 2007, a transaction based reporting system for the only active class of 
interest rate derivatives, the interest rate swaps and dissemination of information based 
on such reporting. We are in the process of taking the initiative further by extending the 
reporting requirements to all foreign exchange and interest rate derivatives.  
b. To ensure that there is no laxity in credit appraisal in case of securitisation, we have 
mandated that the originator of a loan asset has to hold it in its books for at least one 
year before securitisation and that he has to retain the equity tranche of the securities 
created. 
c. We have introduced not only anonymous, order matching trading system for trading in 
government securities to improve transparency, we have also introduced central 
counterparty based guaranteed settlement  for government securities and foreign 
exchange transactions.  
d. We have stipulated that ratings of external agencies can complement and not substitute 
the internal appraisal processes for sanction of loans by banks. 
e. Introduction of credit default swaps has been subjected to purchase of protection only by 
the holders of the reference obligation and sale only by regulated entities. 
f. As early as 2005, we have used risk weights and provisioning norms for influencing the 
flow of funds to the housing sector and moderating excessive growth.  
 
Conclusion 
22. In conclusion, let me summarize what we have discussed. Good governance is a 
necessary condition for not only economic growth and development but for an easy and comfortable society where we can go about our business - confident and unruffled. Good 
governance is of utmost importance for the financial sector but needs to be complemented 
by alert and efficacious regulation and supervision so as to build and maintain confidence of 
the savers and the investors. We, as a nation, have begun our journey and the tryst with our 
destiny and we need continued confidence of all our stakeholders to reach our destination. 
Our responsibility towards good governance cannot be overemphasized. In this endeavour 
needless to mention that members of this august audience are the principal actors. 
 
Thank you for your patience. 
 