A Revolution in Monetary Policy: 
1
Lessons in the Wake of the Global Financial Crisis
 
Joseph E. Stiglitz 
It is a real pleasure for me to be able to deliver this lecture in memory of the Reserve Bank of 
India's first Indian Governor, who set an example and a tradition which has resulted in the 
Reserve Bank of India being viewed as one of the exemplars of central banks around the world.  
As I shall comment later, one could not help but notice this in the aftermath of the 2008 Global 
Financial Crisis—which to a very large extent was brought about by failures of central banks in 
the United States and Europe.  C.D. Deshmukh understood not only the importance of the 
financial sector to the functioning of an economy, but that to ensure that the financial sector 
fulfills its roles requires regulation—otherwise, there is a risk that it won't do what it should and 
that it will do what it shouldn't.  He did not succumb to ideology that has plagued central banks 
in so many countries:  he understood that the state may have to play an important role in 
providing credit, either directly or through regulation, especially as part of the early stages of the 
development process and in the rural sector. 
 
The themes that I will take up today would, I think, resonate with Governor Deshmukh.  I want 
to lay out a vision of what Central Banks should do, a vision that is markedly different than that 
which was fashionable in the years before the Great Recession.   
 
It is understandable that the global financial crisis should give rise to considerable reflection 
among macroeconomists, and especially monetary theorists and policymakers.  After all, their 
models didn’t predict the crisis—the most important economic event in three quarters of a 
century.  Economics is supposed to be a science, and the test of any science is its ability to 
predict; and if a sub-discipline can’t predict something of this importance, then it suggests 
something is wrong.   
 
I say suggests because devotees of the model claim that there are always random exogenous 
shocks that cannot be anticipated.  But this crisis was not an exogenous shock:  the credit bubble 
that brought the economy down was endogenous.  It was a shock created by the market itself.  
And it was the kind of shock that the theory said couldn’t happen: for if markets are rational, 
there won’t be bubbles.   
 
This is but one example of the many flaws in the prevalent paradigm that were exposed by the 
crisis.  In this lecture, I do not want to dwell so much on the flaws in the economic theories and 
                                                            
1
 This is lecture is given in Mumbai on January 3, 2013, to commemorate C.D. Deshmukh, who capped his 21 years 
in the Indian Civil Service with an outstanding stint as Governor of the Reserve Bank of India from 1943-1949. 
During his tenure, he oversaw the Bank’s transformation to a nationalized institution, promoted regulation of banks, 
and established India’s first financial institution for the provision of long-term credit to industry. He later served as 
Union Finance Minister, India's Special Financial Ambassador to America and Europe, and among many other 
notable achievements, made his mark in academia and public service. It is my honor to give this lecture in 
recognition of his deep contributions to India and to his field. 
1 
 models that dominated mainstream thinking, including thinking inside many central banks, but 
on the central policy stances that typically followed—sometimes quite loosely—from those 
theories and models.   
 
These theories and models not only contributed to  the failure to see the crisis coming, but led 
some leading central bankers to argue that its effects were contained, even after the bubble 
2
broke.  They were also extra-ordinarily influential in shaping the policies that both contributed 
to the crisis and to its rapid spread around the world, and have contributed to the lack of 
effectiveness in responding to the crisis.  A half decade after the beginning of America’s 
recession, more than six years after the breaking of the bubble, unemployment in Europe and 
America remains unacceptably high, the GDP in many countries is still below the level attained 
before the crisis, a few countries are mired in depression, and the global economy is on the verge 
of another recession. 
 
In this lecture, then, I will enunciate 14 lessons for monetary policy that I believe emanate from 
the recession.  Some are controversial.  Most reflect a marked departure from the stances taken 
by at least many monetary authorities.   
 
1. Self regulation doesn't work 
The notion that financial markets are self-regulating seems slightly quaint now, but we should 
not forget how widespread and deeply believed that doctrine was.  That that was so is testimony 
to the ability of ideology to prevail over the lessons of history and theory.  Financial markets 
have repeatedly been prone to bubbles, which when they burst would bring havoc in their 
3
wake. Conflicts of interest and predatory and abusive practices had repeatedly marked financial 
markets.  These were among the reasons that the sector had become highly regulated.  To think 
that somehow, things would have suddenly changed, beginning around 1980, was sheer fantasy.   
 
Indeed, advances in economic theory had explained why unfettered markets—and unfettered 
financial markets in particular—were likely not to be efficient or stable, and why they were 
likely to be marked by abuses and exploitation.   
 
The general theory of imperfect and asymmetric information, developed in the 1970s and 80s, 
had shown that whenever information is imperfect and asymmetric (that is, some individuals 
know things that others do not) and risk markets incomplete—that is, always—the economy is  
                                                            
2
 Bernanke said, as late as March 2007, that “the impact on the broader economy and financial markets of the 
problems in the subprime market seems likely to be contained.” Statement of Ben S. Bernanke, Chairman, Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, DC, 
March 28, 2007. 
3
 See, for example, Charles Kindleberger’sManias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises (New York: 
Basic Books, 1978). 
2 
 4 5
not likely to be (constrained) Pareto efficient.  Adam Smith’s invisible hand was invisible 
because it was not there.  The theory also explained why risk markets are likely to be 
incomplete—why key risks could not be insured against. 
 
The theory  explained too why markets in which information was important were not likely to be 
fully competitive—for instance, someone who offered the same product at a lower price would 
not attract the entire market, as assumed in the conventional theory, simply because not everyone 
would know about the offer.    
 
Moreover such markets could well be characterized by rationing—unemployment and credit 
rationing were real phenomenon, with important economic consequences. 
 
Finally, markets in which information problems were important were likely to be marked by 
severe agency problems—where those making decisions might not fully reflect the interests of 
those on whose behalf they were supposed to be acting.  Managers might not maximize 
shareholder value, let alone societal welfare. 
 
These issues are of particular relevance to financial markets, precisely because information is at 
the center of what financial markets do.  They are supposed to allocate scarce capital resources 
and manage risk, but what makes these tasks difficult and interesting are information 
imperfections, ascertaining the returns and risks associated, for instance, with different assets, 
determining which risks are best suited for different individuals, etc.  That America’s financial 
markets did an abysmal job in this, their central function, should be obvious.  The failures were 
not, however, that of a single bank, or an isolated banker:  they were systemic, suggesting that 
the problems that gave rise to them were systemic, as indeed they were. 
 
Further, the reason that we care so much about failures in the financial system (or even of a 
single large bank) is that there are systemic consequences—there are large externalities on the 
rest of the economy.   
 
The implication is that there is a need for strong governmental regulation of financial 
institutions.  Much of the rest of this lecture will be concerned with the design of a good 
regulatory system.  
 
This brings me to the second important lesson: 
                                                            
4
 B. Greenwald and J. E. Stiglitz,  “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets,”  
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 101, No. 2, May 1986, pp. 229-264 
5
 The term “constrained Pareto optimal” refers to the fact that the costs of creating new markets and obtaining more 
information are included in the analysis:  information is not a free good.   
3 
  
2. Regulation is needed for a well-functioning market and economy. 
 
Financial sector regulation is required both because it is a sector characterized by large market 
failures, and where there are systemic consequences (large externalities) arising from these 
market failures.  Regulators need to bear this in mind, as they think both about the need for 
regulation and its design.  In subsequent sections (in particular, points 3-7 below), I touch on the 
multi-faced nature of this regulation, a long list thatincludes ensuring the safety and soundness of 
individual banks and systemic stability; maintaining competition; promoting access for all; 
protecting consumers and investors from exploitation, predation, manipulation, and a wide range 
of abusive practices that have become part of every-day business in the sector; and enhancing 
transparency.  While regulations and regulators may be imperfect, the track record of success—
in India, and even in the United States in the decades after the last great crisis, the Great 
Depression—shows that good regulation is both possible and can make a difference.     
In the aftermath of the financial collapse in 2008, Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal 
6
Reserve, lamented about the flaw in his reasoning.  He was surprised that the banks had not 
managed their risk better.  I was surprised at his surprise:  after all, banks had repeatedly not 
managed risk well.  Why did he think they would do so in the twenty first century, when they 
had done such a bad job in previous centuries?  Moreover, anyone looking at the incentive 
structures facing banks and bankers should have understood that they had incentives to engage in 
excessive risk taking and short sighted behavior.  They acted as any economist should have 
predicted that they would.   
Even if there had not been such perverse incentive structures, those in the financial sector have 
often been prone to irrational exuberance.  Even Greenspan had commented on this.  History was 
replete of instances of such irrational exuberance.  What distinguishes banks from other 
institutions is that in this sector, irrational exuberance has systemic consequences—there are 
large externalities.  Bankers with irrational exuberance are gambling with other people’s money, 
But the problems go deeper.  Bank managers and industry leaders often seem to show 
remarkable ignorance of some of the basic principles of risk—including the Modigliani-Miller 
theorem, which asserts that increasing leverage doesn’t increase market value—it doesn’t create 
wealth, it simply shifts more risk upon the residual equity base.  (Of course, there could be an 
                                                            
6
 In Congressional testimony on October 23, 2008, Greenspan described being “in a state of shocked disbelief” that 
the lending institutions’ self?interest had not protected shareholders’ equity. Testimony available at 
http://democrats.oversight.house.gov/images/stories/documents/20081023100438.pdf (accessed December 14, 
2012).   
4 
 increase in value because of market imperfections, either because (a) market participants are 
irrational, and don’t fully understand the increased risk imposed on equity; (b) shareholders as a 
whole may gain because of the shift of risk to the government, resulting from an increase in what 
might be termed the “bail-out subsidy”; or (c) distortions in the tax code.  But none of these are 
7
reasons to countenance an increase in leverage.)
Thus, the widely held notion in the banking community that increased capital requirements (say 
under Basel III) will increase the cost of borrowing either reflects a profound misunderstanding 
of risk among those in the banking community; and/or their understandable desire to increase the 
subsidy the sector gets from the public, disguising this in terms of the benefits to their customers; 
and/or their understanding of risk, but their understanding that other market participants don’t 
understand risk.   
This implies that there should be strong regulations on the incentive structures of banks—it is 
not just the size of the bonuses that should be of concern, but the design.  Higher deposit 
insurance fees levied on banks engaged in higher levels of risk taking might also discourage 
excessive risk taking, offsetting the implicit subsidy associated with government bailouts.  But 
because of pervasive irrationalities, we cannot rely on incentive structures to curb excessive risk 
taking.  There have to be strong restrictions on the risk taking, including the degree of leverage.  
Excessively rapid expansion of a bank's assets, particularly within a given area, are almost a 
sure sign of excessive risk taking.  There need to be “speed bumps.”  The costs of such 
restriction—a slight postponement of perhaps some socially profitable lending—is far less than 
the benefit—avoiding the kind of financial collapses that have occurred repeatedly. 
It is natural to ask why so many financial institutions chose to adopt incentive structures that 
seem so perverse.  Traditionally, one of the purported virtues of the market economy is that it 
provides not just strong incentives but well designed incentive structures.  That has obviously not 
been the case.  The explanation lies in deep rooted failures in corporate governance.  Much of 
our thinking about the market economy is based on simple models of Marshallian nineteenth 
century economics, with little relevance to understanding the functioning of managerial and 
corporate capitalism of the twenty-first century.(This illustrates a more general theme, to which 
we return later in this lecture:  The financial sector cannot be viewed as separate from the rest of 
the economy.  It is affected by the laws and mores that affect other sectors—laws like those 
related to bankruptcy and corporate governance, and mores such as those that affect the 
acceptability of exploitation and the primacy of material values and incentives.  I will have little 
                                                            
7
 For a more extensive discussion of these issues see “On the Need for Increased Capital Requirements for Banks 
and Further Actions to Improve the Safety and Soundness of America’s Banking System,” witness testimony of 
Joseph E. Stiglitz to the Senate banking Committee, August 3, 2011, available at 
http://banking.senate.gov/public/index.cfm?FuseAction=Files.View&FileStore_id=97cec3e1-2d1d-44fa-acd9-
a0a1bc640bc4 (accessed December 14, 2012),  and A.R. Admati, P.M. DeMarzo, M.F. Hellwig and P. Pfleiderer, 
2010, “Fallacies, Irrelevant Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of Capital Regulation: Why Bank Equity is Not 
Expensive,” Stanford University Working Paper No. 86.  
5 
 to say about these issues of social mores, except to note that as trust and social capital weakens, 
the need for public regulation is enhanced.)   
There needs to be deep reform of corporate governance laws, providing in particular better 
provisions for say in pay.    
The problems of distorted incentives are especially important with financial institutions which 
cannot be allowed to fail because of the systemic consequences.  This brings me to the third 
major lesson: 
3. Banks that are too big to fail, too interconnected to fail, and/or too correlated to fail 
present a real danger to the financial system and the economy 
 
Financial institutions which are too big to fail, too interconnected to fail, or too correlated to fail 
have an incentive to gamble:  if they win, they walk off with the profits, if they lose, the public 
picks up the losses.  But the problems are deeper:  banks have an incentive to become too big, 
too intertwined, and too correlated to fail; and because of the implicit guarantee that is provided 
to such institutions, they have an advantage over other institutions.  The private returns to growth 
in size and to interconnectedness exceed by a large measure the social returns (which may, in 
fact, be negative.)   
One aspect of “correlated” risk taking is the herding behavior that marks credit bubbles.  Such 
irrational bubbles are a major source of macroeconomic volatility.  In the past, regulation has 
typically focused on the safety and soundness of individual banks, but once we recognize the 
central role of the correlated behavior of banks in causing macroeconomic fluctuations, we have 
to ask how can we design a regulatory structure to reduce the scope and severity of such finance 
induced fluctuations. 
There should be strong regulations restricting the size and interconnectedness of banks.  (Some 
of these restrictions relate to derivatives and CDS’s, are discussed under point 6  below.)Taxes 
on large banks should be levied to “level the playing field." 
Reducing the risk of “too correlated to fail” is more complex, and requires ensuring a diversity 
8
of financial institutions, with different ownership, incentives, and objectives.  This argues 
strongly against the universal bank model.  While more specialized financial institutions may 
face a greater risk of bankruptcy, the risk of systemic failure is greater where all banks are 
universal banks, and the social costs of systemic failure is an order of magnitude greater than 
the costs of the failure of individual institutions.  (Much of that cost can be handled through 
diversification of the ownership shares.) 
                                                            
8
 This was a key point emphasized in The Stiglitz Report: Reforming the International Monetary and Financial 
Systems in the Wake of the Global Crisis, with Members of the Commission of Experts of the President of the 
United Nations General Assembly on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System, New York: The 
New Press, 2010.  
6 
 Macro-prudential regulation is essential to prevent the growth of credit bubbles and other forms 
of macroeconomic volatility.  Of particular concern is collateral based lending—where the value 
of the collateral, and thus the magnitude of lending, increases in a bubble, thus reinforcing the 
bubble.  By demanding high lending standards and increased collateral in boom periods, the 
financial system can act as an automatic stabilizer, rather than the automatic destabilizer that it 
is under current arrangements. 
4. The Pervasive Imperfections in Competition need to be curbed 
 
In most countries, the financial sector is far from perfectly competitive.  In many markets, even 
in advanced countries, there are only one or two lenders to small businesses.  In many countries, 
banks have acted collusively to obtain outsized returns from their control of the payments 
mechanism.  In most countries, the persistence of returns that are far higher than could be 
justified by effective competition in certain lines of business are suggestive of limitations of 
competition.  
Imperfections of information naturally give rise to imperfections in competition, so we should 
not be surprised that even in countries where there are many banks, markets are far from 
competitive.  Because markets that are fully transparent are more competitive, and less 
profitable, there are strong market incentives for reducing and impeding transparency.   That is 
just one of the reasons that we need strong regulation ensuring transparency, including—and 
especially—for derivatives (see the discussion below).  
But even with reasonable laws governing transparency, effectively enforced (not the situation 
today), in many areas within the financial markets competition is likely to remain limited.  We 
can however circumscribe the worst practices.  Modern technology has, for instance, made it 
possible to have an efficient electronic payments mechanism, where it would cost but a fraction 
of a cent to transfer money from a customer's bank account to the merchant from which he has 
purchased a good.  But the banks, in their attempt to extract monopoly rents out of their control 
of the payments mechanism, have resisted the creation of this kind of an electronic transfer 
mechanism. 
There need to be strong restrictions on credit card fees, interchange fees charged merchants, 
and other anti-competitive practices.  Restrictions on the size and ranges of bank activities and 
the interconnectness of banks would not only increase systemic stability, it would also enhance 
competitiveness. 
5. Consumer and investor  protection:  information asymmetries and exploitation 
In most countries, the financial sector has been actively engaged in exploiting poorly educated 
and financially uninformed users.  They have engaged in deceptive practices, and even in market 
manipulation and fraudulent practices with seemingly sophisticated customers.  They have 
demonstrated a remarkable level of moral turpitude.  This has contributed not only to creating 
7 
 high levels of inequality—moving money from the bottom and middle of the pyramid to the 
top—but also to a lack of trust in markets and the market economy.  Markets cannot function 
well without such trust—and this is another way in which the banks have exhibited enormous 
adverse externalities.   More generally, there are large costs to the sector's rent seeking activities-
-money doesn't move from the bottom to the top costlessly; the benefits to those at the top are 
less than the losses to the rest. 
 
There needs to be strong consumer protection legislation, a regulatory framework along the 
lines of the USConsumer Financial Protection Bureau.  There need to be strong restrictions on 
usury, overdraft fees, credit card fees and penalties, predatory lending, etc.   
 
But the consumer protection agency needs to do more than just protect against abuses of the 
private financial sector.  It needs to innovate—to design, for instance, mortgage products that 
help ordinary citizens manage the risks of home ownership.   
 
The London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor)scandal illustrates the potential depth of the 
consequences of unfettered markets:  there is a $350 trillion derivative market and somewhat 
smaller loan market  indexed to a number that we now know is manipulatible and manipulated, 
that doesn’t represent what the words seem to suggest it represents.   
 
The continuation of the market linked to Libor is itself scandalous.  There is ample evidence that 
even today it does not reflect any true lending rate:   is it conceivable that interbank lending rates 
for a particular bank whose cds’s spread have soared barely move?   
 
Contracts should be indexed to T-bill rates, which are less manipulable, and may be even more 
linked to the kinds of risks which these indexed contracts are suppose to handle. 
But even if the T-bill rate is less correlated with the risks that individuals care about, the 
advantages in the reduction of potential for manipulation and exploitation make the movement 
away from Libor desirable. 
 
6. Derivatives and CDS's:  We need tomakeMarketsWorklike Markets 
 
Derivatives and CDS’s bring together many of the issues discussed so far:  the market is far from 
competitive, with a few big banks deriving significant returns (in the billions) from these 
activities, making it understandable why they resist regulation so strongly.  The lack of 
transparency facilitates market manipulation and a lack of competition, enhancing bank profits, 
but at the same time posing significant systemic risk, which became so evident in the 2008 crisis.  
There is also an element of regulatory arbitrage, or what might more accurately be described as 
regulatory deception.  If regulators treat a bank’s holding of a risky bond combined with a CDS 
(supposedly aninsurance policy on the bond) as if the bank were holding a safe asset, it allows 
8 
 the bank to lend more money—to leverage its portfolio even more.  But the insurance may be 
phony insurance—sold at a low price because the benefits would never be paid by the insurance 
company because in the event of the insured against event occurring, the insurance would 
default:  this was precisely what happened with AIG. 
Moreover, by failing to net out their positions and by not trading through exchanges, the banks 
increase systemic risk and reduce transparency, another instance of externalities imposed upon 
others.   Indeed, they reduce the overall efficiency of the market, since the standard arrangements 
undermine principles of market decentralization. For example, with large credit default swaps 
not cleared through an adequately capitalized clearing house, knowing the risk of default of any 
one firm required knowing the risk position of every firm with which it was financially 
interlinked—in a vast, difficult, simultaneous equation system.    
Transparency and the euro-crisis 
The euro crisis has once again brought out the consequences of the lack of transparency in 
derivative positions.  No one knew for sure the full consequences of a Greek restructuring, partly 
because no one knew who bore the risks, or what banks may have taken a speculative 
positioning.  One of the explanations for the ECB’s hard-to-justify position that the restructuring 
should be done in a way that was not a credit event—that is, so that the banks who had bought 
insurance would not be repaid—was that they were more concerned with the banks who had 
taken  a speculative position.   
Government insured financial institutions (whether the insurance is explicit, or implicit—as a 
result of being too big to fail) should not be allowed to issue derivatives.  While it is not clear 
whether such financial products are insurance products or gambling instruments, they are not 
loans, there is no justification for government encouraging them through implicit or explicit 
insurance.  There is no evidence of compelling economies of scope to offset the market distortion 
arising from such subsidies.   
Derivatives should be traded over adequately capitalized exchanges and positions should be 
transparent.Some critics have worried that trading over exchanges will concentrate risk;there 
could be systemic consequences to the failure of an exchange.  The response is to increase 
capitalization and to require all those who make use of the exchange to be jointly and severally 
liable for the losses.  The rest of society should not have to bear the consequences of their failure 
at risk management.   
It should be clear that Dodd-Frank went only a little way towards addressing the problems posed 
by derivatives.  A fundamental flaw of Dodd-Frank was that it did not recognize the deep 
disparity between private rewards and social returns; it did not recognize that market participants 
had incentives to design transactions in ways that increased systemic instability and decreased 
the economy’s efficiency, either in gathering and disseminating information or in assessing or 
distributing risk. 
9 
  
Derivatives and other new financial productions were championed as part of financial 
innovation.  But as Paul Volcker pointed out, it was hard to see that any of this financial 
innovation had led to faster real economic growth.  It had contributed to more inequality—to 
greater wealth for the bankers—but it was hard to see societal benefits.  Indeed, it has been 
associated with more instability.   
 
We now understand better why that is the case.  Much of the financial innovation was not 
directed at improving the efficiency of the economy and enhancing the ability of ordinary 
Americans to manage the risks which they faced.  Some of the innovations were directed at 
improved ways of exploiting poor Americans;some at regulatory arbitrage;some at new forms of 
market deception.  In each of these cases, there were marked discrepancies between social and 
private returns.  Whenever there are such discrepancies, not only will markets not be efficient, 
innovation will not be directed at enhancing societal welfare. 
 
The one part of the agenda that seemed to have some rationale was called “completing the 
market.”  Since the earlier work of Arrow and Debreu, one of the widely recognized market 
failures was the absence of key risk markets.  The notion was that the new products enabled 
individuals to manage risks better.  Ironically, they were typically priced by using “spanning” 
theorems—the new products were viewed as a linear combination of existing products, or at least 
near enough so to be able to base prices on these related products.  In this view, the real 
advantage of the new products was the lower transactions cost.  But as those in the financial 
sector heralded these benefits, total transactions costs soared—to the point that just profits in the 
financial sector amounted to 40 percent of all corporate profits.  
 
But there is a basic result called the theory of the second best, which says that when there are 
many market distortions, eliminating one of them may actually make matters worse.  In the 
presence of imperfect risk markets, for instance, removing trade barriers may make everyone in 
9
both countries worse off.  In the presence of imperfect risk markets, capital market 
10
liberalization may increase volatility in consumption and make the economy worse off.
 
In this case, matters may be even worse.  When individuals have different assessments of risk 
(the probability of a given event), they can through buying and selling derivatives create pseudo-
wealth—both parties believe that they will win the bet, and hence both believe that they are well 
off.  In reality, of course, this is just a zero sum game, and next period, one will be proven right, 
the other wrong.  But at that point, there can be large destruction of this pseudo-wealth, with 
                                                            
9
 See D. Newbery and J. E. Stiglitz, “Pareto Inferior Trade,”  Review of Economic Studies, 51(1), January 1984, 
pp. 1-12. 
10
 See J. E. Stiglitz, “Capital Market Liberalization, Globalization, and the IMF,” in Capital Market Liberalization 
and Development,J.E. Stiglitz and J.A. Ocampo (eds.), New York: Oxford University Press, pp.76-100.  
10 
 severe macroeconomic consequences.  Of course, if only two individuals engaged in such bets, 
the macroeconomic consequences would be negligible.  But when they are engaged in by large 
numbers, there can be severe consequences. 
 
This provides a still further reason for restricting derivatives—or at the very least, making sure 
that they are not facilitated and subsidized, implicitly or explicitly, by government policy. 
 
Unfortunately, not only do we encourage the derivatives through allowing them to be sold by 
government-insured institutions, we implicitly encourage them through bankruptcy laws that 
give them priority in bankruptcy. 
 
It is imperative for government to try to correct discrepancies between social returns and private 
rewards because in the presence of such distortions, not only will markets be inefficient, but 
innovation will be misdirected. 
 
Legal frameworks—corporate governance laws, competition laws, bankruptcy laws, financial 
sector regulations—provide the rules of the game, affect the distribution of income and the 
relationship between social and private returns, and can be thought of as providing (implicitly) 
the basis of industrial policy, encouraging some sectors at the expense of others.  The legal 
framework in some countries, such as the United States, has resulted in a distorted and bloated 
financial sector.   For example, among the reforms needed in our bankruptcy law are the 
following: 
 
Bankruptcy law should treat derivatives junior to workers and senior creditors.Bankruptcy law 
should be used to encourage transparency:  any derivative not registered would be junior to all 
other claimants; and losses on derivatives that are not fully disclosed would not be tax 
deductible. 
 
7. The shadow banking system 
 
Prior to the crisis, many thought that the shadow banking system did not pose systemic risk.  An 
investment bank that failed would (some believed) have no systemic consequences.  We now 
know that that is not true.  Even a large insurance company can pose systemic risk.   
Much of the shadow banking system arose to circumvent regulations imposed on commercial 
banks.  And much of the theory providing justification for the shadow banking system has been 
put into question by the crisis.  For instance, while the benefits of risk diversification through 
securitization are well recognized, the crisis has exposed the downside to securitization:   
One of the arguments for institution- (bank-) based lending is the internalization of information 
externalities.  Securitization offered advantages in risk diversification, but these advantages were 
11 
 more than offset by the attenuation of the quality of information.  A great deal of attention has 
been focused recently on the failures of the rating agencies; but the problems associated with the 
inadequacy of incentives for gathering good information are partially inherent and have long 
been recognized: if markets perfectly conveyed information (as the advocates of informationally 
11
efficient markets claimed), then there would be no incentives to gather information.  Earlier, 
we noted that private decisions with respect to sharing and transferring risk are not, in general, 
socially optimal.  Even worse, the way private markets balance risk and information efficiency is 
not, in general, optimal.  Systems that disperse risk inherently weaken “accountability” and 
incentives not just for gathering information, but for ensuring the “quality” of the financial 
products being produced.   
12
If diversification leads to an attenuation of incentives for obtaining good information, it can 
lead not only to poorer overall performance, but more instability.  Hence, the trade-off is 
markedly different than has traditionally been envisaged in the securitization literature, where it 
was presumed that securitization would lead to enhanced systemic stability.  Different policy 
frameworks (rules of the game) can lead to different financial architectures; and different 
financial architectures balance the trade-offs differently, some better than others, some 
enhancing the ability to absorb small risks, but making the economy more prone to systemic risk 
in the event of a large shock, or a set of correlated smaller shocks.   
The shadow banking system has to be tightly regulated, e.g. with tight leverage (capital and 
liquidity) requirements—and because wholesale deposits may be even more fickle that consumer 
deposits in commercial banks, the requirements may even have to be higher.  Originators of 
securities have to have “skin-in-the game,” i.e. they have to retain at least a 10% stake in the 
security.   
There need to be deep reforms in the credit rating agencies.  The quasi-public role (delegating 
responsibility in ascertaining which securities are safe enough to be held by a pension fund) 
needs to be re-examined.  There needs to be standardization of the ratings.  There needs to be a 
rating of the rating agencies performance.  They need to be held more accountable.(Litigation in 
Australia where the credit rating agencies were found culpable is a beginning in doing so.) 
 
8. The centrality of banks and the necessity of central banks using a full range of 
instruments 
                                                            
11
See Sanford Grossman and J. E. Stiglitz, “Information and Competitive Price Systems,” American Economic 
Review, 66(2), May 1976, pp. 246-253, and Sanford Grossman and J. E. Stiglitz, On the Impossibility of 
Informationally Efficient Markets,” American Economic Review, 70(3), June 1980, pp. 393-408. 
12
As in Calvo, Guillermo A. and Mendoza, Enrique G., 2000. “Rational contagion and the globalization of securities 
markets,” Journal of International Economics, Elsevier, 51(1), pp. 79-113 
12 
 Banks, and their failures, were central to the crisis of 2008.  But curiously, banks play little role 
in standard macroeconomics models, in which the financial sector is often summarized in a 
money demand-and-supply equation.  These models typically didn’t model the banking sector 
carefully—or at all.   Such a reduced-form approach may suffice in normal times, but not now, or 
13
in other times of crisis, such as the East Asia crisis.
 
The importance of banking (including the shadow banking system), as opposed to the provision 
of credit through markets, is rooted in information economics.  In particular, they are the 
repository of institutional knowledge (information) that is not easily transferred, and the 
internalization of information externalities provides better incentives for the acquisition of 
14
information, but, as we have noted, at the cost of a lack of direct diversification of risk .
It should now be clear why an analysis of banking has to be central in any macroeconomic 
analysis:  A key channel through which monetary policy affects the economy is the availability 
of credit and the terms at which it is available.  It is the lending rate that firms can borrow at that 
they care about—not the interest rate at which the government can borrow.  The spread between 
the two can and does vary greatly; banks are central to the setting of the lending rates at which 
small and medium sized enterprises can borrow.  Government policy can affect the spread 
through both conventional monetary instruments and a variety of regulatory policies, and 
monetary authorities need to be sensitive to the various  market forces which might affect the 
spread, so that they could take offsetting actions.   
If we are to understand the impact of monetary policy, we must better understand how what 
Central Banks do (either in conventional open market operations, reserve requirements, interest 
provided on reserves, or regulatory requirements) affects the behavior of banks and the shadow 
banking system.  This is especially so because banks are still the locus of most SME borrowing, 
and because variability in SME investment and employment is central to understanding 
macroeconomic variability.   
15
Greenwald and Stiglitz provide a beginning of a research program of creating macroeconomic 
models where banks play a central role and are explicitly modeled.  Credit availability too plays 
a central role—rightly so, because credit markets are often characterized by credit rationing.  If 
there were no credit rationing, there would be no liquidity crises. 
                                                            
13
 The irony is that many of the proponents of these models made a great fuss over the fact that they were structural, 
i.e. deriving savings behavior from intertemporal utility maximizing behavior.  
14
Though shareholder risk diversification can still occur.  The fact that this is so raises questions even about the 
validity of the risk argument for diversification through securitization. 
15
 B. Greenwald and J.E. Stiglitz, Towards a New Paradigm in Monetary Economics, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003. 
13 
 Already, though, there are clear policy prescriptions both about policies aimed at macro-stability 
(preventing crises) and in restoring the economy after an economic crisis—prescriptions that 
may differ markedly from those arising out of the standard conventional (DSGE) models.    
Quantities (credit availability) and liquidity can be as, or more important, than interest rates.  
The interest rate that matters is the lending rate, not the Treasury bill rate, and this should be the 
focus of attention. 
Credit availability and the terms at which banks lend money is affected by the T-bill rate (which 
in turn is affected by open market operations) but also by a host of regulatory measures, such as 
capital requirements.  These regulatory instruments have first order macroeconomic 
consequences and should be treated as macroeconomic instruments.  In some cases, they can be 
far more effective.  Increasing margin and down payment requirements would have been far 
more effective in curbing the tech and housing bubbles than just adjusting interest rates.   
Changes in technology and market structure and some regulations can affect the effectiveness of 
other instruments.  In particular, the elimination of regulation Q has meant that changes in T-bill 
rates have a smaller wealth-effect on banks, so that much of the effect of conventional monetary 
policy is through substitution effects, which typically are far weaker.   
Most importantly, central banks need to use all of the instruments at their disposal.The 
artificially self-imposed constraint adopted by many central bankers influenced by neo-liberal 
doctrines—that central bankers should limit themselves to adjusting short term interest rates—
has been costly.  It was predicated on the false notions that markets were always efficient, and 
therefore central banks should minimize their interventions.  But all central banks intervene—
that is why they were created.  And there is no theorem that says that optimal intervention should 
be limited to short term rate setting.  Indeed, in other contexts,such as tax policy, we know that 
optimal intervention (taxation) involves imposing a multiplicity of interventions(taxes)—it is 
16
better to have a large number of small interventions than one large intervention .   
The crisis has forced many Central Banks to rethink their doctrinaire policies.  Even the Fed has 
become more active in the use of alternative instruments.  I should say a word a few words later 
about one such instrument, quantitative easing.   
9. Broader objectives—beyond inflation—as well as more instruments 
 
In the aftermath of the crisis, it is evident that the single-minded focus of some central banks on 
inflation was misplaced.  The losses in welfare from low to moderate inflation were of orders of 
magnitude smaller than the losses from the financial collapse.  But the underlying hypothesis, 
held by many central bankers, that keeping inflation low was necessary, and almost sufficient, 
                                                            
16
 P.P. Ramsey, "A Contribution to the theory of Taxation." Economic Journal (1927), 47-61. 
14 
 for stable and strong growth has been shown to be wrong—and was never really justified by 
sound economic models.   By diverting attention from what was really important,inflation 
targeting may accordingly not only have failed to enhance macro-stability, it may actually have 
contributed to instability. (Of course, high levels of inflation are a problem, but they are often 
symptomatic of other more general problems in the economy.) 
 
The period immediately before the crisis showed another aspect of the destabilizing effects of 
inflation targeting:  developing countries exposed to an adverse supply shock which results in 
“imported” inflation increased interest rates, slowing the economy down even more, and 
imposing even greater costs on workers already suffering from high food and energy prices.  The 
only way that the increased interest rate would have had a significant effect on inflation was by 
imposing such stress on the non-traded sector and on wages that prices of non-traded goods and 
labor declined enough to offset the rising international prices.  But then the cure would have 
been worse than the disease.   
 
The more general point is that the response to any shock to the economy should depend on the 
nature of the shock.  If it is, for instance, a demand shock, then it may be appropriate to curb 
demand through interest rate policy.   
 
This and the preceding point illustrate another more general one:  for years, Tinbergen's 
approach to policy has been extremely influential.  If the number of instruments equals the 
number of  objectives, it has been argued that one should "match" instruments with objectives, 
and different institutions should be assigned an instrument and a target for which they are 
responsible.  The central bank should be responsible for inflation, using its instrument of choice, 
the interest rate.  Tinbergen focused on controllability, but this system has been argued for on the 
basis of accountability:  there is a simple metric (the level of inflation), in this view, by which 
central bank performance can be judged.   
 
But Tinbergen's analysis was conducted in a highly stylized linear model, in which with n 
instruments one could control n objectives.  In a complex non-linear system with risk—including 
17
instrument uncertainty —and where one is concerned not just with the ultimate equilibrium 
(which in practice may never be attained) but with real-time performance--one should use all the 
instruments at one's disposal, and coordination among policymakers is essential.  There are no 
general theorems on decentralization—to the contrary, what theorems we have relate to the 
dangers of decentralization.   
 
                                                            
17
 That is, one cannot be sure about the consequences of any action.  See, e.g. B. Greenwald and J.E. Stiglitz, 
“Toward a Theory of Rigidities,” American Economic Review, 79(2), May 1989, pp. 364-69. 
15 
 In practice, this means that monetary and fiscal policy needs to be coordinated, and it makes no 
sense for the body controlling one of these to be allegedly independent, while the one responsible 
for the other is politically accountable, a point to which I shall return shortly. 
Central banks should broaden their objectives beyond inflation.  They need to focus too on 
employment, growth, and financial stability.  And monetary policies need to be coordinated with 
fiscal policies. 
10. The complex effects of monetary policy: asymmetries, irreversibilities, sectoraleffects, 
distributionaleffects 
 
 Monetary authorities need to be especially sensitive to asymmetries in "controllability" and the 
costs associated with the conduct of monetary policy.  While monetary policy may be an 
effective instrument in constraining output, it may be far less effective in stimulating the 
economy in a deep downturn.  This, in turn, implies asymmetries in the conduct of monetary 
policy.  There is always going to be uncertainty, for instance in judging the level of employment 
or growth at which inflation starts to increase or in judging whether there is a bubble.  But a 
slight restraint on the economy in dampening a potential bubble has a miniscule cost relative to 
the costs imposing by the breaking of a bubble.   
 
This is an example where there are long–term, hard-to-reverse effects of mistakes.  There are 
other examples:  prolonged high unemployment gives rise to hysteresis effects, as skills atrophy.   
 
So too, advocates of monetary policy as a control instrument (over fiscal policy) stress its 
flexibility, the ability to fine tune policies as new information comes in.  But they fail to note that 
some parts of the economy are more interest-sensitive than others, and some parts are more 
sensitive to the availability of bank credit than others.  Hence loosening and tightening of credit 
induces more volatility in some sectors than others, and because of imperfections in risk markets, 
this imposes significant costs on these sectors.  In a sense, the way monetary policy is conducted 
distorts the economy.   
 
At the same time, the way monetary policy is conducted can have significant distributional 
effects.  While it is often asserted that inflation is the cruelest tax, in advanced countries at least 
we have protected the poor against much of the consequences, since social security and other 
programs are often indexed to inflation.  With competitive labor markets, wages tend to rise with 
inflation, and so even workers are protected.  (Sometimes it seems that this is not the case, but 
that is because the shocks to the economy that set off inflationary episodes often are shocks that 
affect labor productivity; we confuse correlation with causation.)  Inflation has redistributive 
effects--against holders of long term bonds.  But fighting inflation by raising interest rates and 
increasing unemployment also has distributive effects—not only is the cost of the higher 
unemployment borne directly by workers, but workers suffer doubly as the higher 
16 
 unemployment exerts downward pressure on wages, and triply, as lower GDP leads to lower tax 
revenues and cutbacks of public programs aimed at the bottom and middle.   
 
Not only have monetary authorities often failed to note the significant distributive effects of their 
policies, the models on which they rely have not given them the prominence that they should.  
Even if one did not put much weight on inequality, inequality can have large macroeconomic 
18
effects.   My own work (summarized in my recent book The Price of Inequality) highlights 
this.  So too did the International Commission of Experts appointed by the President of the UN 
19
General Assembly examining the causes of the 2008 crisis.  And so too has the IMF, which has 
20
noted the systematic relationship between inequality and instability.
 
While I can't in this brief lecture go into all the channels through which this occurs, let me note 
one that was evident in the run up to this crisis.  As incomes of most Americans stagnated and 
declined, they incurred greater indebtedness as they strived to maintain their standards of livings 
and to keep up with those at the top who were doing so well.  Had monetary authorities not offset 
the effects of growing inequality (because the marginal propensity to consume of those at the top 
is so much lower at the top than at the bottom and middle, as income shifts from the middle and 
bottom to the top total consumption demand is lowered) by lowering interest rates and relaxing 
regulations, thereby helping create a housing bubble, aggregate demand would have been 
lowered, and unemployment would have increased.  But such actions provided only a temporary 
palliative.  The temporizing was sowing the seeds of destruction:  it was simply a matter of time 
before the bubble which sustained the economy, offsetting the effects of the growing inequality, 
broke.  But the period of recovery, during which actual output remains substantially below 
potential output, may be longer and the costs far greater than the benefits and duration of the 
bubble.  And this is especially so when the underlying problem is not addressed; for the 
downturn itself gives rise to adverse distributional effects which weaken the economy further.   
 
Monetary authorities need to be more sensitive to the distributive and sectoral consequences of 
their policies, and to the fact that some mistakes--letting bubbles grow, or allowing 
unemployment to rise in an excessive zeal for fighting inflation--have long term consequences 
which are hard to correct.   
 
11. Limited effectiveness of monetary policy and the channels of monetary policy:  
exploiting market imperfections 
                                                            
18
The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future, New York: W.W. Norton,  
2012; see also J. E. Stiglitz, “Macroeconomic Fluctuations, Inequality, and Human Development,” Journal of 
Human Development and Capabilities, 2011, 13(1), pp. 31-58. 
19
 Available as The Stiglitz Report: Reforming the International Monetary and Financial Systems in the Wake of the  
Global Crisis,Op.cit. 
20
 See Andrew G. Berg and Jonathan D. Ostry, “Inequality and Unsustainable Growth: Two Sides of the Same 
Coin?,” IMF Staff Discussion Note, April 8,  2011, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/sdn/2011/sdn1108.pdf (accessed December 14, 2012).  
17 
  
This discussion has highlighted one of the lacuna in the models used by many monetary 
authorities--the lack of attention to distribution.  Earlier remarks highlighted other lacuna--the 
lack of attention to banks and the details of the financial system more broadly.  But these are not 
21
just mistakes of modeling, about which I have written more extensively elsewhere , but they 
lead to misguided views about the channels through which monetary policy affects the economy, 
and indeed, the very reasons that monetary policy affects the economy.  And without 
understanding these channels, one can't understand why sometimes monetary policy is less 
effective than at other times, nor can we design policies to maintain stability or restore the 
economy to full employment. 
22
The effectiveness of monetary policy hinges critically on certain market imperfections.
Some years ago, I proved a generalization of the Modigliani-Miller (MM) theorem, which had 
23
shown the irrelevance of corporate financial policies, for the public sector.  I showed that, 
under the idealized conditions under which the MM theorem held, public financial operations, 
such as a change in the maturity structure of government debt, should have no effect. (The result 
could also be thought of as a generalization of the Barro-Ricardo theorem, suggesting that 
government debt itself had no effect.)  In a simple model with infinitely lived individuals, putting 
aside any distributive effects, we owe money to ourselves, so government debt is simultaneously 
a liability and an asset.  That that is so provides an important critique to those excessively 
worried about government debt, at least when it is internally held (it’s another matter when the 
                                                            
21
J.E. Stiglitz, 2011, “Rethinking Macroeconomics: What Failed and How to Repair It,” Journal of the European 
Economic Association, 9(4), pp. 591-645;J. E. Stiglitz, Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the 
World Economy, New York, W.W. Norton, 2010. 
22
 This section of my lecture is adapted from my paper, “Monetary Policy in a Multi-PolarWorld," presented to an 
IEA Roundtable  on capital flows at Izmir, Turkey on November 1-2, 2012 
23
 That work itself was based on my generalization of the MM theorem (J. E. Stiglitz, “A Re-Examination of the 
Modigliani-Miller Theorem,” American Economic Review, 59(5), December 1969, pp. 784-793; J. E. Stiglitz, “On 
the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial Policy,” American Economic Review, 64(6), December 1974, ), work which 
itself, together with J. E. Stiglitz “Information and Capital Markets,” in Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of 
PaulCootner, William F. Sharpe and Cathryn Cootner (eds.), Prentice Hall, New Jersey, 1982, pp. 118-158;reprinted 
in The Selected Works of Joseph E. Stiglitz, Volume II: Information and Economic Analysis: Applications to Capital, 
Labor, and Product Markets, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013, pp. 55-84), explained the limitations on the 
theorem .  For instance, in  “On the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial Policy,” American Economic Review, 64(6), 
December 1974, pp. 851-866,  I showed the irrelevance of corporate financial policies in a general equilibrium 
model, under much more general conditions than those that Modigliani and Miller had established the result.   
I subsequently extended these results to the public sector in “On the Almost Neutrality of Inflation: Notes on 
Taxation and the Welfare Costs of Inflation,” in Development in an Inflationary World, M. June Flanders and Assaf 
Razin (eds.), New York: Academic Press, 1981, pp. 419-457; “On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial 
Policy: Indexation, Price Rigidities and Optimal Monetary Policy,” in Inflation, Debt and Indexation, R. Dornbusch 
and M. Simonsen (eds.), MIT Press, 1983, pp. 183-222 and of Economic Education, 19(2), Spring 1988, pp. 171-
177; and “On the Relevance or Irrelevance of Public Financial Policy,” in The Economics of Public Debt, 
Proceedings of the 1986 International Economics Association Meeting, London: Macmillan Press, 1988, pp. 4-76. 
18 
 debt is held by foreigners, because then the debt amounts to a diminution in the country’s “net 
worth.”) 
The intuition, of course, is simple, and it is the same that underlies the Barro-Ricardo analysis (in 
its general equilibrium form):  if the government borrows more now (say, instead of paying for 
current expenses by raising taxes), to be repaid at some later date, the effect can and will (in 
general equilibrium) be precisely offset by the representative consumer saving more, and using 
the funds to repay the government debt later.  But in the general equilibrium  formulation, there 
can be multiple heterogeneous individuals, and the result holds, assuming, of course, that those 
who would have paid the taxes now pay the “equivalent” amount later, i.e. that there are no 
distributive consequences to the postponement of the taxes.  And the same holds if the 
government decides to raise more funds by a sequence of short-term borrowings, rather than by 
long term debt. 
The empirical evidence is overwhelming that the Barro-Ricardo theorem, and my 
24
generalizationof it, are wrong.  The question is not the validity of the proposition, but why it 
fails.  And what insights does this provide us into capital markets and the workings of monetary 
policy?   
Distributive effects, capital constraints, and seeing through the public veil 
It should be obvious, as we have already noted, that it is hard to avoid distributive effects and 
political economy considerations (the absence of which are essential to the validity of the Barro-
Ricardo result).  In the limiting case, with an overlapping generations model, the decision to 
postpone financing for current expenditures through taxes has potentially important 
intergenerational effects.  To be sure, there may be partially offset through changes in 
intergenerational transfers, but the fact is that most individuals do not leave any significant 
25
bequests to their children , in which case there can’t and won’t be such offsetting bequests.   
A variety of capital market imperfections provide the basis of the strongest theoretical critique.  
If, for instance, individuals would have want to have borrowed more, but are constrained from 
                                                            
24
See for example, D.S. Johnson D S, J.A. Parker, N.S. Souleles, 2006, “Household Expenditure and the Income 
Tax Rebates of 2001,” The American Economic Review,  96(5): 1589-1610. Anecdotally, when Bush cut taxes 
dramatically in 2001 and 2003 the average savings rate fell to near zero—it did not increase as the Barro-Ricardo 
analysis would have suggested.  Of course, there were many other things going on, and defenders of the theory 
might argue that were it not for the tax cut, savings would have been even lower, i.e. minus 2 or 3% of GDP.  But 
with credit constraints already binding for so many individuals—and with the bottom 80% of America already 
consuming 110% of their income—it is hard to believe that in the absence of the tax cuts, the savings rate would 
have been that low.   
25
 In fact, most individuals have almost no wealth--and hence no bequests of significance.  See, for example, E.N. 
Wolff and M. Gittleman, “Inheritances and the Distribution of Wealth Or Whatever Happened to the Great 
Inheritance Boom?” BLS Working Paper 445, January 2011, who find that between “1989 to 2007, 21 percent of 
American households at a given point of time received a wealth transfer and these accounted for 23 percent of their 
net worth.”  
19 
 doing so, the existence of an incremental future liability will not induce them to start saving.  
The borrowing constraint will simply be less binding than it was before.  By the same token, 
were the government to decide to tax more and borrow less, the individual facing a borrowing 
constraint won’t be able to offset the effect through increased borrowing.   
In reality, most individuals do not fully incorporate future tax liabilities into their budget 
constraints—and even less so, do they incorporate the “risk pattern,” so that changes in the risk 
pattern, as a result of a change in say the maturity structure of debt (or a shift from unindexed 
debt to indexed debt) are not offset by corresponding changes in their portfolios.  (As another 
example:  as the Fed bought long term bonds, there was the obvious risk that should it reverse 
26
the purchases as the economy recovers, there would be a capital loss.  The expectation of such 
a capital loss, with full integration of the public and private budget constraints, should have had a 
contractionary effect on consumption, offsetting the intended expansionary effect.  The Fed 
suggested it might hold the bonds to maturity, using other ways of tightening credit, e.g. by 
paying interest on deposits at the Federal Reserve, in effect enabling it never to realize the capital 
losses.  But these only mask the reality that (the present discounted value of) government 
revenues are less than they otherwise would have been; they don’t change the predicted adverse 
effect on consumption, assuming full integration of public and private budget constraints  and 
27
full rationality.  ) 
Monetary policy in a world of interest bearing money 
It is clear that the idealized world of Modigliani-Miller provides an inadequate description of the 
28
economy.  There is a widespread assumption that monetary policyhas some effects.   
But modern monetary theory lives in a half-way house of incompletely articulated assumptions of 
imprecisely defined market imperfections and distributive effects, leading to speculative 
observations about possible channels through which monetary policy might yield  effects, with 
ambiguous quantitative significance. 
Today, for instance, with cash management accounts, T-bills can, in effect, be used as money for 
purposes of transactions.  In the standard model in which interest rates are determined by the 
demand and supply for money, an open market operation entailing an exchange of T-bills for, 
say, “money”, doesn’t change the effective supply of money, since T-bills themselves can be 
                                                            
26
 The general point that it is hard to explain why temporary interventions (such as associated with IMF short term 
loans to a country) should have long term effects in models with rational expectations was made in Stiglitz [1999] 
27
 The irony is that government insists that banks use mark to market accounting, but the central bank doesn’t do so 
for itself.   
28
 My own earlier work on asymmetric information and stressing the importance of bankruptcy provided part of the 
critique.  Higher debt ratios may entail higher (expected) losses from bankruptcy and may have signaling/screening 
effects.  (Stiglitz, J.E., 1969, 1982,   Op.cit .  But these “limitations” are not relevant, at least for countries like the 
United States, where there is essentially no risk of soverign default. 
20 
 used for transactions, and so such an exchange (open market operations) shouldn’t  have any 
effect on interest rates.  And this is especially so in a world in which T-bills are yielding close to 
zero nominal interest rates. 
Institutional constraints, credit availability, profit maximizing risk-averse firms, and the liquidity 
trap 
But it is possible in a world of banks with institutional rigidities that such open market operations 
could have an effect.  For an increase in deposits held by the banking system in the Federal 
Reserve (“base money”) can, through the credit multiplier, lead to increased lending.  I say, can, 
29
not necessarily will.  For banks are (for the most part) profit maximizing risk averse firms , and 
they may decide the best way to allocate their portfolios is not to issue new loans to, say, SME’s, 
but to buy government bonds from the household sector or from abroad, or simply to hold the 
excess liquidity at the Fed.  This can give rise to a liquidity trap, though one that is distinctly 
different from that discussed by Keynes (where it arises because the demand function for money 
becomes infinitely elastic at low interest rates) and some more recent commentators focusing on 
the zero lower bound on the interest rate.  
We have already referred to one reason that today, monetary policy may be much less effective 
than in the past:  with the abolition of Regulation Q, restricting competition in the setting of 
deposit rates, the wealth-effects of monetary policy are largely eliminated, implying that 
monetary policy exerts its effects through much weaker substitution effects.   
But in deep downturns, there are two further reasons for the inefficacy of monetary policy:  the 
interest insensitivity of investment (and consumption) and the blocking of credit channels, so that 
the impact of monetary policy on the flow of credit is diminished.   
The distinction between the situation confronting Keynes in the Great Depression and that of 
today is important:  Keynes was confronting a situation where prices were falling at 10% a year, 
so real interest rates remained in excess of 10%, so it was plausible that the inability to lower real 
interest rates represented a constraint on the ability of monetary authorities to ignite the 
economy.  Today, however, there is moderate inflation, of say 2%, so that real (T-bill) interest 
rates are negative.   To be sure, at a sufficiently negative real interest rate, individuals might be 
spurred to consume more and firms to invest more, but within reasonable ranges,  further 
lowering  (expected) real T-bill interest rates, to say -4%—even were that feasible— is unlikely 
to spur much further investment or consumption.   
                                                            
29
 I should be more cautious:  given the agency issues that were revealed so vividly in the crisis, they might be better 
described as managerial enterprises, maximizing the well-being of the managers, subject to certain constraints on the 
access to credit.  In either case, we have to describe the behavioral responses to a change in, say, base money or T-
bill interest rates. 
21 
 There are some obvious reasons for this interest inelasticity:  with firms sitting on excess 
capacity, even large changes in interest rates are not likely to induce much more investment.  
Why would firms acquire even more excess capacity, just because the interest rate is lowered?  
30
Moreover, as Greenwald and I have explained in our earlier work , because of information 
imperfections, capital markets are imperfect; and because of capital market imperfections, firms 
act in a risk averse manner.  In deep downturns, firms are likely to be particularly risk averse, 
and so particular unresponsive to even moderate changes in interest rates.   
Today, large firms are sitting on some $2 trillion dollars of cash.  It is hard to believe that small 
changes in T-bill rates are going to result in large changes in their willingness to convert those 
cash holdings into real investments.   
For many smaller businesses, however, the real constraint is the lack of availability of credit (a 
problem that simply cannot be analyzed in a model with perfect capital markets).  For these 
firms, credit availability is far more important than interest rates.  Providing more liquidity to 
banks does not necessarily lead either to more lending or to lower lending rates (Greenwald-
Stiglitz, 2003).   
The ineffectiveness of temporary interventions:  QE as an example 
One of the arguments often put forward in favor of monetary policy is its flexibility—the ability 
to change interest rates quickly up and down.  But while that is undoubtedly an advantage (over 
the much slower process of adjustments of tax rates or government expenditures—though not of 
well-designed automatic stabilizers built into sound fiscal and financial frameworks), there has 
been a long standing theoretical conundrum:  why should policy measures that are seen to be 
31
(and often announced to be) temporary have much of an effect?
Consider, for instance, the temporary intervention of Quantitative Easing—buying long term 
bonds now, under the presumption that the economy will recover in say a couple of years, in 
which case the action will be reversed.  Apart from slight changes in endowments (increases in 
the levels of state variables like human and financial capital) that might have been induced by the 
temporary intervention, at the later date, asset prices will be the same as they would have been 
                                                            
30
 1993, 2003, Op. cit. 
31
 Temporary interventions can have long term effects if (a) they move the economy from one equilibrium to 
another, in a model in which there are multiple equilibria; (b) there are large substitution effects, so that, for 
instance,  investment that might have occurred in a later period occurs earlier; or  (c) it can generate large 
“permanent” income effects, with longer last effects on the evolution of the economy.  Many of the interventions 
associated with monetary policy have none of these characteristics.  See, for instance, my Keynote address before 
the 1998 Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, “Knowledge for Development: Economic Science, 
Economic Policy, and Economic Advice,” in Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, B. 
Pleskovic and J. Stiglitz (eds.), Washington: World Bank, 1998, pp. 9-58. 
 
22 
 before the intervention.  Knowing this, it is hard to see why there should be large changes in 
asset prices (share prices) today.  With lifetime budget constraints essentially unchanged, it is 
hard to see why there should be any significant changes in consumption  during the period of the 
temporary interventions, even if there should be some changes in asset prices during that period.   
Moreover, as we noted earlier, the capital gain on long term government bonds that individuals 
might enjoy today as long term interest rates fall will be offset either by a capital loss on their 
holdings when the intervention is reversed and/or by the capital loss that the government will 
realize when it sells back the long term bonds back to the public at a time when long term 
interest rates are lower.  If public and private life-time budget constraints are largely integrated, 
then these effects are offsetting, and it is hard to believe that there will be large effects on 
aggregate demand.   
Market imperfections and why QE may have some effects 
Of course, in models with less than perfect rationality, high degrees of risk aversion, and 
significant capital market imperfections, such temporary interventions can have some effects.   
The financial press continually describes the response to low interest rates as leading to a “drive 
for yield.”  There is, of course, no general theory that would suggest that as yields go down, 
individuals act in a less risk-averse manner; quite the contrary, the adverse wealth effects might 
more plausibly lead to more risk-averse behavior.But such behavior, if widespread, could  in turn 
lead to an increase in the price of stocks—even if “rationally”  the forces leading to this increase 
(above what the prices would otherwise be) are just temporary.  The standard wisdom from the 
advocates of QE are that the higher stock prices will lead to more consumption.  We have 
questioned, though, whether that is so, if they rationally expect the intervention to be temporary.  
 But there is a more fundamental problem:  if the reason for the increase in stock prices is the 
“drive for yield,” then it reflects a worsening of the life-time budget constraint as a result of 
lower interest rates, and net, that should have ambiguous effects on consumption, with wealth 
and substitution effects operating in opposite directions.   
But there is another set of effects that may be operating that may also imply that QE can have an 
adverse effect on consumption (and aggregate demand).  The standard model ignores the effects 
of distribution, including across generations.   Those that go into retirement at, say, t, and had 
been planning to sell their assets, will, if QE results in an increase in stock or bond prices, now 
receive more from them that they otherwise would have received, and this group may consume 
32
more than they otherwise would have.
                                                            
32
 But those among the elderly who expect to live long will obtain  lower yields as they re-invest the proceeds, and 
this will largely cancel out these benefits. 
23 
 But once we start focusing on distributive effects, we need to take into account other effects 
associated with the lowering of interest rates:  those prudent older people who had invested in 
say government bonds will find their incomes lowered as interest rates are reduced, and for many 
of these, a lowering of income translates quickly into a lowering of consumption.  Their 
consumption is cash-constrained, and their cash flows will be diminished.   
There are many other potentially significant effects that are typically ruled out in the “standard” 
model:  lower interest rates lead to more capital intensive technologies, laying the seeds for a 
“jobless” recovery; lower interest rates can lead to asset price booms, increasing the prices of oil 
and other commodities which act much like a tax on consumers.   
Market imperfections and the ineffectiveness of QE 
While capital market imperfections help explain why monetary interventions like QE might have 
larger effects than one would have expected in a “perfect markets” model, capital market 
imperfections also help explain why QE may have less of an effect than expected.  (The most 
important reason for the limited effect of QE in the United States is globalization of financial 
markets, and that is discussed in the next part of this lecture.)   
As we noted earlier, what matters for aggregate demand is the availability of credit and short and 
long term lending rates, and even with quantitative easing, credit availability and the spread 
between T-bill rate or other rates set by the Fed and the lending rate are endogenous variables.  
In deep downturns, changes in conventional monetary policies may have limited effects, 
especially if the monetary authorities have not done what they should have done to ensure the 
health of the institutions responsible for the flow of credit. 
One of the hoped for effects was that lower long term interest rates would lead to lower 
mortgage rates, which in turn would lead to large numbers of Americans refinancing their 
mortgages, and the lower interest rates would effectively put cash in the pockets of households, 
leading to more consumption.   
Note that underlying this analysis are implicit assumptions about distributive effects of interest 
rate changes.  Lower interest payments by households corresponds to lower receipts of interest 
by lenders.  In representative agent models, the effect would be a wash.  More realistically, given 
large differences in the marginal propensities to consume of creditors and debtors, the 
redistribution from creditor to debtor should increase consumption (as the advocates of QE 
hoped.  In the presence of capital constraints (limiting borrowing by households), the effect is 
even stronger. 
However, in more general models focusing on capital and institutional constraints, the effects are 
more complex and ambiguous.  For instance, in the presence of institutional constraints on 
24 
 banks, lower revenues/profits for the banks translates into less lending, an effect which could be 
stronger than that generated by differences in marginal propensities to consume.   
The many and growing imperfections in the mortgage market help explain the ineffectiveness of 
33
monetary policy, including quantitative easing.  There has been increasing concentration --to 
the point where no one would describe the market as a competitive one.  Without precisely 
specifying the appropriate model of tacit collusion or oligopoly, it is certainly conceivable that 
the banks would not pass on to consumers the full benefits of the lower long term government 
rates; they would limit the supply of mortgages so much as to increase their spread, their profit 
margins.  And this is precisely what has happened.  (This is especially the case because of the 
multiplicity of conflicts of interests that have been creating under existing institutional 
arrangements.  The banks also derive large revenues as “service providers,” from servicing 
existing mortgages, and the contracts as service providers also provide them with incentives not 
to refinance.)  The result is that the consumer benefits (and thus the increase in aggregate 
demand through that channel) have been less than had been touted.  Critics suggest that, like so 
many of the Fed’s programs, the real beneficiaries are the banks, especially the large banks that 
control the lion’s share of the mortgage market.  If that is the case, the short run benefit to the 
economy, at least through this channel, will be limited. 
Another market imperfection may have reduced the benefits derived from QEIII even more.  
Mortgages that could easily be refinanced have already been refinanced; borrowers who have not 
have either insufficient income or are “underwater.”  The mortgage could be refinanced only if 
there were a principal write down.  In a standard model with rationality, it would pay both 
lenders and borrowers to engage in debt restructuring.  Foreclosures are expensive for everyone 
involved, including the communities in which they occur.  There is enormous dead weight loss.  
But principal write downs entail a recognition of losses faster than would otherwise be the case, 
especially since the change in accounting regulations in 2009 that allowed even impaired 
mortgages not to be written down.  That would make the seeming profits in the short run lower, 
even if it would make long run profits higher.  But agency problems pervade the banking system, 
and bank management has incentives to focus on the short run.  Moreover, some banks may face 
                                                            
33
 William C. Dudley, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, noted in a recent speech, “Federal 
Reserve MBS purchases have succeeded in driving down mortgage rates to historically low levels. But these 
purchases would have had still more effect on the economy if pass-through rates from the secondary market to the 
primary market had been higher […]The incomplete pass-through from agency MBS yields into primary mortgage 
rates is due to several factors—including a concentration of mortgage origination volumes at a few key financial 
institutions and mortgage rep and warranty requirements that discourage lending for home purchases and make 
financial institutions reluctant to refinance mortgages that have been originated elsewhere.” William C. Dudley, 
“The Recovery and Monetary Policy”, Remarks at the National Association for Business Economics Annual 
Meeting, New York City, 15 October 2012, available at 
http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/speeches/2012/dud121015.html. 
25 
 high costs in raising funds (a natural capital market constraint, arising in part from the high level 
34
of non-transparency of the banks.)
 In short, the level of refinancing may be far smaller than would be the case if financial markets 
were perfect, but analyzing the extent to which there will be refinancing, and the impact on 
banks and aggregate demand, entails a complex analysis of institutional constraints and 
35
imperfections.   Monetary policy ignores these at its peril.   
Balancing  
Here, I do not wish to argue for the quantitative importance of any of the effects that I have 
described.  What I do contend is that once one moves away from the “perfect markets” model, or 
the “almost perfect markets model” in which we know that monetary policy should have no (or 
negligible) effects, we have to be careful in thinking through the source of “imperfections” and 
their consequences. 
Too much reasoning on the impacts of monetary policy interventions has been based on an 
almost incoherent pastiche of analyses based on “rationality,” “rational expectations,” and “well 
functioning markets” overlaying a variety of forms of imprecisely specified and explained 
market imperfections.  I’ve alluded to some examples already:  while there is ample discussion 
of markets “discounting” future actions, temporary measures, it is still believed, can have 
36
significant effects.
Some of the disappointments with QEII and QEIII would not have come as a surprise, if 
monetary authorities had grasped better the nature of market imperfections as they existed at the 
time of the implementation of these policies.  Given the role that local (community) and regional 
banks play in the provision of credit to SME’s, given the weaknesses that persist in these banks, 
given the role that collateral plays for such lending, given that real estate is the predominant form 
of collateral, and given that real estate prices remain persistently and markedly below the level 
before the crisis, it should be no surprise that QE would have limited effects on SME lending.  
                                                            
34
 Still further problems are posed by the conflicts of interest between the holders of the first and second mortgages.  
See J. E. Stiglitz, Freefall: America, Free Markets, and the Sinking of the World Economy, New York: W.W. 
Norton, 2010.  Still further problems have resulted from the put-backs of flawed mortgages and the surrounding 
litigation:  risk-averse banks now realize that there is more risk associated with the process of mortgage origination 
and securitization than they had realized.    
35
 The list of imperfections in the mortgage market is not meant to be exhaustive.  Institutional arrangements, for 
instance, make it difficult for lender A to refinance a mortgage held by lender B, and lender A often has little 
incentive to refinance the mortgage—it will simply lower his revenues.  More broadly, the mortgage servicers have 
little incentive to facilitate mortgage restructurings.  There is Congressional legislation under consideration as this 
paper goes to press attempting to deal with some aspects of these issues.  
36
 They can, but typically only through substitution effects (a temporary investment tax credit or VAT tax), or 
through redistributive effects (e.g. the recapitalizations of the banking system, transferring, often in a non-
transparent way, resources to the banks at the expense of others.) 
26 
 Given that large firms were sitting on large amounts of cash, it should be no surprise that QE 
might have little effect on lending to large firms and/or investment by these firms.   
It is at least conceivable in a situation where there is excess capacity in industry and real estate 
and excess leverage in households, that the adverse effects of QE described earlier (including the 
adverse  consumption effect among the elderly) could outweigh any inducement towards more 
investment or consumption among firms or households, and so lowering interest rates could have 
an adverse affect on aggregate demand.    
The realization that it is partly because of--and in some cases mainly because of--market 
imperfections that monetary policy has the effects it does (or does not have the effects it is 
supposed to have) complicates monetary policy in many ways.   
It means that the simplistic notion, current in recent years, that all one needs to focus on is the 
real interest rate is simply wrong--even if one could figure out which real interest rate one 
should focus on.  
It implies too that the current fad to suggest that the reason that monetary policy is ineffective 
today is the zero lower bound is misguided.  We are not in a Keynesian liquidity trap.  
 It implies too that the effectiveness of monetary policy can be increased if monetary authorities 
work on increasing the effectiveness of the credit channel--strengthening the banks that are 
responsible, for instance, for SME lending and eliminating blockages in the mortgage market.   
These insights help us understand why QE II and QE III have not been effective--and are not 
likely to be. 
27 
  
12.   Access to credit 
 These experiences also highlight a point which is especially important in developing countries:  
lower T-bill rates do not necessarily translate into more access to credit.  Access to credit for 
SME's is especially important for growth; and private financial systems, on their own, may not 
37
provide adequate access.  (Emran and Stiglitz  provide a partial explanation for why this is so:  
it is difficult to ascertain who will be good entrepreneurs, and repay their loans; those who prove 
themselves good get poached away by others.  It is thus difficult for those providing capital to 
appropriate the full value of the information associated with their lending activities.) 
Governments and central banks need to have explicit programs to encourage lending to certain 
groups/sectors that are underserved.   
This may entail partial government guarantees and direct government lending programs and 
specialized institutions (like development banks) as well as regulatory interventions (like CRA 
lending requirements in the United States and geographical requirements.)   
It is important that such requirements be imposed not only on domestic institutions but also on 
foreign banks. 
 
13.   International finance 
Globalization has changed the way that monetary policy operates, and its effectiveness.  Capital 
and financial market liberalization was supposed to help stabilize financial markets, but the 
evidence is to the contrary:  it has brought new and higher levels of instability, without bringing 
the promised growth.   
Even the IMF, long the champion of capital market liberalization, has suggested that capital 
38
account interventions may be desirable.
These changes in view are not a surprise.  Liberalization/globalization played a central role in the 
rapid movement of the 2008 crisis from the United States around the world.  The world of 
liberalization has been one marked by far higher levels of volatility--and in the advanced 
countries far lower rates of growth--than  the era before liberalization.  Closer studies of financial 
                                                            
37
 S. Emran and J.E. Stiglitz, 2009, “Financial Liberalization, Financial Restraint and Entrepreneurial 
Development,” working paper, Columbia University, available at 
http://www2.gsb.columbia.edu/faculty/jstiglitz/download/papers/2009_Financial_Liberalization.pdf (accessed 
December 14, 2012). 
38
 See, e.g., Jonathan D. Ostry et al., “Capital Inflows: The Role of Controls,” IMF Staff Position note 10/04, 
February 19, 2010, available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/spn/2010/spn1004.pdf (accessed December 14, 
2012). 
28 
 market liberalization have shown that the flow of funds to SME's is often reduced, with 
consequent adverse effects on economic growth.   
QEII too has heightened these concerns.  In a world of globalization, money goes where the 
returns are highest--and not necessarily to the country increasing liquidity.  Thus, some argue 
that the major impact of the increased liquidity by the Fed  has been to increase demand in 
emerging markets (and perhaps to support asset price increases globally); and in response to the 
overheating to which it has contributed in the emerging markets, the central banks there have 
tried to undo the effects of what they view as the US competitive devaluation and have 
constructed impediments to the free flow of capital.  In effect, they have tried to offset, in their 
country, the expansionary effect of US Fed policy. In short, money has been going where it’s not 
needed, and not going where it’s needed.  Why should an investor with access to funds invest 
them in the United States or Europe, where there is excess capacity and a long term slump, rather 
than in the high return booming emerging markets?  In the older, closed economy models, they 
had no choice:  but in a globalized world with free capital markets, they do.  From a global point 
of view, one needs to ask:  of what value is there for the Fed to increase liquidity, which then 
moves to other parts of the world, and the Central Banks in these countries then take largely 
offsetting actions? 
(One of the effects of that policy that may have increased US aggregate demand is a lowering of 
its exchange rate.  But this attempt at competitive devaluation is a beggar-thy-neighbor policy, 
one to which emerging markets have rightly responded, suggesting that the US policy of 
quantitative easing has let loose a “currency war.”) 
Advances in economic theory have helped us to understand what was wrong with earlier models, 
which assumed that risk diversification associated with liberalization would obviously enhance 
stability and efficiency; and why the promised gains have not been materialized.  The standard 
models made strong assumptions not only about perfect markets (including the absence of 
information imperfections and asymmetries) but also about the absence of non-convexities, so 
essentially by assumption, risk diversification worked.  But as I showed in some recent papers, in 
39
the presence of such non-convexities, financial market integration may increase risk.  A host of 
papers have now shown that greater interlinkages (among financial institutions, across countries) 
40
may lead to a greater risk of systemic failure.
                                                            
39
 “Contagion, Liberalization, and the Optimal Structure of Globalization,” Journal of Globalization and 
Development,  2010, 1(2), Article 2, 45 pages; and “Risk and Global Economic Architecture: Why Full Financial 
Integration May be Undesirable,” American Economic Review, 100(2), May 2010, pp. 388-392.  
40
 See, e.g. S. Battiston, D. Delli Gatti, M. Gallegati,  B. Greenwald, and J. E. Stiglitz,  “Default Cascades: When 
Does Risk Diversification Increase Stability?”  Journal of Financial Stability, 2012, 8(3), pp.138-149; Gallegati, M., 
B. Greenwald, M. Richiardi, and J. E. Stiglitz (2008), “The Asymmetric Effect of Diffusion Processes: Risk Sharing 
and Contagion,” Global Economy Journal, 8(3), Article 2; Stefano Battiston, Domenico Delli Gatti, Mauro 
Gallegati,  Bruce Greenwald, and J. E. Stiglitz, 2012 "Liaisons Dangereuses: Increasing Connectivity, Risk Sharing, 
29 
 Advances in economic theory have also highlighted some of the reasons that foreign banks are 
different from domestic banks:  their risk profile is different, and they face greater asymmetries 
of information (e.g. about which small firms are likely to be good).  Imperfections and 
asymmetries of information help also explain the high level of volatility associated with foreign 
41
capital flows.
There is now an emerging consensus among economists on several aspects of policy concerning 
cross border capital flows: 
(a) Just as there is a need for financial sector regulation, there is a need for regulation of 
cross-border flows—countries should be cautious both about capital and financial 
42
market liberalization. 
(b) Cross-border flows and foreign banks behave differently in important respects from 
domestic sources of funds and domestic banks, and therefore there is a need for a 
different regulatory regime.  Of course, foreign financial institutions will oppose these 
regulations.   
(c) Of particular concern is that many international agreements, signed in the hey-day of 
neoliberalism, restrict the ability of governments to impose adequate regulatory regimes, 
and these need to be changed. 
(d) There is a need for closer cooperation among monetary authorities around the world, 
and  
(e) Larger central banks, the Fed and ECB in particular, need to recognize that they can 
impose large externalities on other countries; by contrast, the externalities imposed by 
any small country are limited.   
14.   Institutional design:  The failure of independent central banks 
43
Modern development economics has stressed the importance of good institutions.  Before the 
crisis, American financial institutions and American regulatory institutions (including the Fed) 
were often held up as models for others to imitate.  The crisis has not only undermined 
confidence in these institutions, but has also exposed deep institutional flaws.  It has shown that 
one of the central principles advocated by Western central bankers—the desirability of central 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
and Systemic Risk,"  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 36, pp. 1121-1141; Haldane, A. G. (2009), 
“Rethinking the Financial Network,” address to the Financial Students Association, Amsterdam, April, available at 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf; and Haldane, A. G. and R.M. May 
(2010), “Systemic Risk in Banking Ecosystems,” University of Oxford mimeo. 
41
See Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2003, op. cit 
42
 Reflective of this new trend, the IMF has recently supported the imposition of capital controls in certain instances, 
a major change in their stance, since 1997, when they tried to change their charter to give them a mandate to impose 
capital market liberalization.  See  Ostry et al., op. cit.  For a discussion of that older debate, see J. E. Stiglitz, 
Globalization and its Discontents, New York:  WW Norton, 2002.   
43
 See, for instance, the World Bank, 2002, Building Institutions for Markets:World Development Report 2001-2002, 
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.  
30 
 bank independence—was questionable at best.   In the crisis, countries with less independent 
central banks—China, India, and Brazil—did far, far better than countries with more 
44
independent central banks, Europe and the United States.  Elsewhere I have provided part of 
the explanation.  There is no such thing as truly independent institutions.  All public institutions 
are accountable, and the only question is to whom.  America's central bank was captured by Wall 
Street:  it came to reflect the ideology and interests of the financial sector, which it was supposed 
to regulate.  As we saw earlier in this lecture, it glossed over central issues like externalities and 
agency problems, as it came to believe in self-regulation.  The pervasive conflicts of interest--
with the New York Fed President being at the center of bailouts of the very banks that had 
played a role in his appointment--were a model of bad governance.  The Fed had allowed the 
development of a financial structure that was rife with conflicts of interests, and had turned a 
blind eye to practices that not only exploited the poor, but put into jeopardy the American and 
global financial system.   
The notion of the desirability of an independent central bank was predicated on the belief that 
monetary policy was a technocratic matter, with no distributional consequences.  There was a 
single policy that was best for all—a view to which the simplistic models that the central banks 
employed may have contributed, but which was not supported by more general models.  There 
does not, in general, exist a Pareto superior monetary policy.   
That in turn implies that delegating the conduct of monetary policy and regulations to those who 
come from and reflect the interests of the financial market is going to result in policies that are 
not necessarily (and weren't) in society's broader interests. 
Even if one wanted independence, one could have combined independence with broader 
representativeness--making sure that consumers who were hurt by banks' predatory and 
exploitive behavior, merchants who were hurt by banks' anti-competitive behavior, or workers 
who were hurt by higher levels of unemployment--had a greater voice in the conduct of 
45
monetary policy and regulation.
The crisis has called into question the notion of independence on other grounds:  monetary 
authorities have been engaged in quasi-fiscal operations, giving away tens of billions of dollars, 
in ways that are non-transparent, and often seem capricious.  The Fed saved some banks, 
throwing tens of billions of dollars at them, but let other banks go.  It saved some bondholders, 
but not others.  The loans by the Fed and ECB to banks at low interest rates--which they could 
then use to buy higher yielding bonds--was, in effect, a gift worth tens of billions of dollars, a 
                                                            
44
 J.E. Stiglitz, Freefall, Op. cit.; The Price of Inequality, Op. cit. 
45
 See J. E. Stiglitz, “Central Banking in a Democratic Society,” De Economist (Netherlands), 146(2), 1998, pp. 199-
226. (Originally presented as 1997 Tinbergen Lecture, Amsterdam, October). 
 
31 
 gift from the public, but which circumvented the usual public appropriations process.  It is 
unconscionable that such power over the purse be given to a non-elected body.   
Monetary authorities need to be held more accountable, especially when they are engaged in 
policies with strong distributive consequences and which are quasi-fiscal in nature.  Monetary 
institutions need to be designed to ensure that they are more reflective of societal interests.   
 
Concluding Comments 
Some years ago, in joint work with my colleague Bruce Greenwald, we provided a critique of 
traditional models in which the effects of monetary policy are mediated just through interest 
rates, and interest rates reflect the balancing of the demand and supply of money.  We pointed 
out that with most “money” being interest bearing, the traditional view that the interest rate is the 
opportunity cost of holding money is just wrong; furthermore, most transactions are not income 
generating, but rather the exchange of assets, so even if money were required for transactions, 
there would still be no simple and stable relationship between money and the level of economic 
activity (since the ratio of asset transactions to income can be highly variable.)  Further, most 
transactions do not require money; credit is typically an effective substitute, and when it is not, 
one needs to explain why not.   
Over the past thirty years, macroeconomics has made a valiant struggle to place itself on firm 
micro-foundations, but it chose the wrong micro-foundations—that based on the perfects markets 
models that were just then becoming discredited, as the economcs profession gained deeper 
insights into the related effects of transactions costs, imperfections of competition, absence of 
risk markets, and imperfections and asymmetries of information.  Most disappointing, the 
standard models for the most part didn’t even provide structural foundations for the financial 
sector.  (And when they attempted to do so, it was as a result of peculiar and unconvincing 
assumptions.  For instance, cash-in-advance models simply assume that credot is not an effective 
substitute for cash.)   
In the 1930s there was an active debate between two approaches to the determination of the 
interest rate, the Keynesian approach, based on the demand for money used for transactions 
46
purposes, and that of Robertson , based on the demand and supply of loanable funds.  In some 
ways, our approach represents a further development of the work of Robertson, with two 
important changes.   
                                                            
46
 See, for instance, D. Robertson, 1951,"Some Notes on the Theory of Interest," a contribution to Money, Trade and 
Economic Growth, Essays in Honor of Professor J. H. William (New York: Macmillan, 1951); reprinted in Sir 
Dennis Robertson, Essays in Money and Interest (Manchester: Collins, 1966), pp. 203-22. 
.  
32 
 First, in his model, the supply of loanable funds was based just on savings.  In ours, there is a 
critical role for banks, who make assessments of the credit worthiness of potential borrowers.  
Imperfect and asymmetric information is central.  (Such information tends to be local and 
specialized; foreign lenders (suppliers) of funds have different information than domestic 
lenders, so that their allocation of funds is markedly different.  This is one of the reasons that 
there is a need for special regulation of cross-border capital flows and foreign banks.) 
Secondly, in both Keynes and Robertson, demand always equals supply; yet in models with 
imperfect and asymmetric information, there can exist rationing equilibrium. Indeed, such 
equilibria are pervasive. 
Thus, traditional models (of both the Keynesian and Robertsonian version) have little to say 
about the determination either of credit availability or of the spread, the difference between the 
T-bill rate and the lending rate.  If there is a difference, it only reflects a difference in 
(objectively determined) risk.  With risk neutral lenders, the expected payments are the same.  In 
the absence of a theory of credit rationing, it is hard to explain a liquidity crisis—and without a 
theory of liquidity (credit availability) it is hard to know how to respond to a liquidity crisis. 
In the Greenwald-Stiglitz models, monetary policy is largely mediated through the banking 
system.  The lowering of interest rates may (or may not) be reflected in a commensurate 
lowering of lending rates or a commensurate increase in credit availability.  Indeed, there is a 
new version of a liquidity trap—not caused (as Keynes suggested) by a high elasticity of the 
demand for money, but by a low responsiveness of bank lending, even as the central bank 
provides the banking sector with more liquidity.  This is precisely what has been happening in 
the United States and Europe; and the theory developed by Greenwald and Stiglitz anticipated 
and predicted this kind of liquidity trap well before it became evidenced in the aftermath of this 
crisis. 
Keynesian models of monetary economics  came into fashion in the last Great Crisis, the Great 
Depression.  The world has changed much since then; and our understanding of economics too 
has advanced.  And yet, in some circles, we are wedded to ways of thinking that have not kept 
pace.  Worse, in the interlude between the Great Depression and the Great Recession, some were 
lulled into believing that markets normally worked well; and the old classical model, slightly 
modified, came back into fashion.  There was, as I have already noted, an irony in this, for 
among the advances in economics (game theory and theories of imperfect and asymmetric 
information) was an enhanced understanding of what was wrong with that model, and why it 
provided such a poor description of what was going on, both in normal times and even more so 
47
in times of crises.
                                                            
47
 For a broader discussion of the evolution of these two strands of thinking, see B. Greenwald and J. E. Stiglitz, 
“Keynesian, New Keynesian and New Classical Economics,”, Oxford Economic Papers, 39, March 1987, pp. 119-
133  .  Within the so-called New Keynesian tradition, there have also been two traditions.  One following Keynes 
33 
 These alternative theories provided the foundations of a new theory of financial markets--an 
understanding of why financial markets are typically not perfectly efficient, and of how 
imperfect financial markets actually work.  The effects of monetary policy are, of course, 
mediated through financial markets, so this new theory of financial markets is central to 
48
monetary theory.  Modern monetary policy has to be based on these foundations.
Monetary policy (understood broadly, to include financial regulatory policy) is of such 
importance in part because the financial sector is so important:  the financial sector has been 
likened to the brain of an economy, and if the financial sector does not work well, the economy 
does not work well.  In many countries around the world--including the US and the EU--the 
financial sector has not done what it should have done and done what it shouldn't have done; the 
costs of their failures in the US alone amount to trillions of dollars.   
In this lecture, I hope I have tried to describe what monetary policy based on a deeper 
understanding of the functioning of financial markets might look like.  Most of the propositions 
that have been at the center of monetary policyfor the past quarter of a century need to be 
rethought.  Monetary policy has not served our economies and societies well.  It has arguably 
49
contributed to the growing inequality that has marked most countries around the world.  But of 
this there can be no doubt:  It has not only failed to stabilize the economy in the way that was 
hoped; but  the way that some central banks have conducted monetary policy and regulation has 
50
been at the center of our greatest crisis in three quarters of a century.  This should be the 
grounds for a revolution in monetary policy. 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                 
ignored the details of financial markets, and, following Hicks’ interpretation of Keynes, focused on wage and price 
rigidities.  The other focuses explicit on financial market imperfections (e.g. H.P. Minsky’s, “The Financial 
Instability Hypothesis,” The Jerome Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Working Paper No. 74, May 1992; 
as well as the work of Greenwald and Stiglitz to which I referred earlier), and encompasses an analysis of the 
consequences of deflation (following the work of Fisher [I. Fisher, “The debt-deflation theory of great depressions,” 
Econometrica1 (1933), pp. 337–357)].  See B. Greenwald and J. E. Stiglitz  “New and Old Keynesians,” Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 7(1), Winter 1993, pp. 23-44. 
48
See Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2003, Op. cit. 
49
 See, in particular, Chapter 9 of J. E. Stiglitz, The Price of Inequality, Op. cit. 
50
 Thus, I take strong issue with Bernanke who has tried to suggest that there was nothing wrong with standard 
macroeconomic and monetary theory; there were only some minor flaws in its implementation.  See Ben Bernanke, , 
“On the Implications of the Financial Crisis for Economics,” address delivered September 24, 2010 at Princeton 
University, available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20100924a.htm, (accessed July 
28, 2011).   
34 
 