STATE FINANCES AND RBI INITIATIAVES*
It is a great honour, and pleasure to be with you all here, on this important occasion. Do I have a
choice, when the distinguished Advisory Board of Data News Features summons me? Mr.
Hanumantha Rao has been collecting, collating, consolidating and marketing data on Andhra
Pradesh economy for decades. He is a pioneer in recognising the importance of data dissemination
and in particular data consolidation and analysis at the state level. Perhaps, this is the first
compilation of its nature in our country focussing on data at State level, spanning 50 years since
independence.
I believe it is customary to say a few words on an occasion like this. Since the book is yet to be
released, I cannot say anything on it. Since Mr. Rao is known to most of you, I cannot add much.
On the substance, I see here an array of Athirathulu, Maharathulu, Guruvulu, with Shri 
Bhishmacharya of AP economy at the lead, and so I will not venture into it either. I would,
therefore, take this opportunity to say a few words, on the RBI's role, and initiatives in regard to
State Economies
We all know that in our country, states are of varying sizes and are at different levels of economic
and social development. Many states are larger, in terms of population than half the countries in the
world. Some states have progressed very well in terms of social development, a few have also done
well in rapid economic development. Thus, individually some of these states are world-class
performers in some respects. Yet there is a lot more to be done in all the sates of our country. To
this end, there is virtual unanimity on the two most critical areas for further progress in our country
viz. social infrastructure and physical infrastructure.
In social infrastructure, we should emphasise primary education, primary health, social security and
 In physical infrastructure, we should emphasise water supply (both for drinking and irrigation)
drainage, roads, power supply, medium and minor ports etc. These have a commercial element but
are proving to be serious bottlenecks for further progress. These are also mostly under the domain
of states.
 one of the main differences of opinion on economic policy is whether we should focus
more on social or on physical infrastructure. In either case, the play is essentially in the theatres of
the States. The very justification for current process of reform is lost if these areas do not get
 The tasks before states in reform process are very very complex because we are dealing with
reforms in delivery of services - quantitatively and qualitatively as also appropriate pricing or
subsidies. Building a road or finalising a Power Purchase Agreement is far more complex, than
Speech
significantly more attention than they did in the past.
 Today,
to some extent law and order. These activities are in the State's domain.
state economies in general, and state finances in particular.
Vittal,abolition of licensing or, quantitative restrictions on imports or exports, or fast-track method of
State Finances
 There is a supplement on Finances of State Governments to the RBI Bulletin of February 1998,
giving a detailed account and so I will only mention a few highlights from concluding
observations:
(a) The stress on the finances of the state governments became evident when their revenue account
started showing deficits in the late `eighties. The steady deterioration in the revenue account caused
(b) The curtailment in Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD) could be achieved through deceleration in
capital expenditure which would, however, have adverse implications for growth. The
improvement in GFD should, therefore, be achieved through the revenue account.
(c) The last few years have witnessed a more or less stagnant tax receipts to GDP ratio and 
declining non-tax receipts to GDP ratio.
(d) Most of the States' Public Sector Undertakings ( ), particularly State Electricity Boards
and State Road Transport Corporations have been showing persistent losses, and therefore, their
(e) Similarly, several irrigation projects in the States reflect negative contribution due to
(f) On the expenditure side, the rigidity in the non-Plan non-developmental expenditure is a matter
of concern as it adversely affects the financial health of the states. This is due to committed
expenditures on interest payments and administrative expenditures on salaries and pensions. This
has led to non-developmental revenue expenditure absorbing a greater proportion of revenue
(g) The problem of subsidies also needs pointed attention. Here the emphasis should be squarely
on implicit subsidies, which deprive states of scarce resources.
 Given the above picture of finances of states, we should assess the massive effort needed to
improve social infrastructure and strengthen physical infrastructure to the levels desired. The limits
to dependence on financial transfers from the Centre are recognised and, there is a feeling in some
states that access to external assistance or capital markets is an easy way-out to finance government
and its enterprises. I would submit that it is not an easy way out but desirable option to be exercised
with a combination of skill and caution. We, in fact, addressed these and other issues in a meeting
with Finance Secretaries early this month and I will elaborate on this after presenting a brief
account of role of Reserve Bank of India in regard to states.
Role of RBI
 Bank of India's major concerns are price stability and ensuring adequate credit to
productive needs of a growing economy. Price stability provides a national economic environment
conducive to growth with justice - to all States.
 Reserve
receipts.
uneconomic user charges.
contribution to the State exchequer is negative.
PSUs
a
enlargement of states' Gross Fiscal Deficit.
investment clearance. These tasks demand more than finances, but finances are also essential. Credit flows to agriculture and, infrastructure are emphasised and enabled but actual absorption in
a particular state would depend on the infrastructure as well as other enabling environment. As a
responsible Central bank, the RBI can persuade but cannot force credit flows to states which are yet
to provide productive as well as congenial credit culture. So, RBI and States do work together on
this through institutional mechanisms such as SLBCs (State Level Bankers Committees). I must
admit that Andhra Pradesh has the tradition of being one among the best in ensuring cordial and
effective co-ordination between banks and government.
 The RBI also performs the functions of a Manager of Public Debt. While in the past, it was
possible to pre-empt financial resources of banks, in a liberalised environment, the RBI would soon
find it difficult to ensure success of debt issues of states whose finances are perceived to be not
well-managed. We are already alerting the states on this issue.
 The RBI also functions as a banker to states. It is out duty to perform services efficiently. For
example, we have launched Electronic Fund Transfer of salaries of State Government Employees
in Andhra Pradesh, thanks to the progressive initiatives taken by the Chief Minister. We are taking
initiatives to render advice to states on matters such as cash management. That leads me to the
Recent Initiatives
 RBI had two rounds of discussions with State Finance Secretaries, based on a number of technical
papers prepared by both RBI and state Governments. As a result of the latest round, a consensus
was reached on many issues. These do reflect initiatives already taken and flag areas of mutual
concern. Let me share with you some of the major issues addressed.
Cash Management and Ways and Means Advances
 the states recognised the importance of cash management as a medium-term objective, but
noted that there is limited scope for cash management on the expenditure side. However, each state
would make a standard analysis for monthly requirements so that even at the margin, the scope for
its management would improve. In the light of such an exercise, it would be possible for each State
Government to work out the seasonality in the expenditure and their borrowing requirements could,
if possible, be appropriately adjusted. This information would be used by the Reserve Bank as an
input in deciding the timings of floating tranches of the borrowing programme for the State
Governments in conjunction with other factors, such as, conditions of liquidity in the market,
interest rate determination and 
 On Ways and Means Advances (WMA), the Reserve Bank agreed to consider changes such as
dual limits and advance warning system. Finance Secretaries wanted the Reserve Bank to continue
to manage the investment of their surpluses, but change the mechanism in such a way that they get
a return close to what they pay for their drawals from the RBI, say, under WMA. The Reserve
Bank has agreed to continue to invest the surpluses of the State Governments, introduce 28-Days
Treasury Bills as an additional instrument and to review the present systems to enable the State
Governments to obtain a better return than now on investment of their surpluses.
synchronisation with Central Government borrowings, etc.
 First,
initiatives taken recently.Public Debt
 Second, while some States favoured the establishment of a formal ceiling on public debt by law,
others felt that the more important requirement is greater transparency in the matter of public debt
and awareness of its implications. Further, the States unanimously felt that the focus should also be
on revenue deficit. It was decided that State Governments should be encouraged by the RBI to
consider both greater transparency and a legal ceiling on public debt.
 The Reserve Bank was requested to actively pursue with the Government of India the consensus of
the State Finance Secretaries for permitting freedom in the range of 5 to 35 per cent to access the
market outside the consolidated tranches of borrowing.
 While there was a general agreement that Consolidated Sinking Fund is a good idea, many felt that
it would not be desirable to consider this at a stage when revenue deficits persist and when scope
for return on investments made in CSF is not very clear. Some State Governments, however,
Guarantees
 Third, recognising the importance of guarantees and their implications on the finances, it was
(a) Hidden liabilities, including especially the letters of comfort, which have the consequence of a
(b) The level of guarantee fee.
(c) The implications of linkage with the value of any foreign currency, where it exists in regard to
such contingent obligation, especially in the guarantees offered in the power sector.
(d) 
(e) 
(f) Discouraging the public sector entities from insisting on guarantees; and
(g) Prohibition on seeking or giving of guarantees for working capital needs of enterprises.
 A concern was expressed about the guarantees at State level for various projects from international
investors in foreign currencies. While, at present, the magnitude of such exposures to foreign
currency obligations may not be large, its assessment and some mechanism to gauge effects of such
dollarisation would be necessary to mount hedging mechanisms. It was agreed that the study on
this subject should be encouraged by the RBI, particularly, in the context of power sector, where
Study of Public Accounts
 Fourth, a suggestion was made that the complexities of pension, provident fund and small saving
liabilities are such that they are required to be analysed by the Reserve Bank. More important, there
was a unanimous suggestion that transactions in public accounts which are in the nature of banking
transactions by the State Governments require to be closely scrutinised by the Reserve Bank due to
its responsibilities as lender of last resort and due to the systemic implications. It was also indicated
guarantee.
the power tariff may be linked partly to the domestic value of the foreign currency.
The importance of attaching weights to risks and arriving at risk weighted guarantee limits.
The possibility of prescribing a legal ceiling on all guarantees and criteria for fixing a ceiling.
decided to include the following in terms of a Working Group on State Guarantees:
requested the Reserve Bank to detail the modalities of such a CSF for immediate consideration.that a study on public account transactions by the Reserve Bank should ideally cover both the
Centre and States. The Reserve Bank agreed to take up such a study in regard to the States,
initially, as a part of its Development Research Group by Studies by utilising the services of both
Inter- generational Equity
 Fifth, considering the prospects of the burden on the future generation on account of the rising
public debt, contingent and other liabilities, and with a view to increasing the awareness of this
issue, it was decided that, accounting mechanisms should be adopted, to depict inter-
equity considerations in managing public finance. The Reserve Bank agreed to the request that it
should develop a model of accounting practice for this purpose by obtaining necessary information
on best practices in the world.
 Stabilisation and Restructuring Fund
Sixth, while some progress has been made in regard to fiscal reform at the State level with the
assistance of World Bank and Asian Development Bank, many states felt that a fund to be
administered by the Reserve Bank should be considered. Such a fund can provide additional
resources on the basis of progress in the reform and thus encourage the State Governments to
undertake reforms. The package so designed should be realistic and made suitable to the individual
States. It was agreed that the Reserve Bank would consider such a fund initially at the senior level
Health Card
 Seventh, there was a consensus on the usefulness of assessment of the financial health of each
State as an important means to encourage fiscal responsibility. It was suggested that the
responsibility of assessing the financial health should be undertaken by the Reserve Bank. Reserve
Bank agreed that they would consider the relevant data, the periodicity and the parameters for
working out such a health card. Prima facie on the basis of the information in RBI's study on
Finances of State Governments some financial indicators can be evolved and these can be released
along with the annual volume on the finances of State Governments, as in the case of the financial
ratios for individual banks  in the Report on Trend and progress of Banking in India.
Some more work is needed to arrive at the most appropriate ratios for such a health card. The RBI
would, no doubt, seek advice from select Finance Secretaries or other experts on the relevant data,
Conclusion
 In conclusion, let me reiterate the importance of States in furthering reform. Indeed, positive
elements of redefining the relationship between the State and the market have to occur in India at
the State level even more than at the Central level and that is no easy task. Such a reform has to be
based on reliable data and sound analysis. The present volume on Andhra Pradesh with
contributions from the best and brightest on the subject in the State is a good model. Other states
could emulate. I commend this book to all researchers, policy makers and senior students.
periodicity, detail, etc. before launching such an exercise.
publilshed
internally and later in consultation with the Government of India.
Fiscal 
generational
in-house expertise and outside talent.* Speech delivered by Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Administrative Staff College of
India, Hyderabad on February 28, 1998.
 I have great pleasure in releasing the volume.