,  Monetary Policy and
* *
I would like to thank the organisers and in particular, Chairman, Shri T. R. Sridharan, for
I enjoyed reading the excellent papers circulated for the Conference. I found them well
researched, thought provoking, analytical, and wide ranging with operational relevance. I also
read the keynote speeches and heard rapporteur’s reports. It is clear that the speeches and
deliberations were of a very high standard, giving a fine balance between the present and future,
In this address, I will share with you my rand om thoughts on the subject of banking
soundness.  I will start with a general account of financial sector reform, i.e., pace, sequence,
components and impact to show how different approaches are possible and also to show that
there is no settled position. I will, thereafter, briefly recall major features of Indian experience on
financial sector reform.  Then, we will explore what is new about banking soundness that we had
to have deliberations such as these.   We can then go on to appreciate the link between
macroeconomic management and banking soundness, and the feedback effects. More
specifically, the relationship between monetary policy and banking soundness should be
appreciated. I will conclude with some remarks on what could be important areas of
The term financial sector reform is used interchangeably with the terms financial
liberalisation and financial deregulation.  Financial liberalisation is a process of
removal/reduction of financial market distortions, mainly created by Government or central bank
interventions. There is a debate with regard to financial sector liberalisation as to what should be
the appropriate pace, sequencing, components, etc. It is necessary to recognise that there is no
settled wisdom on many of these aspects.  Each country proceeded at its own pace, decided its
*
 Valedictory Address by Dr. Y. V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Bank Economists’
                                           
Bangalore on December 18, 1998. Conference at 
own sequencing and packaged the components of measures.
Financial Sector Reform: Review of Approaches
research/analysis for bank economists.
theory and practice, and knowledge and experience.
inviting me to deliver the valedictory address at the Bank Economists’ Conference `98.
Mr. Chairman and friends,
Macro-economic Management: Random Thoughts
Banking SoundnessThe pace of financial sector reforms could be conveniently classified as gradual or rapid.
Similarly, liberalisation could be almost total or liberalisation may co-exist with elements of
Government control. Experience has shown that countries that liberalised rapidly are more prone
to reversals – examples are Chile, Argentina, Turkey.  However, countries that have phased out
controls gradually, such as South Korea, Malaysia, Thailand and Philippines have also faced
The sequencing of reform can be analysed with regard to the linkage with general
macroeconomic situation, ownership, regulatory and supervisory framework, and external sector
Financial sector liberalisation could be initiated during a period of macroeconomic
Argentina and Chile decontrolled interest rates during a per iod of high inflation but
undertook a large number of measures during a period of macroeconomic stability. Chile, New
Zealand, Peru and Turkey began financial sector deregulation under conditions of macro
instability but implemented reforms as part of a larger reform process during a period of
As regards ownership, some countries could successfully tackle the process of reducing
the role of State Enterprises either prior to or in conjunction with financial sector reform (Chile
and Mexico), while others implemented privatisation program after initiation of financial
With regard to the regulatory and supervisory framework, a few countries strengthened
regulation and supervision prior to reform (Peru, Israel) while others (Egypt) strengthened
On external sector liberalisation, a number of countries liberalised the capital account
after domestic financial liberalisation, an important exception being Indonesia. Many countries
have also embarked on external sector 
The components of reform involved dismantling certain directed credit 
lowering cash and liquidity requirements, reducing barriers to entry in the banking sector,
privatising the public sector banks, improving payments system, adopting international standards
for capital adequacy and prudential norms and improving the legal, regulatory and supervisory
infrastructure.  The components were packaged in different ways in each country, within the
2
overall framework of appropriate pace and sequencing.
programmes,
Components
liberalisation in conjunction with financial sector reform.
liberalised. supervision at the same time that they 
liberalisation.
stabilisation.
instability or as part of the overall reform process during conditions of macro economic stability. 
liberalisation.
Sequencing
difficulties.
PaceThe impact of financial liberalisation has to be seen in the context of its both immediate
effects and in the longer term. To broadly generalise, first, there is evidence that efficiency in the
allocation of credit improved after liberalisation.  Despite weaker economic conditions, private
investment has grown or financial constraints have eased.  Second, financial deepening has
increased.  Third, evidence regarding the impact of liberalisation on saving and/or consumption
is mixed.  Experience has shown that while liberalisation permitted a consumption boom and
reduced saving in many countries, saving did increase in some other countries.  Fourth, the
immediate impact on interest rates was disparate, with rates sometimes rising and in some
countries falling.  Fifth, after liberalisation, financial crises have taken place with some countries
experiencing more than one crisis.  Sixth, financial liberalisation has generally resulted in more
I will conclude this section by drawing some broad conclusions from experience with
financial sector 
First, financial sector reforms appear to have better chances of success in an environment
of macroeconomic stability. Fiscal consolidation and liberalisation of industrial and trade policy
Second, for maintaining internal and external stability, it appears essential that the
inflation rate is not too high and is stable.  In such an environment, it is possible to ensure that
real rates of interest are not too high, which deter investment and are not too low, which
Third, instituti onal development has to go hand in hand with financial sector reforms.
Institutions may be sponsored by the central bank and as they develop, central bank can vacate –
as done in the case of the Discount and Finance House of India Ltd., and the Securities Trading
Corporation of India Ltd.
Fourth, interest rate deregulation needs to be phased carefully.  During transition from a
repressed market to a free market, the tendency for interest rates to overshoot their equilibrium
levels could be damaging for the real sector.  Moreover, the borrowers, especially small
borrowers in the productive sectors of the economy need to be insulated from too much of
Fifth, in the transition phase, the prudential requirements of provisioning for b ad debt and
capital adequacy perhaps need to be phased over a period to ensure that the institutions
Sixth, the financial sector reforms need to be complemented by reforms in the legal
system, not only in those laws which affect financial institutions directly but also related aspects
3
such as tenancy laws or procedural laws impinging on debt recovery.
concerned respond, adjust and comply without their viability being threatened.
interest rate volatility
discourage savings.
regimes do constitute an integral part of reforms.
liberalisation in India.
effective monetary control.
EffectsSeventh, deregulation should be accompanied by improvements in supervisory
mechanisms including those of off-site supervision with on-site examination and effective
Eighth, though deregulation is desirable, the risk profile of the banking sector may still
n mechanisms improve, in terms of operating procedure of
monetary policy, the central bank may gradually move from direct instruments to indirect
instruments.
Finally, credibility, continuity and commitment are enhanced if the reform agenda
emanates out of a group of distinguished persons of great standing, made public, debated upon
and then implemented.
Traditionally, soundness of banking system was considered essential for efficient
financial intermediation. However, the costs of financial-repression were recognised in seventies
and a wave of deregulation and marketisation occurred. Soon, it was realised that both on
theoretical and empirical grounds, financial sector in general and banking sector in particular
need to be carefully regulated – though who should regulate, how it should be regulated, with
what objectives and instruments are still being debated. There are, without doubt, valid reasons
First, the soundness issue is not merely a developing country issue.  Both developed and
developing countries are addressing these issues, with the Bank for International Settlements
Second, the banking crises occurred in both developed and developing countries - S&L in
U.S.A., banking failure in Nordic countries, Japan’s financial system of ‘nineties, more recently
realisation that the soundness of banking system ensures capacity to absorb
shocks – external and internal. At the same time, macro economic stability helps soundness of
Fourth, banking crises can easily spillover into the real economy and c risis in real
economy affects banks almost simultaneously. This is clearly the consequence of financial
Fifth, as globalisation occurs, banking crisis and currency crisis get closely linked. In this
Tarapore Committee (CAC)’s insistence on a robust banking system as a pre-condition for
further progress in liberalisation of capital account is significant.
4
sense, 
deepening and widening.
banking system.
Third, there is 
in Latin America, Russia and East Asia.
taking initiatives and more recently the International Monetary Fund.
for this vigorous focus and debate on the banking soundness and strength.
What is New About Banking Soundness?
Ninth, as monetary transmissio
need to be controlled.
follow-up action.Sixth, the pre-occupation with macro aspects and neglect of micro aspects, especially
those relating to institutional, governance and transparency aspects could conceal potential for
crises.  Causes, cures and dimensions of banking crisis, therefore, go well beyond the realm of
Seventh, with globalisation and threat of contagion, alignment of regulatory regimes and
commonly accepted standard as between various national authorities becomes critical, i.e. there
is increasing emphasis on harmonisation. This came into bold focus in early ‘eighties after Latin
Eighth, banks are critical, and are special but non-banks are playing an increasingly
Ninth, promoting and ensuring soundness is an ongoing process to cope with financial
innovations and increasing cross-border flows facilitated by technological advancements.
Interface between banks, non-banks, financial intermediaries and regulators is also coming to the
fore as an issue. Further, financial markets are getting integrated globally and there is increasing
It will be useful to recall some important linkages between macroeconomy and banking
First, large fluctuations i n the real economy mean that uncertainty increases and banks
Second, in a cyclical context of performance of an economy, banks tend to behave
procyclically.  In the upward phase or boom phase, profits rise and lending increases.  In the
downward phase, banks tend to withdraw from commercial lending.  In fact, with prudential
norms and capital adequacy, there is greater likelihood of such procyclical behaviour, if not
Third, when there are s ignificant developments in world demand and supply, unduly
affecting exports and imports, banks portfolio gets affected.
Fourth, volatile 
Fifth, large fluctuations in interest rates, usually the effect of high and fluctuating
inflation, exacerbates the problem.  The effect of increase in interest rates on market value of
investment portfolio, in particular government securities, is well known.  Mark to market
Sixth, when banks are perceived to be inefficient or subject to excessive costs of
regulatory compliance to be borne by banks, depositors may desert banks.  So, effectiveness of
5
monetary policy in pursuing objectives of price stability or credit availability is reduced.
increases transparency but does not reduce the risks.
forex markets also create uncertainty in banks.
countered by other policies.
find it difficult to manage risks.
soundness.
Macroeconomy and Banking Soundness
harmonisation of polices and procedures to ensure banking soundness. emphasis on 
intermediation. crucial role in financial 
American crisis and more so after the East Asian crisis.
the community of economists.Seventh, even fiscal stimulus to boost demand may not get fully realised if there is
limited supply of working capital from the banking system to the commercial sector.
Eighth, other things being the same, capital adequacy re quirements may make banks
Ninth, with the presence of vulnerable banks in the system, effectiveness of monetary
Lastly, in the context of liberalised capital flows and rightly assuming that banks will
play critical role in such flows, the extent of soundness of the banking system will get reflected
What are the special links between monetary policy and banking soundness? I will
First, it i s well known, but let me repeat, banking system continues to be, and will
continue for quite sometime, especially in developing countries, as the main vehicle for
Second, the banking system enables transmission of monetary policy . So, transmission
channels, especially credit channel is important.
Third, payments system is critical to monetary policy and crisis of banking system spills
Fourth, those banks that are in unsound position are unable to resp ond to signals.
Furthermore, contagion among banks is natural and hence, concern regarding the health of
Fifth, while ideally, monetary policy on the one hand and regulation/supervision on the
other should operate independent of each other, in practice the two often get intertwined. Thus,
monetary policy initiatives, such as tightening liquidity, credit conditions and  interest rates may
Sixth, unsound banks could become captive to insolvent debtors, and their response to
market signals could get perverse.
Seventh, as already mentioned, managing capital inflows, exchange rate, monetary base,
are facilitated (or hampered) by banks which are sound (or not solvent).
Eighth, it is possible that credit channel is choked due to non-economic or institutional
rigidities usually ascribed to principal-agent relationships in banks. The effectiveness of
6
on occasions take into account impact on banks profitability, especially fragile banks.
individual banks is also natural.
over to payments system.
monetary policy signals.
highlight some aspects to supplement what I have already said on macroeconomic linkages.
Monetary Policy and Banking Soundness
in the degree of efficiency of use of such capital flows.
policy instruments diminishes; and inefficiencies in credit allocation also creep in.
prefer safe government paper to commercial lending if there is no assured expansion of capital.monetary policy, and perhaps even regulatory/supervisory regime could be influenced by such
non-economic factors.
Ninth, monetary policy has to recognise the strains of deregulation on the banking
system.  Also, the data needs keep changing with transition, apart from the importance of timely
and reliable data from banks if monetary policy has to cope with fast changing realities and
markets.
Finally, and as a sum-up, there is a clear two-way intimate inter-relationship between
In this background, let me highlight some areas which may require special attention of
First, is it possible or necessary to focus research on links between banking soundness
Second, in the current context, should there be a review of two aspects related to banking
supervision, viz., deposit insurance system and lender of last resort function? Now, with entry of
Third, during the reform-era, how to counter the possible short-run, temporary effects on
Fourth, how to reconcile the needs of harmonising our supervisory standards and
accounting practices with international standards and the demands of our unique requirements in
Fifth, and finally, while the merits or demerits of public/private ownership of banks is a
current subject of debate, there has been insufficient attention to  the implications of banking
soundness for government finances. It is not inconceivable that private sector banks get into
trouble. If such failures have systemic implications, governments all over the world may bail
them out.  Even if the central bank takes the burden as a lender of last resort, in effect it is at the
expense of transfer of resources to government.  In regard to public sector banks, government
has a more direct fiscal stake. Thus, in the interest of soundness, where restructuring either
through recapitalisation or a possible less costly, Asset Reconstruction Company route is
attempted, the ultimate cost if any, has to be borne by government.  In brief, whether banks are in
the public or private sector, government has a stake in ensuring bank soundness. Ensuring
soundness of banks is in the long-term interest of fiscal management just as prudent fiscal
management is in the long-term interest of bank soundness.  But fiscal prudence does not
guarantee banking soundness while bank soundness avoids possible contingent liabilities on
government.
7
India.
credit-direction, as a result of tightening prudential norms?
new private sector banks and competition such a review may be worthwhile.
and macroeconomic management, especially in the current second-generation reforms in India?
bank economists in India.
Concluding Remarks
monetary policy and banking soundness.I am thankful again to the organisers for provoking me to read, listen, think and interact
with you on a subject of great contemporary relevance, especially to the management of reform
of the financial sector.
8