By
Bangalore
16-12-1998
On
Held at
 Economists Conference (BECON’98) Bank
the
At
Governor, Reserve Bank of India
BIMAL JALAN
Inaugural Address
TOWARDS A MORE VIBRANT BANKING SYSTEMBimal Jalan
I am happy to join this special gathering of bankers and deliver the inaugural
 
address to the conference of bank economists . This year's meeting of bank economists
is particularly important as it is being held against the background of one of the worst
The recent financial market developments show that we have come to live in a
world of considerable uncertainty, where prudence and foresight get rewarded while
errors, inadequate judgements and bad decisions impose severe costs on the individual
financial intermediary as well as on the financial system as a whole. In today's
liberalised financial environment, savers, investors and financial intermediaries are
widely dispersed, not necessarily confined to domestic boundaries. This has made
efficiency and continued stability of the financial system has assumed critical
In India, over the past few years, we have made substantial progress towards
regime which relies less on detailed controls and directions and more on initiative,
autonomy in decision-making and accountability. Policy initiatives since 1992 in this
regard have been directed at building strength and ensuring the safety and stability of
the financial system. Compared to the experience of many developing countries
embarking on financial sector reform we have treaded cautiously and in an orderly
This, however, should not lead to any complacency particularly in the context of the
present fluidity of international capital markets and the increased vulnerability of
developing economies to sharp fluctuations in macroeconomic situations. These
It is important to note that the number and frequency of bank failures in the world
have increased rapidly in recent years. These failures have occurred both in countries
different degrees.  Recent experiences in East Asia and elsewhere have brought to fore
the criticality of financial system’s stability for ensuring sustainability of openness in
invigorating economic growth. In one important sense it also marks a departure from
the excessive emphasis laid on the proposition that financial liberalisation per se will
for growth, it may not, however, prove sufficient to provide desirable outcomes if the
namely to strengthen the Indian financial system, assumes critical importance. Indeed
fresh round of structural reforms in their financial systems. A number of international
agencies, including the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) are also currently
new safety standards that would help promote stability. In India, the second Report of
the Narasimham Committee has recently addressed a number of vital issues pertaining
to the health and stability of financial system and the action that is necessary to
                                                      
 
 I would like to acknowledge with thanks the help of  Shri M.S. Mohanty and Shri Partha Ray of the
Reserve Bank of India in the preparation of this lecture.
2
engaged in identifying factors that raise vulnerability of financial systems and devising
this is a concern for most developing countries at present. Many of them have initiated a
It is in the above context that the theme of this year’s bank economists’ conference,
safeguard systems are not very sound and financial system is unstable.
lead to higher growth. While developing financial institutions and markets are important
which followed a relatively more open policies as well as the ones exercising controls in
absorbing internal and external shocks.
disturbances tend to get exaggerated if the financial system is fragile and lacks depth in
fashion which has helped us in minimising the adjustment costs involved in the process.
improving the performance of our financial system and putting in place a new financial
importance in the present context of a more open world economy.
systems of the recipient countries. Pursuing policies and practices that ensure improved
capital extremely fluid and highly sensitive to policies and performance of the financial
meltdowns of financial system experienced by a number of economies.
Introduction
Towards A More Vibrant Banking Systemstrengthen it. Some of these recommendations have been implemented in the recent
As professional bankers and economists you are no doubt seized of the challenges
financial system. What has been our experience of financial reforms so far? Where do
we stand in terms of financial stability considerations? What are the tasks  if the
Indian financial system were to improve its competitive strength substantially and
strengthen itself to withstand the pressures of instability? What role should the bank
The significance of the financial system for an economy arises from at least
three major sources. First, it performs various transformation functions relating to
intermediation of funds in the economy. Secondly, it provides the mirror image of the
underlying real economy and the basic macro-economic balances. Thirdly, it is one
industry whose basis of operation is underpinned in public trust.  The strength of this
bond between the banking system and people in general depends on how the financial
viability of banking system is perceived.  The organisation and conduct of financial
markets should be such that they reflect the underlying fundamentals of the economy.
The financial system as a whole must remain sound and stable in order to enjoy a high
Until recently, the improvement in various transformation functions of the
The basic issue was how to create a competitive environment for the financial system
and to put in place a policy regime which would lead to improved allocative efficiency
of the financial sector and enhancement of saving and investment activities of the
and matured, the two-way interaction between the financial and non-financial policies
grew in importance. In the recent years, the increased market exposure of the financial
system and its vulnerability to macro-economic shocks have highlighted the need for
greater internal controls and the need for strengthening prudential norms and
regulations. In an environment of rising importance of cross border capital flows,
perceptions and expectations play major roles in shaping events and this consideration
can be particularly heightened if the financial system is perceived to be weak and
unsound.  It is not surprising that financial reform initiatives globally have now moved
reform in the Union budget of 1991-92 to the Second Report of the Narasimham
Committee in 1998, a considerable ground has been covered in putting in place a
financial system which can meet the requirements of a more competitive and open
economy. By and large, financial reforms in India have proceeded in four major
First, setting the policy conditions right and removing the operational
constraints of the financial system. What the reform process has tried to achieve is to
lower the share of pre-empted resources in the total resources of the banking system
through gradual liberalisation of the cash reserve ratio and the statutory liquidity ratio.
While the medium term target of 25 percent and 10 percent set for the CRR and SLR,
respectively, have been, by and large, achieved, these ratio levels are still higher than
what would perhaps look ideal in the international context. Our relatively high reliance
on the cash reserve ratio has been necessitated by the needs of monetary policy
in the economy, the dependence on this instrument of monetary policy would need to
3
come down in future.
operations. As financial markets develop, allowing for a greater role for the interest rate
directions.
In India, since the formal announcement of the first initiative of financial sector
to the strategic considerations of ensuring continued stability of the financial system.
economy for attaining faster rates of economic growth. As financial markets developed
financial system was the focal point of reform initiatives in many developing countries.
level of public confidence.
A Review of Directions
in my remarks this morning.
economists be playing in this environment? Let me try and address a few of these issues
ahead
that the recent developments in international financial markets have posed for the Indian
monetary and credit policy announcements.The second directional change has been in the area of creating a more
of entry and exit norms, reduction in public ownership in banking industry and letting
banks access capital market for meeting their fund requirement. The objective is to
bring out the best result in terms of pricing and quality of banking services over a
The third important direction of reform has been the strengthening of market
institutions and allowing greater freedom to financial intermediaries. These reforms
have taken the form of gradual liberalisation of interest rates, development of money,
capital and debt markets and giving operational flexibility to banks in the management
In this connection, a distinction needs to be made between two types of market
respect of macro-economic fundamentals of the economy which impact on the interest
and has implications for the balance sheets of the financial intermediaries. Institutions
which do not have an organised approach in anticipating events, undertaking pre-
emptive actions and designing a suitable response to unanticipated developments can
find themselves in a difficult situation, particularly in times of large degree of
arising out of macroeconomic shocks need to be given special attention in a liberalised
financial system. Our reform initiatives in this area are still in the formative stage. The
second type of market developments which have implications for the financial sector
relates to asset price bubbles which may be related to  high concentration of bank
of market exposure can be unhealthy and lead to irreparable shocks.  Although the
impact of such cycles on our banking system is quite limited, international experience
suggests that, unless prudential measures are in place, banks can be potentially
vulnerable to asset price pressures that can generate systemic risks for the financial
The fourth important element of reform concerns the “safety” aspects of the
financial system. This is the core of the challenges facing the financial system at
present. When the reform process was started in 1992, there was a massive problem of
cleaning the balance sheets of banks which had deteriorated over the years. Successive
reform initiatives in this area have been aimed at prescribing certain prudential
standards for the financial system and addressing certain structural weaknesses which
asset classification, meeting minimum capital adequacy standards through
recapitalisation and devising a supervisory framework are steps in the direction of
The key indicators of banking sector performance during the past few years
mark certain noticeable changes. For example, the net profit of the scheduled
commercial banks as a percentage of their total assets has been turned around from a
negative figure of -1.0 percent on an average during 1992-93 and 1993-94 to a positive
of 0.5 percent during 1994-95 to 1997-98. In the case of most public sector banks,
business per employee and profit per employee have shown improvement in the recent
have achieved the minimum capital adequacy norm of 8 per cent.  The gross and net
non-performing assets of the banking system as percentage of advances have declined
to 16 per cent and 8.2 per cent, respectively, by March 1998. In terms of percentage to
total assets, gross and net non-performing assets have declined to 7.0 per cent and 3.3
4
per cent, respectively, by March 1998.
period. Certain other indicators also look good.  By 1997, almost all public sector banks
Where Do We Stand?
ensuring the safety of the financial system.
could minimise their recurrence in future. Measures such as income recognition norms,
system.
lending to one or two sectors which have a boom and bust cycle of their own. This form
fluctuations in macroeconomic variables. The dangers posed by market and credit risks
rate, exchange rate and other asset prices. This is a normal phenomenon in any economy
developments, which have implications for the financial system. One is developments in
domestic and international economic environment.
these changes imply greater degree of exposure of individual financial institutions to the
of their assets and liabilities subject, of course, to prudential guidelines. In simple terms,
period of time.
competitive environment in financial sector through reform measures such as relaxationI think the present statistics are not unfavourable for the banking system as a
whole.  As the second report of the Narasimham Committee has observed “this
improvement has arrested the deterioration in these parameters that had marked the
functioning of the system earlier”.  Keeping in view the current macro economic and
“There is still, however, a considerable distance to
traverse.  The process of strengthening the banking system has
to be viewed as a continuing one. There is no finite end to
improving the levels of efficiency and profitability.  In fact, the
situation is one where the system has to cope constantly with
changes in the broader environment in which it functions and
face new challenges that these developments impose on it”
(p.18).
vulnerability of the financial systems of developing countries and the need for
improving its efficiency and stability.  The Narasimham Committee has presented a
detailed analysis of various problems and challenges facing the Indian banking system
The Indian banking system is still perceived as a relatively high cost banking.
This is because of the relatively high operating cost of the banking system. A
comparative analysis indicates that while the average operating cost of banks as a
percentage of assets was about 2.3 per cent in India during 1990-91 to 1995-96, it was
low at 1.1 per cent in China, 1.6 per cent in Malaysia, 1.9 per cent in Thailand, 1.0 per
cent in Japan and 2.1 per cent in G-10 Europe.  One of the major problems posed by a
relatively high intermediation cost in our case is that it gives rise to uneconomical
banking.  It raises the necessity of maintaining a relatively high interest income spread
Operating costs depend on labour productivity, technology, innovation and
from the production process. In the economy-wide scale, these factors differentiate the
weak from the strong banking system and provide internal strength and stability to the
system.  Without gaining sufficient advantage in this respect, it is difficult to think of a
A key issue relates to banking sector’s non-performing assets (NPAs).  The
amount of gross and net NPAs have been on the rise, although the rate of their growth
distribution of non-performing assets is skewed across banks.  Still a large number of
public sector banks have net non-performing assets ranging between 10 to 20 per cent
of net advances.  The Narasimham Committee has underlined the need to reduce the
international presence.  I think this is an important requirement for our banking system
and is crucial to maintaining the viability of the system in future.  A two-pronged
strategy identified by the Committee viz., to reduce the backlog NPAs and improving
the management efficiency and stricter enforcement of prudential norms, have to be
itical aspect is the soundness of the banking system and how this is
reflected in the practices and principles followed by banks.  Prudential norms and
supervision are necessary, but they are no substitute for the internal control system and
sound business practices. The ability to distinguish between a normal business risk
from an abnormal one, managing such risks and defining a prudent limit for risks are
5
essential functions for the bankers.  For long, Indian banking did not have a tradition of
Another cr
acted upon to deal with this challenge.
average level of net NPAs for all banks to 3 per cent by 2002 and to zero for banks with
has been below the overall rate of expansion of advances.  Apart from absolute size, the
significant improvement in the banking system in future.
organisational effectiveness of a bank to harness various static and dynamic economies
in the economy.
and a high real lending rate.  This adversely affects financial intermediation and growth
Let me short-list a few key areas, which must concern us at this stage.
and made wide-ranging recommendations for improving and strengthening its functions.
The banking sector indicators in India need to be seen against the backdrop of increased
international financial situation, the Committee has noted thatnow come into open especially against the experience of the recent East Asian crisis,
where markets fell precipitously because banks and corporates did not accurately
measure the risk spread that should have been reflected in their lending activities.  Nor
did they manage such risks or provide for them in their balance sheets.  In India, the
Reserve Bank has recently issued comprehensive guidelines to banks for putting in
the light of suggestions received from banks.  But, ultimately risk management is a
culture that has to develop from within the internal management systems of the banks.
Its critical importance will come into sharp focus once current restrictions on banks’
portfolios are further liberalised and are subjected to the pressure of macro economic
importance for the banking system, there is no escaping the fact that a permanent
term structural weaknesses of the system.  Our banking system operates with a large
limited due to the fragmented organisational structure.  Today, size is becoming
increasingly important for strategic business planning in every sphere of the
economy.Banking sector is no exception. When competition is the key issue, it is the
market structure and regulation that need careful attention. Furthermore, given the
multi-tier financial system of our economy, and the complementarity and synergetic
relations among these different tiers, it is difficult to isolate the efficiency of banking
system from that of the long-term financial institutions, co-operatives, rural banks and
non-bank financial companies.  A more meaningful reorientation of objectives and
long-term issue of enhancing competitiveness of the system as a whole.  It is also
decision-making is not affected by non-economic considerations, and banks are able to
Another crucial issue especially in the present context relates to banks’ special
role in the credit delivery system.  There is no inherent conflict between the canons of
sound banking and banks’ pro-active role in credit disbursements to promote growth.
off-take and credit availability conditions influence growth prospects of an economy.
Ultimately, it is the credit business, which is central to the profitability of the banking
in the economy, it has adverse effects on profitability of the banking system as well as
Credit disbursement to rural sector and small- scale industries require special
attention from banks.  The Gupta Committee recommendations involving greater
flexibility and discretion to the lending banks in agricultural sector in matters of
be implemented by the banks expeditiously.  Similarly, special treatment has to be
accorded to small sector units in improving their accessibility to institutional finance
its critical importance in the manufacturing and export activities in the economy, it is
unlikely that banking system’s profitability and efficiency can grow without exploiting
the opportunity provided by the small- scale industrial sector.  The 
has recently made a comprehensive set of recommendations for improving the credit
An important effect of the Asian economic crisis, and of the recent
the soundness of the domestic banking system in all countries – developed and
6
developments in Japan, has been that there is now a much greater international focus on
The International Context
delivery system for small -scale industries, which are being implemented in phases.
Kapur Committee
with a view to enabling them to emerge as profit centres for the banking system.  Given
collateral, margin, security, no dues certificate, composite cash credit limits etc., have to
on economic growth.
system. To the extent that excessive risk aversion among bankers restricts credit growth
These two objectives are complementary to each other.  Hgh growth leads to high credit
raise sufficient capital in line with their increasing volume of business.
important to ensure that the ownership structure of Indian banks is such that managerial
functions of various tiers of financial institutions would be necessary in dealing with the
continent wide network of branches, yet the scale economies in the banking industry are
improvement in the state of Indian banking is not possible without addressing the long-
 of critical While developing a system of internal control and risk management is
fluctuations.
place an asset-liability management system. Formal guidelines will be issued shortly in
dealing with various forms of market risks.  The critical role of managing such risks hasEast Asia and also Japan, is generally believed to have been accentuated by the
sector and the prudential and regulatory framework are thus no longer a matter of
domestic concern only.  A country’s ability to access capital markets as well as
investments abroad is likely to depend on whether domestic financial system is
perceived to broadly conform to international prudential and supervisory norms.  In
and ramifications of banking crisis in several parts of the world.  What were earlier
existing norms and practices being followed by banking systems in different countries
and to assess how far these norms have helped or prevented instability in the banking
system. India has been fully participating in these discussions and is helping in the
formulation of norms and guidelines, which take into account the views of the
developing countries, where market structures and growth objectives are different than
in industrial countries.  Issues currently under scrutiny include : the corporate
governance system in banks, risk management, banking regulation and supervision,
sector. The Basle Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision has underlined
the need for adhering to twenty-five basic principles for adopting an effective
supervision system in the aftermath of East Asian crisis.  More detailed work is now in
progress after the recent publication of three reports by the Willard Group, constituted
by the Bank for International Settlements, on enhancing transparency and
accountability, strengthening financial systems and managing international financial
The Willard Group reports have argued for gaining credibility and
accountability of banking system through more transparent accounting practices and
better disclosure norms.  They have drawn attention to the need for developing a stable
and efficient financial system through strengthening the corporate governance system
arrangement for the banking system.  It has also argued for a more organised approach
in preventing international financial crisis and a more orderly system of creditor and
The recent international consensus on preserving the soundness of banking
system has veered around certain core themes.  These are: effective risk management
system, adequate capital provision, sound practices of supervision and regulation,
transparency of operation, conducive public policy intervention and maintenance of
in corporate governance.  This, as mentioned before, involves according utmost
importance to prudent business practices, such as, developing an effective internal
term mismatches in portfolio.  A proper cushion needs to be kept by way of capital
an individual financial institution.  Apart from capital adequacy standards, the new
international norms of banking regulation and supervision require a more pro-active
role for the regulator in enforcing an effective mechanism for evaluating, monitoring
7
valuation and reporting norms on the part of banks.
and managing risks in the financial system.  This in turn would need stricter accounting,
reserves against market exposure and capital size should set a limit for risk exposure of
risks, and instituting a proper system of asset and liability management in order to avoid
control system, monitoring and managing the whole range of financial and commercial
is how to ensure that individual banks govern themselves according to the best practices
An important issue which we, along with other countries, would need to address
macro-economic stability in the economy.
debtor coordination and effective solvency laws.
and risk and liquidity management among banks and putting in place a proper safety net
crises.
transparency and accountability and public policies relating to moral hazards in banking
In various international fora, an intensive effort is now underway to evaluate the
contagion effects.
been proved to be severely inadequate to deal with systemic instability or preventing the
considered to be the ideal prudential norms for preventing individual bank failures have
fact, the world standards themselves are being put to severe test by the changing nature
weakness in financial sector rather than the other way round.  The health of the banking
developing. Unlike previous financial crises, the persistent crisis in the real economy inregulators and supervisors, which must be satisfied for ensuring orderly conduct of
financial system for promoting its soundness and stability.  Transparency in banking
capital markets.  Transparency and accountability demand realistic valuation of assets,
public disclosure norms and prudential reporting by banks to help depositors and
investors form an informed opinion about the state of the financial system, thereby
enabling them to react in an orderly fashion to asset price changes.  Moreover, public
intervention policies in the form of explicit or implicit guarantees may have to be such
that they do not lead to “moral hazard” in the form of undue risk-taking by banks and
India must remain in the forefront of the movement for ensuring soundness of
the banking system by adopting best practices and best international standards of
performance and prudence.  Actions have already been initiated in this direction.  The
challenge now is to accelerate this process so that the banking and the financial system
in our country can contribute to the sustained growth of the real economy with price
Before I conclude, let me say a word about the role of Bank economists in
facilitating the reform process. This annual conference is a testimony to the economic
economists with long experience in banking and the financial sector.  The issue that I
would like to pose before this conference is: are we making the best and most effective
use of economists working in the banking sector for improving the functioning of
banks, and for that matter, improving the operational efficiency of the financial sector
as a whole?  In commercial organisations like banks, economics departments have the
advantage of not being excessively burdened with day-to-day problems of running the
banks or ensuring safety and profitability of individual transactions.  They are in a
position to take a strategic or longer term view of the comparative or competitive
costs/benefits of various kinds of services and products offered by them.  They also
have the opportunity, to study from their vantage point and from a practical angle, the
working of the financial system and various improvements needed to strengthen the
However, for bank economists to be able to perform these functions, it seems
need for some “attitudinal” change on the part of economists themselves.  Those who
work in the commercial banking sector have to be prepared to accept operational
responsibility, to work in the field, and to familiarise themselves fully with the
commercial aspects of their bank’s work.  Their work has to be operationally relevant,
and it must contribute to the financial soundness of bank’s operations. This is possible
At present, th e role of economists in our banking sector seems to be too
narrowly defined.  They are viewed as keepers of data, particularly macro-economic
data, and undertake periodic review or analysis of macro-economic trends in the
economy.  They are seldom involved in undertaking any operational work or in
developing strategic policy choices or even in treasury or foreign exchange functions.
All over the world, with deregulation and globalisation of the financial sector, the role
of economists in the banking sector has been changing and becoming more and more
focussed on analysis and valuation of risk associated with various alternatives,
particularly in emerging economies that are subject to greater volatility in the financial
8
sector.  In India, however, the role of economists has been somewhat slow in changing.
economic departments with line responsibility.
if bank economists also have branch level experience and experience of working in non-
that some reorientation of the role that is assigned to them is necessary.  There is also a
financial intermediation function.
advantage of their individual banks as well as identify areas of portfolio weaknesses and
economic research departments or economic cells which are staffed by highly qualified
talent that our banking system has developed over the years.  Almost all our banks have
Role of Bank Economists
stability.
laxity in observing market disciplines.
operation is also something which has to receive top priority given the current nature of
The Basle core principles have also identified a number of challenging areas forIt may perhaps be useful for this conference to initiate a process of discussion
on the various issues and to re-assess the role that members of this distinguished body
are gigantic, but they are also exciting. Given the determination, I have no doubt that
I would like to acknowledge with thanks the help of Shri M. S. Mohanty and Shri Partha Ray of the
Reserve Bank of India in the preparation of this lecture.
9
India can have one of the most vibrant financial systems in the world.
can play in pushing forward the process of reform in our country. The challenges ahead