January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Towards Globalisation in the Financial Sector in India*
Y.V. REDDY
I am indeed very happy to be, once interest of its citizens. In the context of public
again, amongst friends– albeit in a slightly policy relating to globalisation, a critical issue
different capacity. All of you have been totally is the trade-off between individual freedom
supportive to me and, I must express my deep and collective self-interest as also where the
sense of gratitude to you for the warm and burden of proof lies, namely, with individuals
affectionate welcome that you gave for my or national authorities.
appointment. My address today is in the
Globalisation has several dimensions
nature of sharing of some of my preliminary
arising out of what may be called the
thought processes on the subject of
consequential enhanced connectivity among
globalisation and the financial sector. The
people across borders. While such enhanced
presentation today starts with a framework for
connectivity is determined by three
appreciating globalisation and then provides
fundamental factors, viz., technology, taste
some insights in the context of the financial
and public policy, cross-border integration can
sector, with special reference to banking. In
have several aspects: cultural, social, political
the Indian context I would setout some of the
and economic. For purposes of this
initiatives by Reserve Bank of India, which are
presentation, however, the focus is on
relevant to the issue of globalisation.
economic integration. Broadly speaking,
Globalisation : A Framework economic integration occurs through three
channels, viz., movement of people, goods
The concept of globalisation, in the
and services, and movements in capital and
sense in which it is used now, can be traced
financial services.
to the phenomenon of nation states.
Government-imposed restrictions on The most notable achievement of recent
movement of goods, services, people and globalisation is the freedom granted to some,
capital are less than a hundred years old; in if not all, from the tyranny of being rooted to
fact, passports and visas and the whole gamut a place and the opportunity to move and
th
of restrictions are a feature of the late 19 connect freely. For example, many Indians
th
Century and the first half of the 20 Century. relatively from poorer sections have benefited
The nation state put restrictions on its citizens by developments in Middle East while many
in their involvement with other nation states talented professions gained from movement
in what was perceived as the collective self- to UK and USA. At the same time, in reality,
Inaugural Address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Twenty-Fifth Bank Economists’
*
Conference – 2003 at ITC Grand Maratha Sheraton Hotel, Mumbai on December 11, 2003.
69January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
there are several economic as well as non- domestic and cross-border transactions. The
economic, especially cultural or emotional implications for public policy of such
reasons for people not globalising. developments in the domestic area are on a
different footing in the sense that domestic
In regard to trade in or movement of
financial markets are in some ways subject
goods and services across borders, there are
to governmental regulation by national
two types of barriers, viz., what are described
authorities while cross-border flows are not as
as natural and artificial. Natural barriers relate
susceptible to governmental regulation. Finally,
to various costs involved in transportation and
in the context of cross-border capital flows, in
information over distances. Artificial barriers
the absence of procedures for dealing with
are those that are related to public policy,
international bankruptcy and facilities for the
such as, import restrictions by way of tariff or
lender of last resort, the liabilities incurred on
non-tariff barriers. The pace and nature of
private account can devolve on public
globalisation will depend on the combined
account. In brief, at this juncture, in respect
effect of technology and public policy, both at
of global economic integration through
national and international levels.
movement of capital, several risks devolve on
In regard to capital movement also, the
domestic public authorities, especially in the
interplay between technology and public policy
case of developing countries.
becomes relevant. There are, however, some
special characteristics of capital flows. These Globalisation is a complex phenomenon
characteristics have highlighted the issue of and a process that is, perhaps, best managed
what is described as contagion, namely, a by public policies. In managing the process,
country is affected by developments totally developing countries face challenges from a
outside of its policy ambit though domestic world order that is particularly burdensome on
policy may, to some extent, determine the them. Yet, as many developing countries have
degree of vulnerability to the contagion. In any demonstrated, it is possible for public policy
case, cross-border flows of capital have wider to manage the process with a view to
macroeconomic implications, particularly in maximising benefits to its citizens while
terms of the exchange rate that directly affects minimising risks. The nature of optimal
the costs and movement of people as well as integration, however, is highly country specific
goods and services; the conduct of monetary and contextual. On balance, there appears to
policy and the efficiency as well as stability of be a greater advantage in well-managed and
the financial system. Furthermore, capital flows appropriate integration into the global process,
by definition involve future liabilities or assets which would imply not large-scale but more
and could involve inter-generational equity effective interventions by governments. In fact,
issues. markets do not and cannot exist in a vacuum,
i.e., without some externally imposed rules
Developments in technology and
and such order is a result of public policy.
innovation in financial services impact both
70January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
assessment of international financial flows that
The poor, the vulnerable and the
much more difficult to capture in the data.
underprivileged will continue to be the
responsibility of national governments and
It is also interesting to consider the
hence of concerns to public policy. Sound
pattern of net capital flows to emerging market
public policies at the national level in countries
economies. While private net direct
like ours are very critical in the current context
investment has been consistently positive and
of levels of development and extent of
above US $ 100 billion since 1995 to 2003,
globalisation. In brief, it is necessary to
private net portfolio investment which was
recognise that nation-states, as those still
positive in the years 1995 to 1999 is since
primarily responsible for social order in the
negative in the rest of the years. The range
communities in which people live, have a duty
during 1995-2003 has been from a positive
to manage the process of globalisation. This
US $ 83 billion to a negative of US $ 53
challenge is particularly complex in the area
billion. It is, thus clear that both in terms of
of financial services, more so in the case of
magnitude and stability, private direct
banks in the larger emerging economies.
investment seems to have a significant edge
over portfolio investment.
Globalisation in the Context of the
Financial Sector
On the quality of capital flows, it is
interesting to note that at the end of 1997,
At the outset, it would be useful to
the estimated share of Off-shore Financial
consider the emerging picture of financial
Centres in the total of cross border assets
flows as per the latest data released by IMF
stood at 54.2 per cent, as per a recent study
in the context of increasing globalisation. For
by OECD discussed in the G-20 meeting in
almost all the years from 1999, the current
Mexico. The study mentions that inadequate
account balance of advanced economies has
access to bank information in such centres
been negative and it is estimated to reach
greatly facilitates money laundering, smuggling
US $ 225 billion in the year 2004 from a
of goods, counterfeiting and financing
positive of US $ 41 billion in 1998. The
terrorism, etc. In any approach to the policies
developing countries, which had a current
relating to the financial integration, it may be
account deficit of US $ 83 billion in 1998, are
useful to keep these facts in mind, particularly
estimated to have a surplus balance of a
both quantitative and qualitative factors in
projected US $ 28 billion in 2004. It is
such flows, particularly in the context of the
interesting to note that while globalisation is
banking sector.
expected to result in flows of capital from
developed to developing countries, it is not As already mentioned, there is an
clear whether the turn arounds in the current increasing recognition of a distinction between
account deficits is a temporary phenomenon.
trade integration and financial integration and
The removal or attenuation of cross-border this distinction has been recognised forcefully
barriers to trade and capital flows renders in a recent study made a few months ago by
71January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
the IMF. The summary of the study reads as integration with the rest of the world, capital
follows: flows both foreign direct investment and
portfolio investment, are predominantly
“The empirical evidence has not
accounted for by a few countries which are
established a definitive proof that
not very high in terms of financial integration
financial integration has enhanced
with rest of the world. In other words, de jure
growth for developing countries.
financial integration seems to be distinct from
Furthermore, it may be associated with
de facto integration. Furthermore, the way the
higher consumption volatility. Therefore,
financial markets as well as international
there may be value for developing
financial institutions respond to economies
countries to experiment with different
requiring adjustment problems appear to be
paces and strategies in pursuing
asymmetrical. The financial markets, in fact,
financial integration. Empirical evidence
tend to be far more pro-cyclical in the case
does suggest that improving
of the emerging economies, thus making
governance, in addition to sound
emerging economies subject to greater
macroeconomic frameworks and the
volatility in flows than the other countries.
development of domestic financial
It is essential to recognise that the capacity
markets, should be an important element
of economic agents in developing economies,
of such strategies.
particularly poorer segments, to manage
It might not be essential for a country to
volatility in all prices, goods or forex are highly
develop a full set of sound institutions
constrained and there is a legitimate role for
matching the best practices in the world
non-volatility as a public good.
before embarking on financial
Globalisation and the Banking Sector
integration. Doing so might strain the
capacity of the country. An intermediate
It is in this overall scenario, the policy
and more practical approach could be
relating to the financial services, and in
to focus on making progress on the core
particular banking, must be considered. It is
indicators noted above, namely
interesting to note that WTO negotiations on
transparency, control of corruption, rule
financial services have been cautious and the
of law, and financial supervisory
commitments of many larger economies in the
capacity……..”
banking sector are rather particularly limited.
In other words, in the context of issue of
Apart from this interesting research on
national ownership of financial intermediaries,
the subject, on a judgemental basis,
banks appear to have a unique place in public
considering the cross-country experiences, it
policy. There are several noteworthy
is possible to discern some disconnects
features of ownership and control of banks in
between impressions and reality. Though
all major economies – irrespective of whether
many developing countries have adopted
they are developed or emerging. In almost all
significant policy measures for financial
72January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
cases, banks are either widely held or have financial intermediation in developing
substantial State ownership. Furthermore, countries. This is understandable for several
there are special conditions governing the reasons viz., the savers’ eagerness for
extent of ownership, the nature of ownership assured income; inadequate capacity to
and control, and transfers of such ownership manage financial risks and the fact that the
or control through statutory backing. These banking institutions in some sense and in
are justified since the banks are admittedly different degrees, enjoy deposit insurance and
special. The discussions in WTO on either implicit or explicit guarantee of
Commitments relating to opening of domestic government.
banking sector to foreign banks/ownership
It is important to note that banking crisis
reflects these concerns in most of the major
invariably results in heavy costs to the
economies.
Government, whether they are publicly owned,
privately owned, domestically owned or foreign
It is worth recalling what Sir Eddie
owned. The fiscal costs of banking crises are
George, the Governor of Bank of England had
ownership-neutral.
said on the subject banks being special: “they
remain special in terms of the particular
An important question in this context is
functions they perform - as the repository of
whether the role of banks in financial
the economy‘s immediately available liquidity,
integration in developed countries is different
as the core payments mechanism, and as the
from that in the emerging market economies.
principal source of non-market finance to a
It is useful to assess the significant differences
large part of the economy. And they remain
in the structure of the banking industry in
special in terms of the particular
emerging vis-à-vis developed markets.
characteristics of their balance sheets, which
In most emerging markets, banks assets
are necessary to perform those functions –
comprise well over 80 per cent of total
including the mismatch between their assets
financial sector assets, whereas these figures
and liabilities which makes banks peculiarly
are significantly lower in developed
vulnerable to systemic risk in the traditional
economies. In most emerging market
sense of that term.” He is even more forthright
economies, the five largest banks (usually
in making it clear that treatment of banks can
domestic) account for over two-thirds of bank
not be on par with non-banks. “On the other
assets. These figures are much lower in
hand, I am not persuaded that the special
developed economies. Another difference in
public interest in banking activity extends to
the banking industry in developed and
non-banking financial institutions, though
emerging economies is the degree of
different functional public interests in many
internationalisation of banking operations.
cases clearly do.”
Internationalisation defined as the share of
Data clearly indicates that banks
foreign-owned banks as a percentage of total
continue to play a pre-dominant role in
bank assets, tends to be much lower in
73January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
emerging economies. This pattern is, however,
More importantly, the issue of financial
not uniform within world regions.
integration and in particular the integration of
banking sector has to be considered in terms
Finally, a significant feature of banking in
of overall sequencing in this process of
developed versus emerging economies,
integration with the rest of the world. The
especially in recent years, has been the
overriding issue is not whether to globalise or
process of consolidation. The most notable
not, but how best to manage the process of
difference between the consolidation process
globalisation, particularly with a view to
in developed and emerging markets is the
accelerating the process at the current
overwhelming cross-border nature of mergers
juncture where the global outlook on India and
and acquisitions in the latter. In particular,
India’s confidence as well as competitiveness
cross-border merger activity in continental
are strong.
Europe and also between US and European
institutions has been more of an exception
There is now a consensus among
rather than the rule. In contrast, there has been
academicians and policy makers that trade
a sharp increase in foreign ownership of some
liberalisation should take precedence over
emerging market banks due to process of
financial liberalisation. Even in the context of
privatisation often associated with crises.
financial liberalisation, the liberalisation in
regard to borrowings in foreign currency
An important difference in this context
should have a lower priority compared to all
has been the role played by the authorities in
other capital flows. There is also consensus
the financial sector consolidation process. In
that the foreign currency exposures of
mature markets, consolidation has been seen
households, corporate sectors and financial
as a way of eliminating excess capacity and
intermediaries should be assessed separately
generating cost savings to the institution. In
and in a continuous fashion to assess the
emerging markets, on the other, consolidation
gains as well as the vulnerabilities to the
has been predominantly a way of resolving
system. In particular, there is a greater
problems of financial distress, with the
recognition of the need to put in place
authorities playing a major role in the process.
appropriate prudential regulation in regard to
Indian Context
the financial intermediaries insofar as foreign
currency transactions are concerned in all
While there has been a significant
emerging countries. There is virtual unanimity
progress towards globalisation in the recent
that the currency mismatches of financial
past and policy-wise, there have been
intermediaries is a major source of downside
impressive initiatives, the extent to which India
risks of financial integration which can be
is globalised is considerably at the lower end
mitigated by monitoring and regulations.
of the emerging economies. This indicates
Among the financial intermediaries, banks no
enormous opportunities but also challenges
doubt have a unique place. There is also a
in terms of transition from a stage of low base.
74January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
observers, including capital markets. The
strong consensus, globally, on the importance
banking sector in India is poised for a
of what have been described as preconditions
quantum jump in productivity and scope for
for capital account convertibility – in particular
expansion in view of the competitive strengths
on the fiscal front and efficiency of the
acquired in Indian industry. Public sector
financial sector.
banks have shown substantial improvements,
In the context of maximising benefits of
though in view of their large presence and
financial integration and minimising the risks,
some institutional constraints, further progress
the link with conditions in the real sector
in reform is desirable. The analysis in the
cannot be lost sight of. In China, reforms in
Report on Trends and Progress of Banking
real sector preceded reforms in the financial
in India a few weeks ago provides an
sector and it was possibly the reason for some
excellent overview of problems, prospects,
vulnerability of the latter. In India, reforms in
and areas for further reforms, and hence that
financial sector started early in the reform
will not be covered here. The ongoing efforts
cycle which imparts significant efficiency, and
of RBI, in close co-ordination with Government
stability to the financial sector. The financial
and consultations with market participants,
sector can add competitive strength and
especially in moving up the policy as well as
growth if reforms in the financial and real
regulatory regimes to global standards, have
sectors keep apace. In other words, flexibility
been narrated in successive announcements
in product and factor markets play a part not
on Monetary and Credit Policy statements by
only in capturing the gains from financial
Dr. Rangarajan, Dr. Bimal Jalan, and most
sector reform but also more generally from
recently in the Mid-term Review. These
globalisation. A major agenda for reform at
narrations would indicate that RBI’s effort is
this juncture for us, given the impressive all-
to open up the economy, maximise benefits
round confidence in the economy, relate to
from globalisation while minimising risks and
the structure and functioning of institutions and
enable as well as equip banks to face global
in particular the high transaction costs
competition. This is an ongoing process and
prevalent in our systems. There are several
I believe we in India are better equipped now
dimensions to the transaction costs – ranging
than ever before to globalise with a sense of
from legal provisions, judicial system,
confidence and pride. Having said this, it is
procedures, etc. to attitudes. It is proposed to
useful to mention a few initiatives being
mention a few measures being contemplated
considered by RBI at this juncture.
by RBI in this direction.
Governor Jalan in his Inaugural address
Some measures by RBI
to this forum in January 2001, said – “The
At the outset it must be recognised that long term vision for India’s banking system to
the improvements in efficiency of the financial transform itself from being a domestic one to
sector in India, in particular banking sector the global level may sound far fetched at
have won the respect and admiration of most present. However, it is not beyond our
75January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
capacity provided we have the will and the favour of any person which would take the
determination”. It is interesting that this year, holding of shares to more than one per cent
the subject chosen relates to globalisation and (subsequently raised to five per cent) of the
perhaps I should enlist a few measures taken total paid up capital of such banking company.
by RBI to demonstrate the will and Since shares are acquired first and then
determination to make our banking industry lodged for registration, the Reserve Bank’s
really global. directions create a somewhat piquant
situation. To plug the gap, a Bill has now been
Consolidation
introduced in the Parliament relating to
As mentioned by Governor Jalan in his
banking regulation. The RBI’s proposals in this
address to this forum in 2002, “In financial
regard should reasonably take care of
systems worldwide, todays buzzwords are
takeover of the management by one from
competition, consolidation and stability”. There
another and the Reserve Bank will have
has been impressive stability and considerable
appropriate regulatory power to satisfy itself
competition in India but the process of
that persons proposing to acquire such shares
consolidation in banking industry has just
are fit and proper persons.
commenced. The issue of consolidation has
The procedure for amalgamation of two
been addressed by the Narasimham
banking companies under Section 44A of the
Committee Report on Banking Sector Reforms
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (the Act) is easy
(1998) but the issue in regard to policy is yet
to follow and cost effective. After the two
to be pursued vigorously. There are three
banking companies have passed the
aspects to consolidation viz., clear cut legal
necessary resolution in their general meetings
and regulatory regime governing
representing not less than two third value of
consolidation, enabling policy framework
the shareholding of each of the two banking
especially where several banks are owned by
companies, proposing for the amalgamation
Government, and market conditions that
of one bank with another bank, such
facilitate such consolidation, recognising that
resolution containing scheme of amalgamation
all mergers and acquisitions may not
is submitted to the Reserve Bank for its
necessarily be in the interests of either the
sanction and if sanctioned, by an order in
parties concerned or the system as a whole.
writing by the Reserve Bank, is binding not
As regards the legal framework, the
only on the banking company concerned, but
Reserve Bank is not very comfortable with
also on all shareholders thereof. While
lack of clear statutory provision regarding
sanctioning the scheme of amalgamation, the
takeover of management of banks. In 1970,
Reserve Bank takes into account the financial
the Reserve Bank had issued directions to the
health of the two banking companies to
banks requiring them to seek the Reserve
ensure, inter alia, that after the amalgamation,
Bank’s permission or acknowledgement
the new entity will emerge as much stronger
before effecting any transfer of shares in
bank. The experience of the Reserve Bank
76January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
has been by and large satisfactory in Section 23A of the Regional Rural Banks
approving several schemes of amalgamation Act, 1976 (RRBs Act), empowers the Central
in the recent past. Government, in consultation with the
NABARD, concerned State Government and
These provisions, however, do not apply
sponsored bank, to amalgamate two RRBs,
to the banks in public sector, viz., the
by issue of notification in the official gazette,
nationalised banks, State Bank of India and
with such liabilities, duties and obligations as
its subsidiary banks. As regards the
may be specified in the notification. As in the
nationalised banks, the Act authorises the
case of amalgamation of a nationalised bank
Central Government, after consultation with
under Section 9(2) of the Nationalisation Act,
Reserve Bank, to prepare or make a scheme,
every notification under this section is also
inter alia, for transfer of undertaking of a
required to be laid before both the Houses of
corresponding new bank (i.e. a nationalised
Parliament.
bank) to another corresponding new bank or
Of course, in the case of a banking
transfer of whole or part of any banking
company in financial distress and having been
institution to a corresponding new bank. Under
placed under the order of moratorium, on an
this procedure, the New Bank of India was
application being made by the Reserve Bank
amalgamated with Punjab National Bank but
to the Central Government under sub-section
the experience in this regard was considered
(2) of Section 45 of the Act, the Reserve Bank
to be not altogether satisfactory. Unlike the
can frame a scheme of amalgamation for
sanction of schemes by the Reserve Bank
transferring the assets and liabilities of such
under Section 44A of the Act, the scheme
distressed bank to a much better and stronger
framed by the Central Government is required
bank. Such a scheme framed by the Reserve
under Section 9(6) of the Nationalisation Act
Bank is required to be sanctioned by the
to be placed before the two Houses of
Central Government and has to be notified in
Parliament.
the official gazette. As in case of
The State Bank of India Act, 1955,
amalgamation sanctioned by the Central
empowers the State Bank of India with the
Government under the Nationalisation Act and
consent of the management of any banking
RRBs Act, the notification issued for
institution (which would also include a banking
compulsory amalgamation under Section 45
company) to acquire the business, including
of the Act is also required to be placed before
the assets and liabilities of any bank. Under
the two Houses of Parliament.
this provision, what is required is the consent
One area of concern to the Reserve
of the concerned bank and the approval of
Bank is amalgamation of non-banking
the Reserve Bank and the sanction of such
companies with banking companies as the law
acquisition by the Central Government.
does not impose any obligation on the part
Several banks were acquired by the State
of such non-banking company (for that matter,
Bank of India by invoking this section.
77January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
even of the concerned banking company) to which are the minimum requirements for a
seek the Reserve Bank’s regulatory approval sound payment system. These requirements
before filing the scheme of amalgamation in were also highlighted in the year 2000 by the
the High Courts under Sections 391 of the Bhide Advisory Group which examined the
Companies Act, 1956. To take care of these International Standards and Codes relating to
gaps, Reserve Bank has proposed some payment systems, from the perspective of
amendments to the legislation on Banking conformity in the Indian context.
Regulation Act that amalgamation of a non-
With the growing importance being
banking company with a banking company will
ascribed towards payment and settlement
be made by following the similar procedure
systems the world over, and in view of their
which is applicable for amalgamation of two
significance for financial stability, most central
banking companies.
banks have set up an appropriate machinery
Payment System
to regulate and supervise such systems to
provide for an explicit legal base for payment
Payment and settlement systems in India
and settlement systems. In this background,
have had a long history. The current
a draft ’Payment and Settlement Systems’ bill
predominant mode of funds settlement is
was prepared by the Reserve Bank and
through the clearing process - achieved by
forwarded to the Government of India.
the functioning of about 1050 clearing houses
in the country. These clearing houses function
In anticipation of the statutory changes,
on the basis of the ‘Uniform Regulations and
certain preliminary steps are proposed to be
Rules for Bankers’ Clearing Houses’ (URR),
taken by the Reserve Bank to build the
a model regulation propounded by the
requisite infrastructure for having effective
Reserve Bank. Though the systems are
supervision over payment and settlement
predominantly confined to cheque clearing,
systems. A Board for Payment and Settlement
many other types have also gained
Systems (BPSS) is proposed to be constituted
significance - such as electronic payment and
soon. The Board would function in a manner
settlement, securities settlement, and foreign
similar to the Board for Financial Supervision.
exchange settlement. All these are regulated
BPSS would provide policy directions in areas
by their respective rules and procedures, as
relating to regulation and supervision of
in the case of the Rules relating to Electronic
payment and settlement systems, approval of
Clearing Service (ECS), the Electronic Fund
payment systems, criteria for membership,
Transfer (EFT) Regulations and the bye-laws
various aspects relating to admission,
relating to the operations of the systems of
continuation and denial of membership,
the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd.
handling of offences etc. This initiative would
The Bank for International Settlements, ensure that all the payment and settlement
Basel, has formulated a set of ‘Core Principles systems in the country are subject to good
for Systemically Important Payment Systems’ and efficient governance and that they adopt
78January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
the best practices in risk management which Users’ Panel on Regulatory Instructions
is a prime requirement relating to a safe,
A Standing Technical Committee on
secure and efficient payment and settlement
Financial Regulation has been constituted
systems. These arrangements should facilitate
recently to advise on regulatory regimes
easy transition to a more formal statutory
administered by RBI. It is recognised that in
system.
spite of existing consultative process, several
Rating of Supervision regulatory instructions, while laudable in their
context are not clear or unambiguous in
The supervision of banks is, on all
capturing operational issues at the
accounts, becoming extremely complex. The
implementation stage. On the basis of
supervisors are required to acquire technical
discussions in the RBI, it has been decided
skills, exhibit considerable judgements on
to prepare, in consultation with self regulatory
systems and develop inter- institutional
organsiations, a Users’ Consultative Panel
interactions on a continuing basis. While
consisting of those incharge of compliance in
every effort is made by the Reserve Bank in
the regulated institutions. The intention is to
this regard, there is considerable benefit in
obtain feedback on regulations at the
introducing a system of feedback from the
formulation stage to avoid ambiguities and
supervised banks on the adequacy,
operational glitches. The Reserve Bank will,
appropriateness and quality of supervision.
from time to time, seek advice from select
This would help in rating of our supervisory
members of the panel to avoid burdening all
performance from time to time and obtain
officials in the regulated units. I would seek
suggestions for improvements from a range
full co-operation from the banking industry in
of banks, large and small foreign and local.
this regard.
In the light of discussions in the RBI earlier
this week, a decision has been taken to Conclusions
introduce such a system of feedback on
In conclusion, I would like to emphasise
supervision from the supervised on a regular
the role of institutions and incentives in
and continuing basis. We expect to seek
ensuring globalisation that benefits all. The
further guidance from Board for Financial
global giants in banking all over the world are
Supervision, due to hold its meeting next
manned by Indians, educated and trained in
week and finalise an ongoing system of
India. The best of technology for the most
feedback.
sophisticated banks in the world is provided
It is hoped that with these arrangements, by Indian companies and by Indians in foreign
some of the unnecessary elements will be companies. Yet, banks in India do not as yet
eliminated while enhancing quality of appear to be world class, though I have, no
supervision particularly in terms of its utility to doubt, that our banks could well be on the
the supervised and result in overall reduction anvil of being reckoned to be on par with
of transaction costs. international banks. My submission is that, to
79January Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
reach global standards, and hopefully surpass Hanson, James. A (2003): “Are Small
them, we need to focus on legal, institutional Countries Underbanked?”, In James A.
and transactions aspects; and the RBI’s Hanson, Patrick Honohan, and Giovanni
measures detailed today try to make a small Majnoni (eds.): Globalisation and National
beginning in addressing some of these issues. Financial Systems, Washington D.C: World
Bank.
Let me thank the organisers for the
opportunity and RBI looks forward to getting the Lamfalussy, Alexandre (2000): Financial Crisis
benefit of your discussions in this Conference. in Emerging Markets, New Haven: Yale
University Press.
References:
Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin
Barth, J, G.Caprio and R.Levine (2001): “The
Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose (2003): “Effects of
Regulation and Supervision of Banks Around
Financial Globalisation on Developing
the World: A New Database”, mimeo, World
Countries: Some Empirical Evidence”, mimeo,
Bank.
International Monetary Fund.
Caprio, G, and D. Klinzebiel (2003): “Episodes
Reserve Bank of India (2003), Report on
of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises”,
Currency and Finance, 2001-02.
mimeo, World Bank.
Reserve Bank of India (2003), Report on
George, Eddie (1997): “Are Banks Still
Trend and Progress of Banking in India,
Special?”, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
2002-03.
February.
80