•
Infrastructure Development In India: Emerging Challenges
I. BACKGROUND
Infrastructure contributes significantly to economic development both by increasing
productivity and by providing amenities that enhance the quality of life.  The impact of
infrastructure on economic growth is well documented internationally. In the Indian context too,
elasticities of output with respect to various stocks of infrastructure indicate that the transport
and communication sectors play a dominant role in explaining the variations in GDP and its sub-
sectors. The index of industrial production is also found to track closely the movements in the
composite index of infrastructure industries during the 1980s and the 1990s.
Historically, it can perhaps be said that infrastructure development in India came to be
explicitly recognised as part of State responsibility during the regime of Emperor Sher Shah
(1540-1545), when a multitude of infrastructure projects on irrigation and roads were completed,
including the famous Grand Trunk Road linking the East and West extremities of the country.
Another major turning point in the history of infrastructure development was the flagging off of
the Indian Railways in 1853 during the British Raj.  The implementation of the National
Highway Development Project, coupled with the Prime Minister’s Gram Sadak Yojana (The
st
Prime Minister’s Rural Roads Plan) will perhaps mark a similar milestone in this, the 21
century. The role of the State in putting in place an infrastructure network was also emphasized
by the National Planning Committee (1938) and the Bombay Plan (1944) in pre-independent
India.  They provided the necessary building blocks for action on infrastructure under the
subsequent Plans in post-independent India when it largely remained a responsibility of the State.
The major policy shift on infrastructure occurred in the 1990s when, along with other wide
ranging economic reforms, the sector was opened up to private and foreign participation in view
of its large financing needs.
 Macro Projections
The Government of India constituted an Expert Group in October 1994 to consider issues
related to the commercialisation of infrastructure projects including institutional arrangements,
legal frameworks and financial arrangements that would facilitate the free flow of resources to
infrastructure. The Group submitted its report in June 1996.
The Group estimated infrastructure requirements up to 2005-06 based on annual GDP
growth projections of 7.5 per cent during 1996-2001 and 8.5 per cent during 2001-2006. Clearly,
the high growth of 7.3 per cent in 1994-95 and its continuation in 1995-96 were the building
blocks for such projections. The rising trend in savings and investment also presented an
optimistic outlook for the future. The ratio of Gross Domestic Savings (GDS) to Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) had indicated a steady improvement since 1993-94, attaining its peak of 25.1 per
cent in 1995-96. In tandem, the ratio of Gross Domestic Capital Formation (GDCF) to GDP also
attained its peak at 26.8 per cent in 1995-96. Set against such a backdrop, the Expert Group felt
that the accelerating GDP would require, in turn, enhanced and accelerating investment in
                                                
•
 I am grateful to Mr.Y.S.P Thorat, Dr. Michael Patra, Ms. Jaya Mohanty and Dr. A.Prasad of the RBI for their
assistance. I have also received useful inputs from the Infrastructure Development Finance Company (IDFC).infrastructure in order to sustain the momentum of high growth. In line with the East Asian
experience, the Group felt that the sustained high growth would require a rise in the overall
investment rate from the prevailing 25 per cent of GDP to about 29 per cent by 2000-01 and 31.5
per cent by 2005-06. The achievement of 7.5 to 8.5 per cent annual GDP growth at such
investment levels would also require the Incremental Capital Output Ratio (ICOR) to decline to
about 3.5, a level achieved by only the most efficient economies. The rate of industrial growth
would also have to accelerate to 10.0-12.0 per cent per annum over the following 10 years.
In line with such macro projections, infrastructure investment was projected to increase
from 5.5 per cent of GDP in 1995-96 to 7.0 per cent by 2000-01 and 8.0 per cent by 2005-06.
This implied that the annual level of investment was to increase from Rs 600 billion in 1995-96
to about Rs 1100 billion by 2000-01 and Rs 1800 billion by 2005-06 (at constant 1995-96
prices). This also implied total infrastructure investment requirement of about Rs. 4000 – 4500
billion between 1996 and 2001, which would rise to Rs 7500 billion between 2001-02 and  2005-
06. Assuming that 30-35 per cent of total external capital inflows would go into the financing of
infrastructure, the Group expected 15 per cent of total capital requirements of infrastructure to be
externally financed. The rest would have to be financed from domestic resources. The public
sector, the engine of infrastructure investments in the past, would continue to have a major role
in this sector, even as its share was expected to decline from over 80 per cent in 1995-96 to 55
per cent by the end of 2005-06. The share of private sector investment in infrastructure was
projected to rise from about 1 per cent of GDP in 1995-96 to 2.5 per cent by 2000-01 and 3.5 per
cent by 2005-06.  This meant that in absolute terms, this investment would have to rise from
about Rs.120 billion in 1995-96 to Rs 380 billion in 2000-01 and Rs.800 billion in 2005-06.
The subsequent reality has, however, turned out to be different. While the high growth
momentum had continued in 1996-97, GDP growth slumped to 4.8 per cent in 1997-98.
Although there was some recovery with 6 per cent plus growth during 1998-2000, it has since
remained far below the mark of 7 per cent plus attained during the high growth phase of 1994-
97. GDP growth declined to 4.4 per cent in 2002-03, the lowest since 1992-93. On the whole, the
phase from 1997-98 to 2002-03 has been marked by a decelerated growth of 5.3 per cent, much
lower than the average growth of 7.5 per cent attained  during  the  high  growth phase of 1994-
95 to 1996-97 (Table 1).
At the sectoral level, the continuing slowdown was reflected in the steep decline in
industrial growth from 9.6 per cent during the high growth phase (i.e., 1994-95 to 1996-97) to a
mere 4.8 per cent in the subsequent phase (i.e., 1997-98 to 2002-03). The industrial slowdown
has been led by a severe slackening in manufacturing growth from 12.2 per cent to a meagre 4.2
per cent over the same corresponding period. Simultaneously, agricultural growth has dipped
from 4.6 per cent during the high growth phase to a modest 1.0 per cent during the subsequent
period, contributed, among others, by the monsoons being lower than the long period average
since 1999-00.
The most important negative development to have taken place is a marked deterioration
in public sector savings, which have turned negative and fallen from  1.3 per cent in 1997-98 to
(-)2.5 per cent in 2001-02,  as against a positive 1.8 per cent of GDP during the high growth
phase and 1.5 per cent in 1990-92.
1The deteriorating fiscal health of both the Central and State Governments caused by high
and increasing interest outgo coupled with a fall in the tax-GDP ratio has contributed to the sharp
decline in public sector savings. As a matter of fact, the gross tax-GDP ratio for the Central
Government declined from 9.3 per cent in the high growth phase to 8.7 per cent in the
subsequent period. At the beginning of the 1990s, it was 10.1 per cent. On the other hand,
interest payments-GDP ratio for the Central Government increased to 4.6 per cent from 4.3 per
cent over the same reference period. The combined revenue deficit of central and state
governments, which declined to 3.5 per cent of GDP in the high growth phase from 3.8 per cent
during 1992-93 to 1993-94 increased substantially to 6.1 per cent in the subsequent period.
Thus, more than 60 per cent of the borrowing to finance the fiscal deficit is going into current
account expenditures with little or no expected returns. With the declining or stagnant tax/GDP
ratio coupled with a deteriorating quality of government expenditure, there seems to be little
prospect of improvement in overall revenues. Interest payments can be expected to increase
continuously along with revenue and fiscal deficits. Such a fiscal situation leaves few resources
for investment purposes. Consequently, contrary to projections made for a stable and constant
level of public sector investment in infrastructure, actual public investment has been falling since
1995-96.
Apart from the deteriorating fiscal health of the Government (at both central and state
levels), the fall in public sector savings also reflects the operations of public sector enterprises in
the infrastructure sectors. The levy and collection of appropriate user charges for the delivery of
infrastructure services is crucial for the financial health of public sector enterprises engaged in
these services. Although there is increasing understanding of this issue, progress in this area has
been minimal over the last decade. There has not been much headway in carrying forward the
much-needed pricing reforms in the railways, State Road Transport Corporations (SRTCs), State
Electricity Boards (SEBs) and urban water tariffs in terms of the levy of economic user charges.
The fare freight ratio (earning per passenger km. vis-à-vis earning per tonne km.) continues to be
one of the lowest in the world. It was at 0.31 in 2001-02 as against 0.30 in 1990-91 and 0.47 in
1950-51. A scrutiny of the financial performance of SRTCs shows that only 87 per cent of costs
could be recovered through revenue receipts in 1999-00, leading to a total loss of around Rs.19.5
billion. The gap between the cost of supply of electricity and average tariff has worsened from a
level of 23 paise in 1992-93 to about 110 paise in 2001-02 with the result that revenues have
dropped from 82 per cent of costs in 1992-93 to 69 per cent in 2001-02. Similarly, although the
average cost of urban water per cubic metre is estimated to be about Rs.15, average water
charges are about a tenth of this cost. The political resistance encountered in recent years to the
rise in local telephone tariffs to economic levels is also indicative of the widespread reluctance to
pay user charges. The poor performance of public sector savings has to be seen in the light of
these developments. This has clearly constrained the ability of the public sector to keep up public
investments in infrastructure at the required levels.
Private corporate savings, which improved from 3.1 per cent of GDP during 1992-93 to
1993-94 to 4.3 per cent during the high growth phase slipped to 3.9 per cent in the subsequent
period, particularly under the weight of lower corporate profits. This could have resulted from
the corporate restructuring necessitated by the impact of increased competition arising from
overall opening of the economy. As a result, the overall GDS/GDP ratio came down to 23.1 per
2cent during 1997-98 to 2001-02 from 24.4 per cent during 1994-95 to 1996-97, despite an
improvement in household savings/GDP ratio from 18.3 per cent to 20.2 per cent during the
same period.
As a consequence, the projected increase in investment has not taken place at the macro
level or with reference to infrastructure. GDCF had improved to 25.8 per cent of GDP in the high
growth phase from 23.3 per cent during the first phase of reforms (i.e., 1992-93 to 1993-94). It
has subsequently declined to 23.9 per cent during 1997-98 to 2001-02 on account of a decline in
both private sector Gross Capital Formation(GCF) and public sector GCF to 15.8 per cent and
6.6 per cent, respectively, as per cent of GDP from 16.1 per cent and 7.8 per cent during 1994-95
to 1996-97. The private sector GCF has fallen under the weight of poor performance of the
corporate sector, down to 6.1 per cent from 8.2 per cent over the reference period,
notwithstanding an improved performance of the household sector in the subsequent period.
The acceleration in overall economic growth that had been envisaged in 1995-96 has
clearly not taken place. Instead, there has been a significant deceleration. The trend in
infrastructure investment has been correspondingly lower than that projected. The public sector
has not been able to keep up the level of investment that was required and envisaged because of
fiscal deterioration. Similarly, the optimism with regard to increasing private participation in
infrastructure has also been belied. It is probably true that the enthusiasm related to private sector
investment in infrastructure in the mid-1990s has proved to be unrealistic all across the world.
There were perhaps unrealistic expectations by prospective private sector investors about the
potential returns to equity, and that risks inherent to infrastructure were underestimated. The East
Asian financial crisis of 1997 also contributed to a general meltdown in the hitherto burgeoning
growth in foreign direct investment in developing countries, particularly in infrastructure.
Although India was not affected significantly by the East Asian crisis, it is likely that the
accompanying world economic slowdown affected domestic developments as well, particularly
through the transmission of low product prices affecting corporate profits.
Apart from the macro developments that have led to the slowdown in infrastructure
development, the lack of adequate reform in the pricing and regulatory environment has also
inhibited both public and private sector investment in India. Thus, it is equally important to
revisit the framework for private investment in infrastructure in addition to the macroeconomic
corrections required.
II. PERFORMANCE OF INFRASTRUCTURE
As already mentioned, in terms of actual outcome, expectations of the Expert Group on
infrastructure investment have not been fulfilled in the context of the subsequent macro-
economic slowdown. The actual performance has been much lower than overall projected
investment in infrastructure as per cent of GDP during 1995-96 through 2001-02 (Table 2).
Sector-wise, the projection remained higher than the actual throughout for ‘electricity, gas and
water supply’ and ‘railways’. In the case of ‘other transport’, ‘storage’ and ‘communications’,
actual performance turned out close to the projection and even better than the latter for some
years.
3Expressed as  a proportion of GDP the actual infrastructure investment undertaken in the
public sector, overall and sector-wise, turned out to be lower all through than the Group’s
projections for 1995-96 to 1999-00, barring ‘communications’, in which case actual investment
in the public sector has been higher than the projection (Table 3).
The actual performance of investment in infrastructure by the private sector also
remained lower all through during 1995-96 to 1999-00 than what had been projected for
‘railways’ and ‘communications’ (Table 4).  This is surprising since the data on private
investment in communications that are available in the National Accounts do not seem to have
captured the substantial private investment that has actually taken place in telecommunications.
Mobile telephone services, radio pager services, internet and other value added services that
were introduced in the late 1990s were almost entirely in the private sector. Private investment
exceeded the projections for some years in the case of ‘electricity, gas and water supply’, ‘other
transport’ and even at the aggregate level of infrastructure investment by the private sector.
This sectoral review suggests that the shortfall in actual infrastructure investment,
expressed as a proportion of GDP in comparison with the projected proportions, has been greater
for the public sector (about 33 per cent) than that in the private sector (about 10 per cent).
However, the private sector shortfall has also been growing in recent years. These data suggest
that there has indeed been an appropriate private sector response, but which could have been
better if it had not been constrained by inadequate public policy action. For example, had the
power sector reform taken place, particularly  in the case of payment security, private sector
investment would have been significant in this sector. The challenge for inducing greater
infrastructure investment in the future, therefore, relates to both enhancement of public sector
investment and also improvement in the policy framework for private investment. These issues
need to be examined for each sector separately.
As part of the plan to double per capita income over the 10 year period (2002-2012), the
Tenth  Five Year Plan has set for itself an ambitious target of 8.0 per cent per annum growth in
GDP over the period 2002 to 2007. With the loosening of the various constraints on growth, the
Tenth Plan has also identified the lack of adequate infrastructure as one of the binding
constraints on the growth process. It has advocated increased public investment in infrastructure
so that the availability of infrastructural facilities is commensurate with the demands of the
economy. Increased public sector savings have been assumed on the expectation of improved
profitability of State Electricity Boards (SEBs), and other public sector enterprises, which would
then facilitate increased public investment.
The Tenth Plan  has observed that  the on-going disinvestments and privatisation process
has constrained the ability and willingness of the central PSUs to undertake investment activities.
In view of the lack of sufficient alternative institutions through which public investment can be
made especially in the infrastructure sectors, the institutional capacity of state governments may
be utilised for infrastructure investment by the centre. The Tenth Plan has envisaged not only the
use of financial resources but also food stocks for augmenting investment in rural infrastructure.
The Tenth  Plan has cautioned that unless the availability of equity and long-term debt to the
private sector is enhanced substantially, the likelihood of adequate private investment in
infrastructure appears to be remote.
4In contrast to the actual investment performance in infrastructure, in the policy sphere
there has been an active and continuous attempt at bringing about reforms in the infrastructure
sector. The government is slowly moving away from its traditional role as a `provider’ of
services to one of `facilitator’ by ensuring that infrastructure services are actually delivered in a
desirable manner.  While liberalizing the rules and procedures, it is attempting to create  an
environment conducive for private participation including foreign investment in the
infrastructure sector.
The power sector was the first among the infrastructure sectors to be opened up for
private participation and yet it is in this sector that the greatest difficulty has been encountered.
Private investment in the power sector has been substantially short of expectations. The basic
strategy was to invite private participation in the generation segment with independent power
projects (IPPs) expected to sell the power to the SEBs. The reluctance of state governments to
tackle the basic issues of power theft and inadequate tariffs that have led to the bankruptcy of
SEBs has, however, prevented financial closure of independent power projects.  The attempt has
been to bypass these basic problems through stratagems like escrow arrangements and central
government guarantees, which have not worked. Besides, the protracted acrimonious
negotiations over the Dabhol power project in Maharashtra have highlighted the political risks
that  IPPs are fraught with, and are sufficient to put off any new investment in generation.
Notwithstanding the problems in the power sector, there have been success stories too,
especially in roads, ports and telecom. The quality of highways will improve substantially in the
coming years. The government has made rapid progress in the implementation of the National
Highway Development Project (NHDP). There have been some efficiency gains in ports through
the privatisation of ports’ services and berths. The telecom sector has perhaps seen the most
significant development. Greater clarity in regulatory and policy environments has accelerated
activities and expanded coverage in the telecom sector.  Several private operators are already in
the market raising funds through bond financing. Tariffs in the telecom sector have come
hurtling down thanks to deregulation, competition and technology. In no sector of the economy
have prices come down so fast as in the telecom sector.
Clearly, the need of the hour is to renew the focus on the relatively lagging sectors, viz.,
power, railways and urban infrastructure. Here, the guiding principle has to be establishment of
adequate user charges, direct or through cess, which has been the key to success for the better
performing sectors. It is in this context, the following section presents a detailed sectoral review
covering roads, telecom, ports, power, railways and urban infrastructure coupled with an agenda
for future policy initiatives.
III. SECTORAL REVIEW
Roads
The National Highway Development Project (NHDP) consists of two major components:
The "Golden Quadrilateral" and the "North South - East West" projects. "The Golden
Quadrilateral" project will connect the four major metropolitan cities with 4-6 lane highways,
5with a total length of about 5,850 km. The "North South - East West" project will connect the
Northern most point of the country to the Southern most, and similarly from East to West, with a
total length of about 7,300 km
The NHDP expected to cost Rs 540 billion, was started in 1998. The financing pattern of
this project indicates that private sector participation in the form of investment amounts to only
Rs 40 billion (7.4 per cent of the total). Over the course of the project, institutions like the World
Bank, Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Japanese Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC)
are expected to finance about Rs 200 billion; another Rs 200 billion of investment would be
financed from the cess. An extra budgetary infusion of funds in the form of market borrowings is
expected to be around Rs. 100 billion for NHDP Phase I, out of which National Highway
Authority of India (NHAI) has already borrowed about Rs 85 billion up to November 2002. So
far, NHAI has also tied up loans amounting to Rs 80 billion from World Bank, ADB and JBIC
for NHDP Phase I.
This project is progressing well. Approximately 1,300 km of the "Golden Quadrilateral"
have already been four laned. Similarly, on the North-South and East-West corridors, 560 km
length has been four-laned. The announced completion date for the Golden Quadrilateral Project
of December 2003, has now been postponed to December 2004, which actually was the original
target date that had earlier been advanced. The North South - East West corridors are expected to
be completed by 2007-2009.
Notwithstanding the efforts made over the years at state and central levels through
different programmes, about 35-40 per cent of villages are yet to be connected by all weather
roads. According to the information provided by the State Governments, there were still 262,000
unconnected villages till January 2004. Apart from 50 per cent of the cess on diesel earmarked
for PMGSY, additional funds are to be made available for rural roads from the additional cess on
diesel of 50 paise in the Union Budget 2003-04. Even these funds may not be adequate if all the
villages (with more than 500 popultion) are to be connected within 5-7 years. There are multiple
agencies involved in implementing road projects at district and state level under PMGSY, which
need to be streamlined for improving efficiency. Although CRF is meant to be used for the
development of the total hierarchy of roads from national highways to state highways and rural
roads, the  funds available do not seem to be sufficient for the development of state/rural roads.
The present condition and stage of development of state highways and major district
roads varies widely from state to state. The status of major district roads is particularly
worrisome. The main reason for this state of affairs is that the funds for the development of this
secondary system are very inadequate. The National Highways are provided with reasonable
funds for their development at the Central level while the rural roads receive the lion’s share at
the State level.  In the process, the secondary system of roads is neglected. In future, the fund
flow from the CRF for the state roads can be enhanced. Several state governments like
Maharashtra, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh have initiated steps to involve the private sector in the
development of state road sector. Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu have set up
Road Development Corporations that have issued bonds for financing of road projects.
6Investment in roads has been done substantially by the public sector in all countries.
Private sector investment has been naturally confined to that in limited access toll highways.
Even in this segment, private investment has been at the margin. However, there was a great
degree of optimism with respect to private investment in highways in the early 1990s, with large
private projects having been undertaken by countries such as Mexico, Indonesia and China.
Unfortunately, the financial difficulties encountered in both Mexico and Indonesia have further
discouraged private investment in roads.
The risks involved in road investment are characteristically high, and involve
Governmental action at almost every step. Limited access toll highways typically involve large
scale land acquisition programmes that are subject to unforeseen delays and, often, protracted
litigation by those affected. This indeed seems to be the case in Bihar, U.P. and Orissa in the
implementation of the NHDP.  Rehabilitation and environmental concerns add further to the pre-
project construction risk and unexpected delays. Post construction, traffic risk is typically high.
Hence, ex ante risk perception on road investment is naturally high among private investors.
Such investors, therefore, demand relatively high ex-ante return to equity. Given that the
capacity of a new highway has to be designed to be adequate for some date in the future, say 10
years, overcapacity is built-in for the initial years. The return from economically and rationally
priced tolls are, therefore, unlikely to produce profits in the initial years of the operation of a
highway. Economic returns, therefore, come only over a long period of time; later profits
compensating losses in initial years. These characteristics, therefore, deter private investments.
In view of these considerations, considerable discussion has taken place on how best to
induce the private sector to invest in highways. There has also been the added concern over the
level at which tolls can be levied in India, in view of the widespread reluctance to pay user
charges. The Government has to engage in considerable risk mitigation to take care of all the
relevant concerns of private investors. On the financing side, it is clear that any economic tolls
that provide adequate return to private investment in highways would be too high in the Indian
context. Hence, it is inescapable that leveraging private investment would involve the provision
of some level of subsidy from the Government.
The initial discussion on this issue had suggested that the best way to provide such a
subsidy would be to fix the level of toll considered feasible, and then to award a highway project
on the basis of the lowest bid for subsidy from prospective investors. Clearly, in such a system,
the level of subsidy bid would vary inversely with the level of traffic and public resources would
be put to best use in leveraging the maximum level of private investment. Such a system would
have the added advantage that heavily travelled  segments would presumably be built first –
thereby leading to economic efficiency in overall resource allocation. The subsidy could, of
course, be given ex ante as a lump sum to finance construction, or as an annuity to finance the
servicing of capital.
With the adequate availability of funds from the fuel cess and the enthusiasm of
multilateral agencies to fund these projects, such a scheme for leveraging private investment in
roads has not found favour, and an opportunity to leverage substantial private funds for road
construction has been lost. Instead, a fully funded annuity scheme has been put into effect. Under
this method, the developer is paid an annuity by the NHAI to cover the full costs over the
7concession period, after certification by an independent consultant on the quality of services to
the road users. In view of the much lower risks involved in this arrangement – the investor is not
subject to any traffic risk  - there has been a relatively healthy response from the private sector
in these projects. The only risk involved is miscalculation on the magnitudes of the annuity.
Until now, 8 annuity projects have been awarded, covering about 476 kilometres in the NHDP.
In the 2003-04 Budget Speech, the Finance Minister announced a viability gap funding
mechanism to attract Rs 600 billion in the infrastructure sector through public-private
partnerships. Under the new scheme, for BOT projects in the road sector, the government will
provide a subsidy in the form of an annuity flow to meet the shortfall between anticipated
revenue and loan repayment obligations.  The shortfall may arise out of various types of risk
involved in the project. Armed with Government’s guarantees to bridge any revenue shortfall,
the executing companies will find it easier to tie up with financial institutions to raise resources.
This is another opportunity to leverage private sector investment in highways through the kind of
process described earlier. However, some important issues about the competent authority to
determine the level of annual subsidy, and prudent and reasonable loan repayment obligations on
the part of developer are yet to be cleared for actual implementation. This subsidy is likely to
have an adverse fiscal impact. Further, there is an urgent need for a proper unbundling of risks
and their assignment to the participants best able to manage them to minimize the cost of risk
management. Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Bill 2002 has been passed to
prevent unauthorized occupation of national highway land and control access points to national
highways and control traffic on them.  As the road sector is facing considerable funds constraint,
especially in view of massive expansion, maintenance and upgradation requirements, private
sector participation in road building activities has to be encouraged through well structured
O&M contracts and by a combination of construction and maintenance contracts. The future
plans of NHAI include an ambitious tolling programme, which is going to be a huge challenge in
view of user resistance, traffic leakages and lower than expected traffic as witnessed in case of a
few projects.
Telecommunications
The substantial progress made in telecommunications since the early 1990s is a success
story. The number of telephone lines has grown by 25-30 per cent each year throughout the
1990s. The number of telephone lines were only about 5 million in 1991 which doubled to about
10 million by 1995. The India Infrastructure Report provided a range of demand projections
between about 30 million and 45 million, with 35-36 million being the mean projection for 2002-
03. The cellular mobile demand was projected to be between 3.5 million and 11 million by 2003.
Interestingly, the licence fee parity demand for mobile phones was projected to be 8.9 million for
2003. The actual achievement has been within the range of projections, with basic service lines
having reached 41 million and cellular mobile connections 12.6 million by the end of March
2003 (Table 5). Private sector investment required for achieving this kind of growth was
estimated to be about Rs 500 billion (at 1995-96 prices) between 1997 and 2002. The estimates
for actual private sector investment during this period range between Rs 380 billion (in current
prices) and Rs 450 billion, with about a quarter coming from Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).
Thus, viewed from any vantage point, the growth in telecommunications must be regarded as a
success, despite the many difficulties that have been encountered in the way, relating to frequent
8policy changes, regulatory problems and tariff restructuring. This experience shows that the
Indian private sector is indeed willing to take risk and invest in infrastructure provided it can see
a certain degree of payment security and profitability.
Reform in the telecommunications sector began in 1992-93 with the opening of value
added services to the private sector. Subsequently, after intensive deliberation within the
Government and outside, the National Telecom Policy (NTP 1994) announced the opening of
basic telecom services to competition, and the initiation of cellular mobile services. Private
initiative was to complement public sector efforts to raise additional resources through increased
internal generation and the adoption of innovative means like leasing, deferred payments, build-
operate transfer, and the like. The NTP 1994 also envisaged the provision of a public telephone
becoming available for every 500 persons in urban areas and at least one in every village. (There
are now about 1.37 million public telephones in the country and about 600,000 village public
telephones). The method employed for inducing the private sector into both basic and cellular
services was through the auction of licence fees, consistent with what has been followed by
many other countries. The consequence was that the auction process elicited excessively high
bids, even from bidders who had no previous history of substantive telecom experience, or even
any other experience. Once the licences had been awarded, and operations had begun, inevitable
complaints arose about the licence fees being too high and uneconomic. Since various
developments had taken place in the telecom sector and new issues had arisen, a New Telecom
Policy (NTP 1999) was announced. The issues that had arisen during this period related to:
• Perception of the original licence fee bids having been excessive
• Inadequate competition resulting from the existence of only two operators in each circle
• Continuing changes in technology
• The emergence of India as a significant player in the IT industry
Under the NTP 1999, a package for migration from fixed licence fee to revenue sharing
•
was offered in July 1999 to the existing cellular and basic service providers. The MTNL was
allowed as a third operator to provide cellular services to promote competition. Government
opened national long-distance services to private operators without any restriction on the number
of operators and with moderate entry fees. International Long Distance Services were then
opened in 2001, also with no limit on the number of operators and moderate entry fees. Both are
subject to licence fees being paid as revenue sharing. Thus significant competition was
introduced in the Indian telecom market starting in 2000-2001. The consequence has been
dramatic: cellular mobile tariffs have fallen by about 75 per cent since 1999, and long distance
tariffs, both domestic and international, fell by 60 per cent between 2000 and the end of 2002.
Corresponding organisational changes also took place during 2000-01. The two service
providing departments of the telecom sector were corporatised, viz., Department of Telecom
Services (DTS) and Department of Telecom Operations (DTO). A new public sector company
'Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited' (BSNL) was given all service providing functions of these two
                                                
•
 MTNL - Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited - the government owned telephone company operating in New
Delhi and Mumbai.
9departments with effect from October 2000. A fourth cellular operator in all the circles was
permitted.
With the introduction of effective competition in the cellular mobile services sector, the
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) made cellular mobile tariffs free from regulation
while reserving the right to intervene in the case of any malpractice such as the offer of predatory
tariffs.
Apart from the success of telecom policy reflected in the growth of services and
substantial reduction in tariffs, the objective of providing rural telephones is also making good
progress. It is estimated that, out of about 610,000 villages in the country, about 510,000 have
already been provided with at least one "Village Public Telephone" (VPT).
Although the outcome of reforms in the telecom sector is reflected in the greater role of
the private sector, higher tele-density, decreasing supply of demand gap and the availability of
services at substantially cheaper rates, the new challenges in the telecom sector are concerned
with ongoing convergence that is taking place and the appropriate regulatory response to greater
competition in the market. There has been excessive fragmentation in the provision of services
on the basis of type of service, geographical coverage between service providers, and even
technology (e.g. Cellular Mobile Services and Wireless Local Loop Limited Mobile Services).
Hence, convergence of different services, broadcasting, multimedia and telecommunications
through a single national service provider is being constrained. As a result of this fragmentation,
none of the operators is able to build a technology base that would strengthen their bargaining
power in the international market. It is true, however, that consolidation is indeed taking place
through mergers and acquisitions: it is quite likely that the country will end up with four or five
private operators along with the public sector incumbent. A key issue for policy is how to hasten
this process through consolidation of different licences. We could then see the emergence of
significant Indian telecom players who could then operate on an international scale.
The corporatisation of the Department of Telecommunications into BSNL and the
•
privatization of VSNL have been bold steps on the part of Government. It is now necessary to
strengthen both BSNL and MTNL as corporate entities. With about 40 million lines between
them they would probably rank among the top six to ten telecommunications entities in the
world. Government equity in MTNL is now about 55 per cent, while BSNL remains 100 per cent
government owned. Two opposite kinds of problems are arising out of their government owned
incumbent status. First, with open entry in almost all service segments, the privileges given to the
incumbents (e.g. non payment of licence fees) provide for unjust competition to the private
sector operators. On the other hand, however, their public sector status constrains them from
competing freely with the new operators. The recent intervention by the Government on
restraining BSNL and MTNL from adjusting their tariffs is a case in point. A key issue,
therefore, relates to the further restructuring of BSNL and MTNL so that they can compete
effectively, while  they also provide fairness and transparency in operations with respect to the
private sector. Social obligations must be met through the mechanism of Universal Service
Obligations (USO) as proposed in NTP 1999, and compensation through the USO Fund  should
get earmarked resources from the licence fee.
                                                
•
 Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited - the hitherto government owned international log distance monopoly operator.
10It has been argued that BSNL deserves preferential treatment from the Government since
it has to bear the social obligations of providing unremunerative telephone social services in rural
areas and other far flung areas. This view has got reinforced with the failure of private operators
in complying with their licencing conditions related to rural services. BSNL has argued for not
paying licence fees, and instead receiving additional subsidies from Government. Whereas the
argument for receiving subsidies for social obligations is justified, this must be done in
transparent fashion through the means of the Universal Service Obligations Fund(USO Fund)  as
proposed in NTP 1999.  The USO Fund itself should be funded from earmarked resources from
the licence fee, e.g. 5 per cent of total revenues from all operators, including BSNL. Fairness
between the public and private sector operators would then be established and perceived as such.
Furthermore, as and when BSNL is disinvested and privatised, such a system could continue to
operate without difficulty.
Efficient, credible, and authoritative functioning of the regulator is essential for the
functioning of the telecom market. The overall functioning of the TRAI must be adjudged an
unusual success: it has been effective in introducing competition in the reduction of tariffs, and
in the rapid expansion of services.  However, its functioning has been subjected to a number of
controversies and recent events suggest that it needs to be strengthened considerably. The key
issues are:
(i) The Government must eschew temptation to interfere in the decision making process
of the TRAI, as a consequence of corporate or political lobbying. This erodes the
credibility of the regulator and gives rise to erosion of its authority, as seen in recent
months.
(ii) TRAI must be strengthened professionally. This will be difficult unless it is made
financially independent and the compensation structure delinked from the
Government, but made totally transparent.
(iii) The appointment of the Authority should be more transparent and process linked so
that it does not become a sinecure for retiring civil servants. The appointment of
respected professionals would also add to its technical strength and respect in the
market.
With the increasing difficulties encountered in tariff restructuring, it is absolutely
essential that the regulator is strengthened and made more independent. The restructuring of
basic service rentals and tariffs have been resisted politically. This is when there are only about
41 million fixed lines in the country: clearly the poor do not have telephones. The political
sensitivity of telephone tariffs will only increase in the future as teledensity expands. Tariffs will
have to be at economic levels if the telecom sector is to remain sound and not go the way of the
power sector.
Ports
11A common characteristic of the fast growing East and South East Asian countries has
been the rapid growth of trade during their high growth period. A higher share of trade in the
economy contributes to the attainment of higher efficiency. A country improves its resource
allocation by exporting those goods where it exhibits competitive advantage and imports those
where it does not. As its comparative advantage changes, so does the composition of its exports
and imports. Thus, in order to achieve higher economic growth and higher efficiency levels, the
trade-GDP ratio needs to increase substantially. Improvement in the efficiency of ports and
expansion of their capacity is essential for promoting the growth of trade and export
competitiveness.
In the wake of 20 per cent plus annual growth of exports during 1993 to 1996, the India
Infrastructure Report had projected annual average growth in exports of about 15 per cent
between 1995-96 and 2005-06, 20 per cent growth tapering down to 10 per cent over that 10 year
period. Thus, exports were projected to increase from a level of about 10 per cent of GDP in
1995-96 to about 17 per cent in 2002-03 (about US$87 billion) and 18 per cent by 2005-06.
Correspondingly, imports were expected to increase from a level of about 11-12 per cent in
1995-96 to about 18 per cent of GDP in 2002-03 and 19 per cent in 2005-06.  Total trade as a
proportion of GDP was expected to have reached 35 per cent by now. The projections for port
traffic had been made based on these trade projections. Thus, total port traffic was expected to
increase from a level of around 215 million tonnes in 1995-96 to 480 million tonnes by 2002-03
and 650 million tonnes by 2005-06. In fact, growth in trade has been much slower, reaching a
level of about 22 per cent of GDP in 2002-03: exports at 10 per cent and imports at 12 per cent.
Thus total port traffic in 2002-03 is recorded at only 313 million tones. It is partly because of this
relatively slow growth in trade in goods that ports have not been a constraint in the late 1990s.
Port functioning has actually improved quite significantly, and there has been no
shortage of needed investment by both the private and public sectors. Cargo handled by major
ports has steadily increased albeit modestly to 313 million tones (MT) in 2002-03 from 215 MT
in 1995-96 (Table 6). The Ninth Five Year Plan had only targetted traffic at 289 MT in the
terminal year, i.e. 2001-02 as against the anticipated capacity of 344 MT. Thus, port capacity is
no longer a constraint. During the Ninth Five Year Plan (1997-2002), 17 private sector/captive
port projects of 60 MT capacity with an investment of about Rs 35 billion have been approved
and are at different stages of construction. The Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07) visualizes 6 per
cent annual growth in traffic, a traffic load of 415 MT in the terminal year and a total capacity of
470 MT at the major ports, contributed, among others, by improvement in productivity to the
extent of 15 MT. There has been an improvement in the principal indicators of port efficiency at
the major ports. The average pre-berthing waiting time has come down from 1.7 days in 1996-97
to 0.50 days in 2001-02. The average turnaround time has declined from 7.5 days in 1996-97 to
4.1 days in 2000-01 and further to 3.7 days in 2001-02. The output per ship berth day has
increased from 4,497 tonnes in 1996-97 to 6,701 tonnes in 2000-01 and further to 6,972 tonnes
in 2001-02. Labour productivity has also increased from 307 tonnes in 1997-98 to 413 tonnes in
2000-01 in terms of output per gang shift. Productivity indicators have, however, varied widely
across the ports. This suggests that there could be institutional innovations as have occurred at
better performing ports such as the Jawaharlal Nehru Port Trust (JNPT in New Mumbai), which
may be adopted in other ports.
12The Government has laid down guidelines for private sector participation in the areas of
leasing out of assets, construction and operation of terminals, berths, warehousing, tank farms,
container freight stations, and captive power plants; pilotage and captive facilities for port based
industries. 100 per cent FDI in ports has been allowed in December 1998 through the automatic
approval route under the Reserve Bank of India. Guidelines on joint venture in major ports have
been issued in September 2000. Model bid documents including license agreement have been
finalised to attract private sector investment and participation. The norms for private BOT
projects in major ports have been relaxed in 2001-02, in the context of limited private
participation in major ports. So far, 41 private sector projects involving a capacity addition of
about 160 MT and investment of about Rs 108 billion are at various stages of evaluation and
implementation, out of which seven projects with capacity addition of 28 MT and investment of
Rs 18.5 billion have already been completed. Private sector participation in major ports has been
mainly under licensing of operations of existing container berths or granting Build Own Operate
Transfer (BOOT) concessions for increasing terminal capacity. Thus, there is no shortage of
private sector willingness to invest in the port sector. Higher trade growth is quite likely to elicit
greater private sector response.
International trade is witnessing an increasing trend in containerisation. Accordingly,
container traffic at major ports has shown impressive growth of over 10 per cent during the last
three years. At present, about 70 per cent of the containers, which flow through India are trans-
shipped through ports of Colombo, Singapore, Dubai and Salalah, leading to increased delay and
cost in trade and transactions. It is, therefore, necessary to develop a hub port each on the east
and west coasts of the country. Already, an international container trans-shipment terminal at
Vallarpadam, Cochin is proposed to be developed.
Even though the major ports continue to handle about 75 per cent of the port traffic in the
country, state ports are increasingly exhibiting higher traffic growth than the major ports. During
the Ninth Plan (1997-02) when the overall traffic growth was 8.5 per cent, it has grown at 27.9
per cent for state ports and at 4.9 per cent for major ports. Besides, there is a need for alternatives
to the congested major ports, particularly in the context of development of coastal shipping.
There is great potential for private investment for the development of minor/ intermediate ports.
Gujarat is by far the most active state in attracting private participation. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil
Nadu and Orissa have also invited private participation to develop minor ports by offering long-
term leases. The state governments and the Union Ministry of Surface Transport have set up the
Maritime States Development Council for formulating an integrated ports policy including minor
ports.
As the Government changed policy to permit private investment in ports, it became
necessary to set up a mechanism for setting tariffs on a transparent and fair basis. With all major
ports being in the public sector and structured as port trusts, tariffs were earlier proposed by Port
Trusts and approved by the Ministry of Surface Transport. Accordingly, the Tariff Authority for
Major Ports (TAMP) was set up in 1997. The TAMP has generally worked on cost plus
principles, but has done so on a transparent and consultative basis. It initiated a system of
transparent consultation with all stakeholders before approving or setting any tariff.
13Tariffs had earlier been set on an entirely ad hoc basis by each Port Trust with little
rationale or uniformity in approach. TAMP has attempted to work on broad principles of cost
plus, but moderated by a normative approach allowing port trusts a certain return to capital. It
also aimed to get a broad comparability in approach across ports, which was then applied equally
to the new private port operators.
With the achievement of some initial rationalisation, TAMP now needs to focus more
pro-actively on promoting competitive tariffs: users of cargo services should not end up paying
for port or labour inefficiencies. Tariff policy should now be used as leverage to prescribe
standards of service, thus contributing to productivity and efficiency. Competition between ports
should also be encouraged through flexibility in pricing. Tariff policy can also be used  for
rationing port capacity, with high tariffs in ports that are congested. However, this cannot be
taken too far since the on land transportation facilities vary tremendously between ports.
With the movement towards corporatisation of ports, and increasing weight of minor
ports in total cargo throughput, the restriction of TAMP's jurisdiction to major ports only will
progressively reduce its effectiveness. In fact, since TAMP was formed through an amendment
to the Major Port Trusts Act, its jurisdiction is restricted to major port trusts. Ironically, as major
port trusts get corporatised they, will go out of TAMP's jurisdiction, thus defeating the original
purpose of TAMP providing a level tariff playing field between port trust operations and newer
private operators.  Thus, further thought needs to be given to the functioning of TAMP. It should
have jurisdiction over all ports over some stipulated size, but its pricing strategy needs to be
much more flexible to promote competition and have lower prices.
So far, Indian port tariffs are generally higher than other ports, and their efficiency also
compares poorly, despite the improvements cited, with the world's major ports including those in
the region, such as Colombo, Shanghai and Singapore. If Indian trade is to expand substantially
in the future, substantial new investment will be required along with modernisation of existing
facilities. This will need significant organisational restructuring of existing port trusts, including
that traditional, restrictive, labour practices. Fortunately, the tariff structure is such that port
investment can be extremely lucrative, even as efficiency increases and port tariffs come down.
The existing port trusts being constrained by their structure are unable to compete with
the private operators and minor ports. Although the port trusts are being encouraged to convert
themselves into limited companies, corporatisation with continuing government ownership and
control may not be of much help without the design of appropriate governance structures for the
new corporatised entities. The existing port trust structure does give voice to other stake holders
and local governments through membership of the Trusts. Thus, a good degree of consultation
will be needed for the transition. It would perhaps be desirable for the port trusts or their
successors to turn into a landlord port structure where each terminal may be hived off as a
separate company and competitively bid, with or without the port authority being a joint venture
partner to boost intra-port competition. These terminal companies could compete and invest
across diverse ports so as to mitigate risks out of a single base. Besides, they should be exposed
to competition in raising funds from the capital market and to competition for management
control. In order to enhance inter-port competition, port connectivity needs to be improved with
inter-modal co-ordination between Railways, Container Corporation of India(CONCOR),
14Central Water Commission(CWC) and National Highway Authority of India(NHAI). For
sustaining competition, both inter-port and intra-port, the key regulatory issues such as dispute
resolution mechanism, entry of new players, issue of concession, and merger/de-merger in the
ports sector need to be clearly enunciated. In ports where private investment has taken place
through container terminals such as in Nhava Sheva and Chennai, conflicts of interest have
arisen with the host Port Trusts performing the role of land lords as well as operating
competitors. In order to aid this process, TAMP could perhaps be turned into an overall port
regulator rather than being restricted to just tariff determination and approval.
Power
The power sector was the first among infrastructure sectors to be opened for private
sector investment. As economic reforms were initiated in 1991 and significantly higher growth
expected as a result, it was clear that public sector resources would not be adequate for the kind
of investment required in the power sector. Internationally, and particularly in East and South
East Asia, the world as a whole had discovered the idea of independent power projects (IPPs) for
generation and sale of power to the existing grids.  Consequently, large plans were drawn up for
attracting investments in independent power projects from both domestic and international
investors.
The installed capacity at the beginning of the Eighth Five Year Plan (1992) was about
69,075 MW. This increased by about 16,500 MW during the Eighth Plan as compared with the
planned addition of about 30,000 MW. The India Infrastructure Report had projected a capacity
addition of about 33,000 MW between 1996 and 2001, and 50,000 MW between 2001 and 2006,
along with significant improvements in efficiency to improve further utilization of existing
capacity.  Correspondingly, the Ninth Five Year Plan projected an addition of  40,000 MW
between 1997 and 2002 and the Tenth Plan projects another 41,000 MW between 2002 and
2007. The actual achievement was an addition of about 16,500 mw during 1992 to 1997 and
about 19,000 MW during 1997 to 2002 (See Table 7).  With this poor achievement, there would
have been a severe shortage of power had it not been for the slowdown in both industrial and
agricultural growth in the last five years, and the significant improvement in the plant load factor
from 57 per cent in 1992-93 to almost 70 per cent in 2001-2002.
In view of the poor financial condition of State Electricity Boards caused both by
inefficiency and low agricultural and domestic tariffs, the original idea was to provide payment
security to private investors through government guarantees and escrow arrangements providing
them priority in payments. It was expected that these would be temporary measures as the State
Electricity Boards would improve their functioning and become able to pay Independent Power
Producers(IPPs) adequately. These arrangements were done in the context of rather generous
assumptions about return to equity embedded in the power purchase agreements ( PPAs).
Consequently, there was enthusiastic response from both international and domestic investors.
The aftermath of this exuberance is too well known to be repeated here: suffice it to say that the
programme was replete with errors on all sides. The consequence is that the expectation of
private sector  investment in generation has been scaled down considerably for the Tenth Five
Year Plan (Table 7).
15The reluctance of State Governments to tackle the basic issues of power theft and
inadequate tariffs has led to the bankruptcy of SEBs, which has then made it impossible for
viable private investment to take place in the power sector.
It is now well recognized that the financial difficulties of the State Electricity Boards
(SEBs) lie at the heart of the power sector problems. The financial position of all the SEBs has
deteriorated rapidly during the 1990s. Barring the SEBs in Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra,
all other SEBs have recorded losses between 1992-93 and 2001-02 ranging from Rs 40 million to
Rs 37 billion. During 2001-02 alone, the commercial loss (excluding subsidy) was of the order of
Rs 240 billion according to Planning Commission estimates.  Such huge losses have adversely
affected the ability of SEBs to supply electricity reliably, leading to default in payments to the
power generation/transmission PSUs.
The root of the problem lies in the gap between user charges and cost of supply. Despite a
graduated hike in user charges, the gap between cost of supply and average tariff per unit of
electricity produced has actually worsened from a level of 23 paise in 1992-93 to about 110 paise
in 2001-02 (Table 8). Revenues dropped from 82 per cent of costs in 1992-93 to 69 per cent in
2001-02. While there has been some rationalisation of tariff for the subsidised sectors, viz.,
agriculture and domestic sectors, the process is obviously far from complete.
What is interesting about Table 8  is that the increases in average tariffs have actually
exceeded average inflation as measured by the Wholesale Price Index (See Table 9). Thus,
tariffs have indeed increased substantially. But, the pace of increase in costs has been even faster.
The gap between cost of supply and average tariff has been accentuated further owing to
losses in transmission and distribution (T&D), which correspond to electricity produced but not
paid for. T&D losses of SEBs rose from 24.8 per cent in 1997-98 to 26.5 per cent in 1998-99 and
further to 30.9 per cent in 1999-00. T&D losses are caused by a variety of factors such as
electricity sold at low voltage, sparsely distributed loads across large rural areas, inadequate
investments in distribution, improper billing and outright theft.
The poor financial health of SEBs and the resultant spill-over on the generating utilities
are reflected in the subdued growth in power generation, which was at 3.1 per cent in 2001-02
down from 3.9 per cent in the preceding period (Table 10). The growth in capacity addition,
after a turnaround in 1997-98 has slowed down, and entered negative territory in 2000-01 and
2001-02. On the other hand, plant load factor (PLF), which is a measure of operational efficiency
of thermal power plants has indicated a steady improvement from 57 per cent in 1992-93 to
about 70 per cent in 2001-02. This is witnessed in all the regions excepting the North Eastern
region. The demand-supply attained a peak of 11.5 per cent of demand in 1996-97, declined to
5.9 per cent in 1998-99, but increased again to 7.7 per cent in 2002-02.
Power Reforms
Power sector reforms were initiated in 1991, encouraging competition in each sub
element of the sector, viz., generation, transmission and distribution. The Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission (CERC) was set up at the national level in 1997 and State Electricity
16Regulatory Commissions (SERCs) have now been set up in 22 states, 13 of which have issued
tariff orders so far. Private participation in power transmission has been allowed with the
enactment of the Electricity Laws (Amendment) Act in 1998. The Indian Electricity Grid Code
has been established in January 2000 by the CERC to ensure grid discipline for individual
players in the T&D sector. The Availability Based Tariff order of January 2000 by the CERC is
expected to encourage reliability and efficiency in generation.
The Electricity Bill, originally drafted in 2001 has recently been passed by the Parliament
in 2003. It would replace the existing three laws on electricity, viz., the Indian Electricity Act,
1910; the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act, 1998. It
recognises trading of power as a distinct activity and provides a legal framework for enabling
reforms and restructuring of the power sector. Already, SEBs in nine states have been
unbundled/corporatised. The distribution operations in Orissa and Delhi have been privatised.
The newly set up distribution companies are expected to emulate the success of private sector
distribution in Mumbai, Kolkata and Ahmedabad, and ensure effective enforcement of user
charges.
An Accelerated Power Development Programme (APDP) initiated in 2000-01 and
subsequently modified as Accelerated Power Development and Reforms Programme (APDRP)
with an outlay of Rs. 3,500 crore has been designed to assist reforms in the distribution sector. It
aims at 100 per cent metering, energy audit, replacement of distribution transformers, and IT
solutions relating to power flow at critical points to ensure accountability at all levels. The
APDRP also provides for financial incentive to the states to reduce the gap between unit cost of
supply and revenue realisation. The Ministry of Power has already signed memorundum of
understanding (MoU) with 25 states to undertake reforms in a time bound manner.
On the issue of outstanding SEB dues to Central PSUs and dues from Central PSUs to
State Power Utilities, the Ahluwalia Expert Group constituted by the Ministry of Power in 2001,
designed a securitisation scheme for one-time settlement of the approximately Rs 420 billion
payable by SEBs to  Central Government Public Sector Units(PSUs) as on September 30, 2001
after writing off Rs 96 billion. Towards this end, a tripartite agreement has been signed recently
in March 2003 between the Ministry of Power, State Governments and the Reserve Bank of
India. In accordance with the agreement, defaults in current payment would attract a graded
reduction in supply of power from Central power stations.
The one time settlement of SEB dues needs to be strengthened with the right pricing of
power. Once the SEBs’ capacity to pay is enhanced in a durable manner, investment in power
generation or transmission with active private participation is expected to take off. The passage
of the Electricity Act, 2003 has now created an enabling environment towards a competitive
power sector. However, a great deal of work remains to be done particularly at the state level.
The reform template recently put forward by the Ministry of Power’s Expert Committee on State
Specific Reforms could be helpful in making further progress.
The last ten years have been intensive in discussions related to power sector reforms. The
policy framework is now in place to actually implement them. The key issue is the curbing of
17theft and the restructuring tariffs. The increase in tariffs that has taken place already is indicative
of  the willingness of consumers to pay, provided they get reliable power supply. The accent now
has to be on a countrywide campaign across all States, regardless of parties  in power to
eliminate power theft. Such theft is clearly not being done by the poor, since consumption of
electricity requires the ownership of items that consume electricity.  If there is not a transper
ant demonstration of the curbing of power theft, it will be difficult to increase power tariffs much
further. The industrial tariffs are already too high in comparison to both international standards
and local costs.
Railways
Indian Railways (IR) have been the prime movers to the nation and have the distinction
of being the second largest railway system in the world under single management. IR has
historically played an important integrating role in the socio-economic development of the
country. Its role in economic development assumes importance due to its innate advantage as a
mode of surface transport being more energy efficient and environment friendly than other
transport modes.
However, IR has run into severe financial difficulties in the 1990s, which has hampered
its growth and cast severe doubt on its ability to provide competitive transport services in the
future.  If the growth of the Indian economy accelerates, the supply of all transportation services
would have to accelerate correspondingly.  With an open economy and an increasingly
competitive world environment, transportation will also have to be increasingly competitive in
terms of both cost and quality of services.  India being a large continental economy, with a large
proportion of its activities located inland, the role of Indian Railways in providing such
competitive services will be a critical part of the solution to India’s infrastructure needs.
As in the case of power, a tradition has been built up to see railways as part of essential
public service, the usage of which should not be denied even to those unable to pay.
Correspondingly, freight users have been seen as those classes of users who could easily pay,
and more. Consequently, freight services subsidise   passenger services as a whole, and upper
class passengers subsidise others. This was a viable system in the context of a closed economy,
since higher goods freight charges could merely be passed on to the ever suffering consumer.
Moreover, since the freight user was predominantly the public sector operating in an
administered price system (oil, steel, coal, foodgrains), this caused no marketing problems for
the railways. This is no longer sustainable in the open economy.
With the implementation of the Fifth Pay Commission award, the financial difficulties of
the Railways got accentuated in the late 1990s. For the first time in 17 years, in 2000-01, IR was
not able to pay its dividend to the Government, and this continued in 2001-02. A commercial
enterprise in such a situation would have been declared in default, and would have had to go for
restructuring.
Competition has been increasing across all sectors of the economy and the transportation
business is no different. After trucking was deregulated in the 1980s, road transportation has
18grown rapidly and has impacted Railways’ market share significantly. Features like greater
customer orientation, flexibility and lower cost of short leads are increasing the share of
roadways even in bulk commodities that have been the traditional stronghold of the Railways.
Over the last decade, the proportion of the total production of bulk commodities that was
transported by rail has gone down in almost all commodities.  The annual growth rate of freight
carried by IR (in  net tonne kilometres) averaged 5.33 per cent between 1984 and 1991, but
dropped to 1.86 per cent in the next seven years 1992-99. Road dominance is likely to increase
further with the completion of the Golden Quadrilateral in the National Highway Development
Project; and the increasing use of pipelines for transportation of POL products.
The loss of market share in the profitable freight business, lack of flexibility in pricing,
high cost of internally sourced products and services, together with investments in
unremunerative projects, have meant that the rate of growth in revenues has been outstripped by
the rate of increase in costs.  Investment in unremunerative projects escalated during the 1990s.
First, the adoption of the uniguage project involving large investments during this period has
been particularly harmful to the finances of IR.  Second, the temptation to begin a myriad of new
lines for political reasons has been much greater in the politically fractured 1990s, and continues
to this day. Revenue growth has also suffered from the saturation of freight traffic on trunk
routes, particularly the golden quadrilateral. This is partly due to the large differential in spread
between passenger and freight trains, which constrains severely the freight carrying capacity of
trunk routes. Timely investment in new technology, track upgradation and signaling could have
eased this constraint.
The proportion of expenditure on repairs and maintenance has been declining over the
years, and adequate investment has not been made in track renewals and other safety related
areas. Consequently, the arrears of track renewals have grown from about 3,500 km to about
13,000 km over the last 10-11 years. To arrest the steep decline in its share, and to improve the
quality of its services, the IR needs to increase investments in infrastructure substantively.
However, if the existing trends in cost increases, uneconomical tariff setting, and investments in
unremunerative projects were to continue, it would be impossible for IR to find the funds for
such investments and to service them.
In recognition of these problems, IR appointed an Expert Group on Indian Railways in
1999, which submitted its Report on July 2001. The Expert Group concluded that:
"If IR is to survive as an ongoing transportation organisation, it has to modernize
and expand its capacity to serve the emerging needs of a growing economy. This
will require substantial investment on a regular basis for the foreseeable future.
With the prospect of getting substantial free or subsidised resources from the
government being unlikely, new investment will have to be financed on a
commercial basis. This is the challenge facing Indian Railways".
The ability of the Indian Railways to accelerate the growth rate of their revenues from
freight and passenger traffic is central to the success of any effort to restructure the organisation
and to finance the necessary investments.
19With these objectives in mind, the Expert Group recommended a multi-track strategy :
(i) Tariff Rebalancing: In order to correct the imbalance between freight and passenger
traffic, both tariffs have to be rebalanced. Any further increase in freight tariffs would
lead to loss of freight share. Within passenger tariffs, the ratio of lower classes fares
to highest AC I class fares would have to be corrected from the existing high ratio of
about 1:14 to about 1:9, as was also recommended in 1993 by the Railway Freight
and Fares Committee.  This could be done over a period of about 5 years.
(ii) A Major Investment Programme: Expansion of revenue will involve a significant
increase in traffic - both freight and passenger - to about 7 - 7.5 per cent per year.
Achievement of such growth will involve all round modernization, introduction of
high speed modern passenger services, commodity specific freight strategies, and
introduction of new technology, particularly in signaling and communications.
(iii) Organisational Restructuring and Corporatisation: Such tariff rebalancing, traffic
growth, and a strategic investment programme cannot  be done in a "Business-as-
Usual" basis. Thus IR has to be reorganized to a corporate framework from its current
departmental form of organisation. This would be essential to achieve the kind of
commercial and customer orientation needed to achieve the goals outlined.  Such
large restructuring would be a very complex task and would have to be done carefully
over a 5-7 year period. A beginning would be made with the recasting of accounts in
a corporate framework in order to enable accountability and commercialisation of IR.
(iv) Separation of Functions : In line with developments in other infrastructure sectors, it
would be desirable to separate policy setting, regulatory and operational functions.
The Government should obviously be responsible for policy making; an Indian
Railways Regulatory Authority could be in charge of regulation, including tariffs; and
the corporatised Indian Railways Corporation  would be responsible for all
commercial operations.
The Expert Group argued that the financial situation of IR is currently such that anything
short of a bold programme would not rescue IR from its current financial straits.
The response of IR and the Government to the Report of the Expert Group has been less
than lukewarm. Some tariff rebalancing has indeed been done. It is possible that such
rebalancing might continue; particularly due to market pressures. It is becoming difficult to
increase upper class fares because of emerging competition from airlines. Second, modernization
of the Golden  Quadrilateral is being taken up in right earnest with assistance from both the
Asian Development Bank and the World Bank. However, it is not yet clear how the whole
project will be financed and how these finances will ultimately be serviced. On the
organisational side, there has been no response at all. The prognosis for Indian Railways being
able to perform its functions efficiently in the future is not positive.
Urban Infrastructure
20The attainment of high growth requires well functioning and efficient cities. India now
has 27 million plus cities, and 400 plus cities with population greater than 100,000. As growth
proceeds apace, we can expect urbanisation to accelerate along with the structural changes
expected in the economy, with activities shifting away from agriculture and towards industry and
services. Efficient production of industrial goods and that of services requires agglomeration.
In the other areas of infrastructure, either significant policy changes have already been
made (telecom, roads, ports) to improve performance, or the policy changes necessary are known
but are proving difficult to implement (power and railways). In the case of urban infrastructure,
there is little understanding of what needs to be done and how. Part of the problem is intrinsic.
The implementation of urban infrastructure programmes lies with city level agencies or some
state agencies, but these are typically bereft of resources and technical competence. A great deal
of policy level discussion takes place at the national level, but the Central Government has few
policy instruments to use to steer urban infrastructure in any particular direction. The Central
Government has initiated a number of centrally sponsored schemes but resources allocated to
these schemes are essentially token in nature.
As in the case of other infrastructure, urban infrastructure investment suffers from the
lack of resources resulting from inadequate municipal finances and low user charges. With the
state of Central and State finances being what it is, precious little can be done by way of
downward devolution. For the provision of public goods, there is little alternative to the
generation of local resources through local taxes, in particular property taxes, which should be
buoyant in the face of rapid urbanisation and an incipient housing boom. Because of inefficient
and antiquated property tax systems, many cities have relied on octroi taxes, a tax that has
always been at the top of the list of rank bad taxes. Similarly, user charges for water supply,
sewage, solid waste disposal, etc. are kept low in the name of the poor, thereby starving these
services of the investment that is surely required. Correction of this situation needs a few city
leaders (political or bureaucratic) who can change the situation through resource generation and
associated improvement in the delivery of services that is transparent to the people. The
demonstration effect should then spread out to other cities. The legislative provision for the
exercise of such leadership now exists.
th
The 74 Constitutional Amendment Act, 1992 has given constitutional status to
municipal governments and has defined municipal responsibilities and entrusted the
responsibility of defining financial relations between state and local governments. In many states
the devolution of administrative powers relating to planning, financing and managing municipal
services has not yet become effective. In order to augment resources in the urban infrastructure,
100 per cent foreign direct investments (FDI) has been permitted in the development of
integrated township since 2001. For urban infrastructure, in view of declining availability of state
finances and the Reserve Bank of India’s endeavor to bring discipline to lend against state
guarantees, the Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) are compelled to explore alternative sources of
financing like municipal bonds. ULBs in Ahmedbad, Bangalore, Vijayawada and Ludhiana etc.
have already raised money through municipal bonds. However, there is a need to incentivise the
markets so that investment in these instruments of longer tenor can be made attractive for retail
and institutional investors. The municipal bond is one of the most potent ways of raising
resources for ULBs. Norms for getting them rated have to be put in place. Investments have not
21taken place because of very rigid existing problems related to land acquisition and stamp duty. In
forward looking states like Andhra Pradesh, there has been some success in terms of customer
oriented and transparent delivery mechanisms. Andhra Pradesh has taken the lead role in
introducing e-Governance and has achieved considerable progress in this area. e-Seva is one
among the major e-Governance projects rendering multiple services to the public through
integrated citizen service centers. Initially it was covered in 16 integrated citizen service centers
in the twin cities of Hyderabad and Secunderabad, called TWINS or Twin Cities Network
Services pilot project. Now the e-Seva project covers the entire Andhra Pradesh providing 19
citizen services across the same counter. These services include information, all payments to
government departments/agencies, submission of forms, tax returns, certificates/licenses,
reservation of travels tickets etc. E-governance systems like TWINS and E-Seva in Andhra
Pradesh are needed to be adopted by other states too.
In the area of water supply, municipalities, state governments and water boards have
initially shown considerable interest in attracting the private sector for funding, constructing,
operating and maintaining facilities such as bulk water treatment plants. However, several
projects were subsequently abandoned in Hyderabad, Cochin and Pune due to various potential
obstacles. Water supply and solid waste collection & disposal system need a shift from
‘Government Only’ approach to provide better services in the cities.  Urban areas presently face
severe concerns emerging from the gap between demand and supply of urban services due to
adequate finance and ineffective governance that has impinged on the productivity of urban
areas. The participation of the private sector to meet rising financial requirements for water
projects is constrained, as this sector is fraught with risks. Since user charges do not cover
services costs the colossal subsidy component has compelled various ULBs to borrow massively.
There is no regulatory authority for the water sector that could make private projects more
bankable.
The World Bank and UNDP have recently conducted careful studies on the cost of urban
water in India and the tariffs charged. It has been found that all water consumers receive large
subsidies at present. Whereas the average cost of water works out to be about Rs.15 per cubic
metre, the average tariff is about Rs.1.50 per cubic metre. Even industrial and commercial tariffs
are found to be significantly below cost. Since better off customers, industrial, commercial and
domestic, typically consume larger volumes of water, they end up receiving larger effective
subsidies than the poor who consume much less water. Yet, the prevailing view is that water
cannot be priced at rational economic levels because of the law affordability of the poor.
In the urban infrastructure sector, urban local bodies (ULBs) which provide services are
autonomous in theory but are still guided by an extensive set of government regulations. The
poor financial position of ULBs is the main constraint on the growth of urban infrastructure.
There is also considerable political interference in operations, managerial decision making and
tariff setting. Tariff fixation should be based on average incremental cost including operation and
maintenance charges, depreciation charges, debt dues etc. The current institutional arrangements
do not create the proper structures and incentives for improvement of operational efficiency and
quality of service. Problems relating to inadequate information about current financial and
physical condition of the existing service provider and assets, tariffs well below cost recovery
22levels etc are the issues for the international water operators trying to identify opportunities in
medium size towns in India.
For the provision of urban infrastructure, ULBs particularly small ones are without the
wherewithal to access the capital market to raise resources at competitive rates. These lack
institutional capacity to manage the complexities and tasks involved in operating infrastructure
services. For them urban housing and development corporations and insurance companies have
been the main source of funds which provide funds at a higher rate. The problem gets
accentuated when ULBs are unable to levy adequate user charges to service the debt and the
projects are too small to be financed through debt/equity etc. Such identified small projects can
be financed jointly as has been the practice of multi-project financing adopted in East European
countries by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. The possibility of pooled
financing of such identified projects through floating of bonds should be explored. It can save
transaction costs as well as borrowing cost. Apart from these, sound accounting and financial
management practices are required to enable the municipalities to access domestic debt markets
and pay for the facilities constructed and operated by the private sector. Recently 14 ULBs in
Tamil Nadu pooled certain water and sanitation projects to float bonds. Currently more than 50
ULBs are experimenting with various forms of arrangements to introduce private sector
participation in Solid Waste Management (SWM) and its transportation.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Infrastructure investment used to be a staid, regular, uninteresting activity that the public
sector was involved in and which was taken for granted by most of the population. The kind of
active discussion, experimentation and innovation that has taken place over the past decade is
unprecedented in the area of infrastructure in India, and in the rest of the world. It is now time
for consolidation and actual implementation. It is inescapable that if India is to achieve the kind
of economic growth rates that have now become a matter of common aspiration, infrastructure
must become even more of a priority than it has been.
That the public sector financing constraint is an objective reality has been documented in
this paper. The lesson is two fold. First, all constraints to private sector investment must be
loosened so that it can at least partially compensate for the lower than desirable level of public
investment. Second, there is no escape from raising the public sector levels of infrastructure
investment since some infrastructure services are really public goods, whereas others exhibit
partial public good characteristics. However, it will not be feasible to restore public sector
infrastructure investment levels to appropriate levels without fiscal improvements, particularly
through revenue increases in both tax and non-tax areas.
Rural Infrastructure
There has been a significant slowdown in agricultural growth over the past five years.
Even prior to this period, trend growth had been in the region of around 3 per cent annual
growth, although it had accelerated to 4.5-5.0 per cent during the early to mid 1990s (Table 1). If
India is to approach annual growth of 7-8 per cent over the next 5-10 years, it will be difficult to
do so if agriculture grows at rates of 2-3 per cent annually. In the past, growth in agriculture has
23been equated with that in production of foodgrains. It is now clear that, with rising incomes all
round, the average Indian diet in both rural and urban areas is becoming increasingly diversified.
Consequently, expenditure on foodgrains is falling as a proportion of total household food
expenditure. Growth in domestic demand for foodgrains is, therefore, unlikely to sustain growth
in production greater than what has been achieved in the past. Higher agricultural growth will
now have to come from a much more diversified agriculture as has been the experience in other
fast growing Asian countries.
Agricultural diversification and accelerated agricultural growth will be difficult to
achieve without much greater investment in rural infrastructure such as roads, storage facilities,
telecommunications, power, and the like. Diversified agriculture will need much more complex
commercial linkages between the farm and market. Thus, rural infrastructure investment will
yield high economic returns, but it is difficult to develop any methodology to yield adequate
financial returns. States such as Punjab, Haryana, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Goa that invested in
rural roads relatively early have demonstrated how essential it is to do so.
A key challenge for India in the coming years will be the investment in and financing of
rural infrastructure. Given the difficult fiscal situation already alluded to, innovation will have to
be the order of the day. New approaches to public private partnerships, participation of local
governments, funds sourced from dedicated levies such as the fuel cess will all have to be
explored. It will also have to be understood politically that continuation of tariff policies such as
the low rural electricity tariffs will not contribute to the rapid development of rural infrastructure.
Regulation
Increases in private sector investments can take place on both exclusive and partnership
basis. In sectors such as telecom where service users can pay user charges at economic levels
there is no constraint, in principle, to exclusive private sector investment. The main area of
policy concern in such sectors is the removal of regulatory risk. The rapid technological change
that characterised telecommunications over the past decade gave rise to unavoidable regulatory
changes, which often trailed technology. New kinds of services became possible, and falling
equipment prices often gave new entrants an advantage over incumbents, giving rise to disputes
over tariff issues. Although technical change in telecommunications is continuing to take place,
it is probable that the big tide of innovation of the 1990s has now receded.  Similar has been the
case in the power sector, where information technology has made possible consumer choice and
competition possible where none was thought feasible earlier. Here also, regulators have had to
cope with new forms of organizational frameworks that require new kinds of regulatory
intervention. These kinds of problems are intrinsic to sectors where rapid technical change is
taking place.
There are other kinds of regulatory risks that can indeed be removed. These relate to
regulatory predictability and transparency. The principles of regulation must be well thought out,
articulated transparently and reasoned. They must be technically sound so that they can be
understood and accepted by market participants. If this is done, abrupt and ad hoc changes will
be automatically avoided and private investment will flow. The various regulatory authorities in
India are still in their infancy and can still be characterized to be on a steep learning curve. They
24have been handicapped by the lack of technical expertise at both the staff and authority levels.
Thus, many of their operations can be characterized as "learning by doing". Staffing at the
Authority level has typically been done by the re-employment of retired civil servants; and that
at the staff level through temporary secondments from government departments. The authorities
have exhibited a marked reluctance to hire from the market, both at the authority and staff levels.
Regulatory authorities in other countries typically have a better mix of staff that include technical
experts hired from the market along with a sprinkling of civil servants. With the imposition of
public sector compensation structures, it is difficult to attract appropriate expertise at any level.
Thus, a key requirement is that regulatory authorities must be made financially and
administratively autonomous. The remuneration of technical staff as well as of their members
must be market related but made transparent for accountability. The ultimate responsibility for
their actions does rest with government and Parliament, hence accountability has to built into
their governance structure.
A good degree of regulatory risk arises from government or political interference in the
work of the regulator, though it would be naïve to argue that the regulator must be completely
immune to political and government pressures. The regulator is ultimately responsible to
government and Parliament. This problem can be reduced by the articulation of conditions and
the manner in which government can give directions to the regulator in a transparent manner. As
has been provided in Sri Lanka, for example, where government direction results in revenue loss
to the operators, it must have a responsibility to provide equivalent budgetary funds for that loss.
Tariffs are both the most contentious of issues that regulators handle, and also the raison
d'etre for their formation. It is with the objective of removing the tariff setting processes from
political pressures that regulators are often set up. Hence, it is doubly important for Government
to devise procedures and conventions that allow regulators to function independently in tariff
setting. Thus, it is important for the government to approach the achievement of a bipartisan
consensus on tariff issues. This would involve wide public education and discussion on
principles of pricing utilities. It is only if there is better understanding of these issues, and of the
necessity of economic pricing, can there be any hope of regulators being allowed to do rational
economic pricing.
A higher level of independence, financial autonomy, and technical expertise in regulatory
authorities will do much to remove avoidable regulatory risk. Distancing of government from
tariff decisions will also reduce inevitable special interest lobbying that often results in
dysfunctional outcomes. Transparency in the appointments process would also contribute to
greater independence and credibility of regulators.
Financing
The second issue related to private sector investment in infrastructure is the availability
of financing of adequate magnitude and structure. Each infrastructure sector has its own different
characteristics and financing mechanisms need to correspond to these characteristics. For
example, once a power station or toll road is built, and tariffs are set in a transparent and
predictable manner, the cash flows are fairly regular and predictable.  They can then be
securitized easily. However, the pre-operation risk is extremely high: hence risk mitigation, and
25credit enhancement is necessary to attract resources at reasonable cost. Market instruments need
to be designed to meet these requirements, along with specific government interventions, where
necessary, in order to mitigate pre-operative risk.
The 1990s witnessed a great degree of innovation in structured finance all across the
world. The huge expansion of cross border flows of capital aided this explosion of innovation. It
was also the period during which the former socialist economies made their transit towards the
market system: all of them had large backlogs of infrastructure investment that had to be
financed. Similarly, China, Indonesia and other fast growing East-Asian countries exhibited great
demand for infrastructure finance. The exuberance of international capital flows, particularly
towards developing countries has dampened during this decade and hence needs some revival.
As already noted, the initial expectations of return to equity were perhaps excessive, and
particularly unsuited to infrastructure investment. Thus, a new look is needed at the international
arrangements for cross border flows of finances for infrastructure investment. The international
financial institutions can look more carefully from the point of view of both the investors and
recipients. In some cases, large investments have been made for the privatisation of existing
utilities, particularly in Latin America. In other cases, green field investments have also been
made in areas such as telecom, power and roads. Serious problems have arisen for investors
where large changes have taken place in currency adjustments that were characteristic of the
1990s. Equity investors have consequently suffered through loss of return whereas, in the case of
debt, recipient countries have encountered debt servicing problems. These issues need to be
given due attention in the discussions related to the new financial architecture. Mechanisms need
to be evolved to provide some protection to both potential investors and recipients so that large
financial flows for infrastructure investments can be rekindled. Mechanisms could be devised for
credit enhancement of borrowers. Similarly, it should be possible to find ways and means for
providing a floor of return to investment below which some form of investment insurance kicks
in. The floor should clearly be below the level of market return to minimise moral hazard.
Various developments have taken place in the recent past that should make it easier for
resources to be intermediated towards infrastructure projects. The government securities market
has developed well and hence debt market benchmarks are now available. It is now quite a liquid
market and government securities can also be traded in the stock exchanges. Thus, the
technological infrastructure for the debt market is in place in the stock exchanges. Interest rate
derivatives are about to be introduced to aid in risk management. An act has been passed recently
enabling securitization of receivables on a widespread basis. The same Act has also strengthened
creditor rights.
The Infrastructure Development Finance Company (IDFC) was founded in 1997 as a
joint venture between the Government of India, the Reserve Bank of India, domestic financial
institutions, and foreign investors like the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the International
Finance Corporation (IFC), among others. Thus, institutional financing is also available for
infrastructure.  In fact, credit disbursed from the banking system for infrastructure has increased
from 1.0 per cent of overall non food credit in March 1998 to 3.0 per cent in end-March 2003.
IDFC itself has disbursed Rs.28.5 billion until March 2002. Thus, there is no shortage of credit
availability for viable infrastructure projects.
26The equity market has been generally dormant since the mid-1990s. Hence, raising
private equity has not been easy, particularly with the decline of the Unit Trust of India(UTI).
Accordingly, a new initiative, the India Development Fund has also been initiated to help private
sector promoters to raise equity. It is expected that this fund will amount to Rs.10 billion shortly.
Furthermore, private sector insurance companies have begun operations and the entry of
independent pension funds has now been announced. Thus, a greater variety and volume of
institutional investors will now become available for both direct and indirect investment in
infrastructure.
Thus institutional investors such as banks, insurance companies, pension funds and the
like can increasingly create specialised vehicles such as this to channel equity funds into
infrastructure projects, where risk capital is otherwise scarce. International infrastructure funds
were the rage in the 1990s. They need to be emulated domestically in India now, but perhaps
with a greater degree of realism in terms of expected returns. If such infrastructure equity funds
succeed, they can also operate as credit enhancement vehicles bringing other equity investors to
the market in their wake.
A major development that has taken place in recent years is the significant reduction in
inflation on a sustained basis, both internationally and in India. It was during the days of 7-10 per
cent annual inflation that equity investors expected 20-25 per cent returns on risk capital,
particularly international investors. With inflationary expectations having come down to 3-5 per
cent levels, there should be a corresponding reduction in both costs of debt and equity. This
should also make formerly unviable projects viable, and hence amenable to commercial
investment. The consequent reduction in user charges necessary for viability would also come
down, leading to greater acceptability.
There also needs to be greater learning from the many different financing techniques
employed in developed countries, which effectively amount to private financing of public
infrastructure or of private-public partnerships. Two patent examples come to mind. In the
United States, municipal bonds, having been made tax free by the Federal Government enable
local governments to tap the large U.S. capital market to finance local urban and other
infrastructure. Because of the tax free status recognising the public good element in urban
infrastructure, they could raise finances at lower cost, thus keeping user charges at affordable
levels or municipal taxes at acceptable rates. The institution of municipal bonds provides
internalised incentives for local authorities to be fiscally prudent: defaults on municipal bond
servicing causes great hardship. The Pfandbrief system in Germany is another effective example
of private financing of public infrastructure. In their case, it is large mortgage banks that pool
local authority debt into "pfandbriefs", which is effective credit enhancement of entities that may
not otherwise be creditworthy. Pfandbriefs have succeeded in keeping up their credit quality for
more than a hundred years, through hyper inflation and two world wars. There is a complex
system of government guarantees that underlies this system. In India too, and in other developing
countries, thought needs to be given to how such innovative systems can be derived to generate
greater private financing of infrastructure.
In sum, there continue to be great opportunities for devising viable financing systems for
the funding of infrastructure in both the public and private sectors. Much greater information is
27available on different techniques; now technology makes possible financing systems not earlier
available; and cross border flows can again be rekindled. The fall in inflation and interest rates
should also make hitherto unviable projects financially viable.
Management in the Public Sector
Even if all constraints are removed for private sector investments, there will continue to
be a very significant presence of the public sector in infrastructure, both in existing entities as
well as in new investments.  Most roads, except for toll roads, will necessarily remain in the
public sector; as will sewerage systems; public lighting, and other similar components of urban
infrastructure. Water supply systems, particularly distribution systems are natural monopolies,
and will always have large public good elements embedded in them. Water generation,
purification, treatment, etc. can indeed be privatised but the rest of the system will either remain
in public sector hands or be heavily regulated. Similarly, in the railways, it is difficult to privatise
the common carrier, i.e. the track, whereas operation of trains, maintenance, etc. can potentially
be privatised, though the international experience of the private sector operating the railways is,
at best, mixed. In other areas, such as ports and airports, whereas activities such as operation of
terminals, traffic handling, and airline operation and shipping, are typically in the private sector,
port or airport ownership as landlords is typically in the public sector. Thus, public investment in
infrastructure will remain essential indefinitely, as will be a good part of its operation.
This must be understood and appreciated better. A much greater focus, than is the case at
present, must be placed on public sector management. The public sector that continues to exist in
infrastructure must be commercially oriented and must have the best of management skills, since
infrastructure systems are typically large systems. There is a great need for instilling excellence
in public management systems. Capabilities need to be built up to bring in modern management
systems. The best managers in the system must be attracted to such activities. As happens in
many systems, the public sector and governmental management systems in India have become
ossified with excessive rigidities and careerism built in. Entry into these systems is essentially at
the basic entry level, with little or no mobility of personnel at higher levels. There is little
infusion of new blood at higher levels, except at the Board level and excessive in-breeding and
inward looking attitudes have become the norm. What is needed is a system of induction of
outside expertise at all levels in an organised framework. Labour mobility is hampered by the
rigidities in the social security system where pensions and other similar benefits are not portable.
Great change has taken place around the world, and in India, in management systems.
Public sector management, be it in  public sector enterprises, central, state or municipal
governments, needs to be modernised to take on the new challenges. Public sector systems are
typically large systems and, therefore, intrinsically more challenging. Young people of high
calibre need to be attracted to these activities in much the same way as the best and most
dynamic corporations attract the best talent to their portals.
In the current system in India, which now has a mix of public and private companies in
the same sector, great inequalities in compensation have crept in between people performing
similar functions. This issue needs to be tackled head on and an acceptable methodology found
to address it.
28A major issue in public sector management is the tenure of chief executives. In the Indian
Railways, for example, the chief executive, the Chairman of the Railway Board seldom has a
tenure greater than one year. With such a tenure, he can scarcely be expected to have even a
medium term vision, let alone a long term one of bringing any change into the system. Even if he
does, he certainly would have no chance of implementing it. Experience in India has been that in
cases where there has been stability of leadership enterprises have performed relatively well. The
system of promotion by seniority is not conducive to commercial operation.
There is great need, therefore, for new thinking on public sector management. Whereas
privatization must be pursued with vigour, it is equally important to instill pride and excellence
in public sector management.
Public Private Partnerships
Given that most infrastructure sectors exhibit some public good characteristics,
investment can be maximized through public private partnerships. If the achievable return to an
infrastructure activity through the levy of user charges is, say, 70 per cent of market returns, a
public subsidy of 30 per cent would elicit market based private investment, and the enterprise
can then run on commercial basis. One example of such an activity has already been given in the
case of toll roads.  Another example could be that of urban water supply where some water has
to be given free for the less well off through public standposts; another could be for
unremunerative railway lines that are deemed necessary for other objectives. Such partnerships
are, however, not easy to do in a democratic parliamentary framework : inevitable questions arise
on award of concessions and contracts. Hence, a great deal of work needs to be done to devise
methodologies for the development of public private partnerships: this also requires excellence in
public sector management.
None of this is possible unless infrastructure is productive: it must either improve
productivity so that the gains result in higher tax revenues, or directly through the collection of
user charges.
*
 I am grateful to Mr.Y.S.P Thorat, Dr. Michael Patra, Ms. Jaya Mohanty and Dr. A.Prasad of the RBI for their
assistance. I have also received useful inputs from the Infrastructure Development Finance
*
 MTNL - Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited - the government owned telephone company operating in New
Delhi and Mumbai
*
 Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited - the hitherto government owned international log distance monopoly operator.
Table 1:Macro Economic Indicators - Annual Growth
(Per cent)
Item 1992-93 to 1994-95 to 1997-98 to
1993-94 1996-97 2002-03*
Gross Domestic Product
GDP 5.5  7.5  5.3
GVA of Agriculture & Allied Activities 5.0  4.6  1.0
29GVA of Industry 4.6  9.6  4.8
GVA  of Manufacturing 6.3 12.2  4.2
GVA of Services 6.5  8.3  8.0
Gross Domestic Capital Formation
GDCF/ GDP 23.3 25.8 23.9
GCF/ GDP 14.1 16.1 15.8
Private Sector
Household Sector  GCF/ GDP  8.1  7.9  9.7
Private Corporate  Sector GCF/ GDP  6.0  8.2  6.1
Public Sector GCF/ GDP  8.4  7.8  6.6
Gross Domestic Savings
GDS/ GDP  22.2 24.4 23.1
Private Sector
 GDS/ GDP 21.0 22.6 24.1
Household Sector GDS/ GDP 18.0 18.3 20.2
Private Corporate Sector GDS/ GDP  3.1  4.3  3.9
Public Sector GDS/ GDP  1.1  1.8 -1.1
Public Finances
Central Tax/ GDP 9.4  9.3  8.7
Interest Payments/GDP 4.2  4.3  4.6
Combined Revenue Deficit/GDP 3.8  3.5  6.1
Combined Govt Exp/GDP 27.1 25.9 26.9
Interest payments/GDP  4.9  5.1  5.6
* Figures relating to investment and saving are averages over 1997-98 to 2001-02.
Note: GDCF, GCF, GDS, tax and interest payments are calculated as per cent of GDP at
current market prices; tax and interest payments pertain to the Central Government.
Source: Central Statistical Organisation and Reserve Bank of India.
GDP  - Gross Domestic Product
GVA  - Gross Value Added
GDCF - Gross Domestic Capital Formation
GCF – Gross Capital Formation
GDS – Gross Domestic Savings
Table 2: Projected Investment in Infrastructure & Actual Performance
(Per Cent of GDP)
Year Elec., Gas & Railways Other Storage Com- In-
Water Supply transport munications frastructure
 P A P A P A P A P A P A
1995-96 2.9 2.0 0.7 0.5 1.2 1.8 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 5.5 5.0
1996-97 3.0 2.2 0.7 0.4 1.4 1.7 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.6 5.8 4.9
1997-98 3.1 2.1 0.7 0.4 1.6 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.6 6.1 4.2
1998-99 3.1 2.2 0.7 0.3 1.8 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.6 6.4 4.3
1999-00 3.2 1.9 0.7 0.3 2.0 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.7 6.7 4.2
2000-01 3.3 1.8 0.8 0.3 2.1 1.4 0.0 0.1 0.8 1.0 7.0 4.6
2001-02 3.4 1.7 0.8 0.3 2.3 0.9 0.0 0.1 0.8 0.8 7.2 3.8
P: Projection by the Expert Group; A: Actual Performance.
Source: India Infrastructure Report, Ministry of Finance and Central Statistical Organisation.
Table 3: Projected Investment in Infrastructure & Actual Performance: Public Sector
(Per Cent of GDP)
30Year Elec., Gas Railways Other Storage Com- In-
Water Supply transport munications frastructure
P A P A P A P A P A P A
1995-96 2.8 1.8 0.7 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.7 4.4 3.3
1996-97 2.8 1.7 0.6 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 4.4 3.0
1997-98 2.8 1.7 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.6 4.4 2.9
1998-99 2.8 1.7 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.6 4.4 2.9
1999-00 2.8 1.6 0.6 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.5 0.7 4.5 2.8
P: Projection by the Expert Group; A: Actual Performance.
Source: India Infrastructure Report, Ministry of Finance and Central Statistical Organisation.
Table 4: Projected Investment in Infrastructure & Actual Performance: Private Sector
(Per Cent of GDP)
Year Elec., Gas Railways Other Storage Com- In-
Water Supply transport munications frastructure
P A P A P A P A P A P A
1995-96 0.1 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.9 1.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 1.1 1.7
1996-97 0.2 0.4 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.4 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 1.4 1.9
1997-98 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.0 1.2 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 1.7 1.3
1998-99 0.3 0.5 0.1 0.0 1.4 0.9 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 2.0 1.4
1999-00 0.4 0.3 0.1 0.0 1.5 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.0 2.2 1.4
P: Projection by the Expert Group; A: Actual Performance.
Source: India Infrastructure Report, Ministry of Finance and Central Statistical Organisation.
Table 5: Telecommunications: Subscriber Base
(In millions)
Basic Cellular VPT PCO
Mobile
1988 3.8
1989 4.2
1990 4.6
1991 5.1
1992 5.8
1993 6.8
1994 8.0
1995 9.8
1996 12.0
1997 14.5 0.34
1998 17.8 0.88
1999 21.6 1.20 0.341 0.52
2000 26.5 1.88 0.375 0.65
2001 32.4 3.60 0.409 0.86
2002 39.0 6.40 0.468 1.07
2003 41.0 12.60 0.507 1.37
(Mar 2003) (Mar 2003) (Dec 2002) (Dec 2002)
VPT - Village Public Telephones
PCO – Public Call Offices (Public Telephones)
Source: Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
31Table 6: Port Traffic
Year Traffic Throughout Growth (Per cent)
(Million Tonnes)
1992-93 167  9.0
1993-94 179  7.6
1994-95 197 10.0
1995-96 215  9.2
1996-97 227  5.5
1997-98 254 12.0
1998-99 252 -1.1
1999-00 272  8.0
2000-01 281 3.4
2001-02 288  2.4
2002-03 313 8.9
Source: Infrastructure Review, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation.
Table 7: Capacity Addition in the Power Sector--Plan Target vs Achievement
Eighth Five Year Plan (1992-1997) (MW)
Target Achievement
Central State Private Total Central State Private Total
Hydro 3,260 5,860 162 9,282 1,465 795 168 2,428
Thermal 8,498 9,010 2,646 20,156 6,252 6,040 1,262 13,555
Nuclear 1,100 - - 1,100 440 - - 440
Total 12,858 14,870 2,810 30,538 8,157 6,835 1,430 16,423
Ninth Five Year Plan (1997-2002) (MW)
Target Achievement
Central State Private Total Central State Private Total
Hydro 3,455 5,815 550 9,820 540 3,912 86 4,538
Thermal 7,574 4,933 17,038 29,545 3,084 5,538 4,975 13,597
Nuclear 880 - - 880 880 - - 880
Total 11,909 10,748 17,588 40,245 4,504 9,450 5,061 19,015
Projected Capacity Addition during the Tenth Five Year (2002-2007) (MW)
Central Sector State Sector Private Sector Total
Hydro 8,742 4,481 1,170 14,393
Thermal 12,790 6,676 5,951 25,417
Nuclear 1,300 - - 1,300
Total 22,832 11,157 7,121 41,110
Table 8: Recovery of Cost of Power Supply
Average Average Recovery
Year Cost Per Unit Tariff Per Unit of Cost
(Paise) (Paise) (Per cent)
1992-93 128 105 82
1993-94 149 117 78
1994-95 163 128 78
1995-96 180 139 77
1996-97 216 165 77
321997-98 240 180 75
1998-99 263 187 71
1999-00 305 207 68
2000-01 327 226 69
2001-02 350 240 69
Source: Economic Survey 2002-03
Table 9: Cost of Power Supply, Power Tariff and Wholesale Price Index (Base: 1993-94=100)
Year Index of Growth of Index of Growth Average Average
Average Average Average Rate of WPI WPI
Cost per Unit Cost per Unit Tariff per Unit Tariff Inflation
(Per cent) (Per cent) Rate
(Per cent)
1992-93 86 - 92
1993-94 100 16.3 100 10.7 100 8.4
1994-95 110 9.6 110 9.7 113 12.5
1995-96 121 9.9 119 8.6 122 8.1
1996-97 145 20.0 142 18.9 127 4.6
1997-98 161 11.2 155 9.1 133 4.4
1998-99 177 9.8 160 3.6 141 5.9
1999-00 205 16.0 177 10.8 145 3.3
2000-01 220 7.3 194 9.3 156 7.2
2001-02 235 6.9 206 6.0 161 3.6
Source: Table 8 and Office of the Economic Adviser, Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Table 10: Physical Performance of the Power Sector
Generation Thermal Capacity Demand-
Year (Billion Kwh) PLF Addition Supply Gap
(Per cent) (MW) (MW)@
1992-93 301 57.1 3537 25442 (8.3)
1993-94 323 61.0 4538 23758 (7.3)
1994-95 351 60.0 4598 24979 (7.1)
1995-96 380 63.0 2123 35676 (9.2)
1996-97 394 64.4 1624 47590 (11.5)
1997-98 420 64.7 3226 34175 (8.1)
1998-99 448 64.6 4242 26349 (5.9)
1999-00 480 67.3 4507 29836 (6.2)
2000-01 499 67.7 3775 39816 (7.8)
2001-02 515 69.9 3115 39276 (7.5)
@: Figures in bracket are demand-supply gap as a per cent of demand.
Source: Economic Survey and Annual Report, Ministry of Power, Various Issues.
33