1
PROSPECTS FOR SAVING AND GROWTH
Y.V. Reddy
At the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to the organisers for giving
me this opportunity to be with you.  Though I belong to Andhra Pradesh, I had
known Mr. Doshi personally since we interacted professionally.  In fact, a few days
before his unfortunate trip to Davos in January 1994, we were together for a couple
of days in Hyderabad in a Retreat for Secretaries to Government of India and Chief
Secretaries of States.  Mr. Doshi displayed in his participation in the deliberations, a
deep understanding of developmental issues, especially in the area of industry, and
a very friendly, and warm temperament.  It is that memory, apart from the
persuasive skills of the respected Principal who made me accept this invitation.
I owe an apology to the organisers and many of you for changing the
schedule from 9th to 16th December. Though I had agreed to send the script of my
address for 9th, I was advised by the organisers to have the pleasure of meeting
you all. I am thankful to them for the courtesy shown to me.
Since we know that Mr. Doshi devoted a large part of his life to the issues of
development, we decided that it would be appropriate to speak on Prospects for
Saving and Growth-naturally in our own economy, on the eve of the Ninth Five Year
Plan.
I would like to start with an account of the performance of our economy in
terms of saving and growth in the Plan era and more particularly in the post-reform
period.  We would also see how our performance compares with some other
developing countries.  We could then move on to a detailed assessment of the
prospects for household, corporate and public sector saving which together
constitute domestic saving, typically financing over ninety per cent of our
investment. An assessment of foreign saving is also necessary, both for completing
the picture about investment and for its significances to our growth.  This should
help us in identifying critical issues in determining growth scenarios.  In particular, I
would like to flag what may be termed as "new realities" that should be noted by
policy-makers in planning for an appropriate level as well as composition of saving
                                               
1
  Lalit Doshi Memorial Foundation Lecture (organised by  Department of Economics, St. Xavier's College, under the St.
Xavier s College Series) delivered by Dr. Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, on December 16, 1996 at Mumbai.and linking them with growth-scenarios.  I hope to conclude by mentioning, what I
consider as the most critical factor that would make or mar our optimistic
projections.
Let me, at the outset, note that there are methodological problems in
estimating savings, especially in respect of households and corporates.  Public
sector saving is essentially based on government accounts and balance sheets of
public enterprises but we need to also include local governments' financial positions.
While the methodological issues are being looked into by an official committee
under the Chairmanship of Professor Raja Chehlliah,  I would make some use of the
data that we have inured to focus on the logic of assessing prospects for saving and
growth.
Saving Performance
What has been our performance in terms of saving?
First, gross domestic saving as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product
(GDP) at current market prices doubled from 10.3 per cent in the First Plan to 20.6
per cent in the Seventh Plan.  This helped the gross domestic investment rate to
rise from 10.7 per cent to 23.1 per cent between the First and the Seventh Plan.  In
the Eighth Plan, the saving rate is 22.3 per cent during the first three years with
24.4. per cent in 1994-95.
Second, though there has been a long-run rising trend, the saving rate
witnessed a large year-to-year fluctuation.  During the 1950s, the saving rate varied
between the peak of 13.9 per cent to a low of 8.2 per cent, the range of variation
was 15.3 per cent and 12.2 per cent during the 1960s, 23.2 per cent and 15.4 per
cent during 1970s and 22.2 per cent and 18.2 per cent during the 1980s. During the
first half of the 1990s, the degree of variation declined somewhat.  The peak saving
rate of 24.4 per cent in 1994-95 was more than 3 percentage points higher than the
low of 21.2 per cent in 1992-93.
Third, the household saving has been the mainstay of our domestic saving
performance.  As a percentage of GDP, household saving grew from 8.4 per cent in
1960-61 to 19.8 percent in 1990-91 and the average for Eighth Plan so far is 17.70
per cent.  Household saving contributed 66 per cent of total gross saving in 1960-
61, which increased to 84 per cent in 1990-91 but declined to 79 per cent in the
Eighth Plan so far.Fourth, saving in the financial assets showed an impressive growth from 2.8
per cent of GDP in 1960-61 to 11.1 per cent in 1994-95, which increased its share in
the total household saving from 33.5 per cent to 58.9 per cent during this period.
Fifth, the share of private corporate sector in total saving, which fluctuated
widely during the 1960s and 1970s, showed smart recovery in the 1990s :  its share
declined from 13.4 per cent in 1960-61 to 7.9 per cent in 1980-81, but recovered to
11.8 per cent in 1990-91, and moved impressively up to 15.6 per cent in 1994-95. In
terms of percentage to GDP, private corporate saving which remained almost
stagnant at 1.7 per cent between 1960-61 and 1980-81, increased by over on
percentage point to 2.8 per cent in 1990-91 and by a further percentage point to
reach 3.8 [per cent by 1994-95.
Sixth, perhaps the most disquieting aspect of the saving behaviour in the
Indian economy is the trend erosion of public sector saving over the years.  Public
sector saving rate which averaged 2.7 per cent in 1960s, 3.7 per cent in 1970s and
3.0 per cent in 1980s, declined sharply to1.3 per cent in the first half of 1990s.  The
deterioration in the public sector saving performance partly stemmed from the
emergence of negative saving of the Government administration since 1984-85 and
the increasing magnitudes of dis-saving since then.  The negative saving of the
Government administration which amounted to 1.43 per cent of GDP during 1985-
86 to 1989-90 increased to 2.6 per cent in the first half of 1990s.
Seventh, the non-departmental and departmental public enterprises,
however, showed some improvement in their saving performance, with a saving rate
of about 4 per cent of GDP during the first half of 1990s.
Eighth, foreign saving has played a relatively minor role in financing domestic
investment in India.  In fact, except for late fifties and sixties, during most of the
period, foreign saving accounted for less than ten per cent of our investment.
Foreign saving as a percentage of GDP averaged 1.5 per cent during the Sixth Plan
and 2.5 per cent during the Seventh Plan.  It declined to 1.0 per cent in the first four
years of the Eighth Plan and this is far less than the target of 1.6 per cent envisaged
in the Plan.  In the eighth Plan, there is a distinct shift from debt flows to non-debt
flows and from short-term maturity debt to longer maturity debt.  The proportion of
private capital flow increased as compared to official flows.  The access of private
sector to foreign saving has also increased.
There has been a lively debate on the effect of reform measures undertaken
recently, on the domestic saving.  The data available for the three years of the post-reform period would not give a firm basis for reaching any definitive conclusions on
this issue.  For, the limited number of observations is limited and the period exhibits
perverse effects of the initial shock introduced by policy regime shift.  Nonetheless,
one could draw some important features of our saving-investment performance in
the post-reform era i.e. from 1992-93.
First, the average gross saving rate of 22.3 per cent during 1992-93 to 1994-
95 does not seem to be promising against the backdrop of the average saving rate
of 23.2 per cent during 1990-91 and 1991-92 and 20.6 per cent during the Seventh
Plan.  Excluding 1994-95, when the saving rate shot up to the historical peak of
24.4. per cent, the average saving rate would drop to a little over 21 per cent in the
post-reform period.
Secondly, for quite sometime, the household saving rate has been hovering
in the range of 17 to 20 per cent, with the peak rate occurring at 19.8 per cent in
1990-91.  In the post-reform period, and starting with 199-93, the average saving
rate seems to be plateauing off around 18 to 19 per cent.
Thirdly, financially saving of the household sector during the period 1992-93
to 1994-95 averaged 10.1 per cent of GDP compared to 9.4 per cent during 1990-91
and 1991-92 and 7.6 per cent during the Seventh Plan. Therefore, much of what
could be expected as improvement in household saving rate, would have to come in
the form of financial assets, and the specific policy initiatives to promote saving in
these assets.
Fourthly, the saving rate of the private corporate sector averaged 3.4 per cent
during 1992-93 to 1994-95, which is about 70 per cent higher than the ratio of 2 per
cent during the Seventh Plan.
Fifthly, the negative saving of the government administrative department
increased from 1.43 per cent in the Seventh Plan to 2.7 per cent during the period
1992-93 to 1994-95.  This, of course, is a reflection of the rising magnitude of
revenue deficit in the general government budget, which was 3.3 per cent of GDP
for center alone during this period.  However, the saving of public enterprises sector
showed a distinct improvement, accounting for 3.95 per cent in the post-reform era
compared to 3.78 per cent and 2.43 per cent in the Seventh and Sixth Plans,
respectively.
Sixthly, the aggregate investment rate in 1960s was 15.6 per cent, and in
1970s it was 19.1 per cent.  It was in the 1980s that this rate went up to an average
of 22 per cent, and as a result, the GDP growth rate also edged up to the range of5.5 to 6.0 per cent.  The eighth Plan envisaged an aggregate investment rate of
about 23.2. per cent, and in the first three years our performance in fractionally
higher than planned.  Our rate of growth is close to what we planned so far- around
5.5 per cent.  The incremental capital output ratio is virtually stagnant at a little over
four, in the Sixth, S3venth and Eighth Plans. 
Briefly stated, our rate of growth is determined by investment, given a
somewhat constant Incremental Capital-Output Ratio (ICOR); and prospects for
growth will improve only if the domestic saving rate, which is a predominant portion
of the investment rate, is raised and efficiency improved.
Some Comparisons
It would be useful to attempt a comparison of our saving and investment
performance with some of the fast growing Asian Economies.  I will list some for
enabling one to obtain policy insights.
(a) The domestic saving rate in the Indian economy is far below as
compared with that of the East Asian economies such as Indonesia, Malaysia,
Thailand, Singapore, China and Korea.
The newly industrialized economies and most of the countries in South-East
Asia exhibit domestic saving rates of over one-third of GDP, among the highest in
the world.  While the average saving rate in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and
Korea was between 35-38 per cent during 1991-95, that of China and Singapore
ranged between 40-48 per cent.  An exception has been the Philippines where the
saving rate fell from 24 per cent in 1995 for several reasons including the political
turmoil in the 1980s and a series of natural disasters.
(b) High domestic saving rates, which have recently been supplemented
by large inflows of external capital are major factors in the economic success of
many of the Asian economies.  However, despite the recent increase in external
capital inflows, domestic saving continues to finance about 90 per cent of
investment.
(c) A notable feature of the high saving performance of the East Asian
economies is the high rate of saving by the government sector in these economies.
For instance, in  Malaysia, government saving showed a drastic improvement from
1.4 per cent of GDP in 1985 to 5.7 per cent of 1993 and constituted around 16 per
cent of gross domestic saving rate in the economy.(d) In contrast to the South-East Asian economies, our South Asian
neighbors have very low domestic saving rate, ranging between 8.0-15.0 per cent of
GDP in 1995.  In contrast, investment in these countries ranged between 15.5-26.3
per cent, reflecting their heavy dependence on external assistance to meet their
investment needs.
(e) The achievement of high rates of growth in South-East Asian
economies is mainly explained by the faster rate of capital accumulation.  The
incremental capital output ratios, implied from the Gross Domestic Investment and
real GDP growth rates in respect of Indonesia (5.17), Thailand (5.04), Singapore
(5.07) and Korea (5.44) during 1991-95, were higher than that in India.  China with
an average ICOR of about 3.6 during the period 1991-95, however showed higher
rate of productivity gains than some of the East Asian economies ad India.
Nevertheless, on the productivity front, the achievement of the Indian economy in
the recent period is comparable with the East Asian economies and other
developing countries.  This reflects the idea that the constraints to growth of the
Indian economy stems mainly from the slow rate of increase in capital stock.  The
constraint would be greatly eased if there is a simultaneous improvement in
productivity.
Household Saving
There are a number of factors that influence the household saving.  It would
be useful to recall each of the factors and their relevance to our conditions on
judgmental basis and to focus on those factors that are amenable to policy
measures.
First, the growth in income is an important factor in determining the saving
rate.  This appears to be equally true in India, particularly on the basis of trends in
the recent past.
Secondly, income distribution has an impact on the saving rate.
Redistribution policy may temporarily dampen the saving rate.  But the secondary or
dynamic effects of such redistribution on efficiency could be different, though this
may not be easily amendable to quantifications.  There could, therefore, be a
conflict between policies to bring about immediate improvements in saving and
policies towards redistribution.  Further, it is often argued that globalisation results in
consumerism which in turn reduces saving rate.  This impressionistic observation is,
however, not supported by empirical evidence.Thirdly, macro-economic stability in general and inflation in particular is
known to have an impact on saving.  There are controversies as to the exact nature
of the relationship between the two.  However, the rate of inflation beyond a point or
volatility in prices does have a negative impact on saving.
Fourthly, the efficiency of financial intermediation has a strong relationship
with the saving rate.  In particular, financial saving is promoted by ensuring an
adequate return relative to other physical and other forms of s saving.  It is
necessary to ensure that savers perceive that there is not erosion in the real value
of their saving:  this will to an extent be taken care of if the interest rate regime is not
artificially repressed.  Some studies have shown that in India there is a positive
relationship between interest rate and financial saving.  There are, however, some
who argue that interest rate has no impact on saving; more important there are a
few who argues that a large increase in interest rate might even adversely affect
saving, since a target income can be obtained with a lower level of saving.
Empirical evidence is not clear on the direction of the impact, but in our case a
reasonable return on saving seems to enhance the financial saving.
Fifthly, it is also argued in some quarters that rapid improvement in
government saving dampens the household saving.  Empirical evidence in general
and available findings in India do not indicate such an inverse relationship.
Sixthly, it is noticed that higher the proportion of working population to the
total population, greater is the saving rate.  On this count we must be aiming for
larger employment opportunities which are likely to enhance the saving rate.
Seventhly, there are strong social influences such as the role of extended
family and the societal values placed on the saving rate in terms of inter-
generational obligations.  In this regard we continue to have a strong bias in favour
of saving.
Eighthly, availability of insurance and tax benefits are also known to have a
positive effect on saving.  Studies have shown that tax benefits have contributed
substantially to the increase in financial saving.
Finally, a factor generally contributing to higher saving rate relates to what
may be termed as contractual saving, mainly PF and other contributions.  There is
substantial scope for increasing contractual savings in our country.  This could be
an important instrument for improving long term financial saving.  Such savings,
being of long-term tenor, are critical to finance our infrastructural needs now.In brief, therefore, it is clear that the level of saving rate and the improvement
in saving rate depend on a number of socio-economic  and other related matters.  In
the short and medium term, however, it is the policy related aspect that determines
household saving.  Assuming a continued output growth of  6-7 per cent, and an
inflation rate of about 6 per cent, coupled with improvements in the financial
intermediation, it is reasonable to expect the household saving rate to improve
further.  However, supplementary initiatives in terms of policy instruments providing
for tax incentives and improvements in contractual saving may be required to
ensure that the household saving rates is around 19 to 20 per cent.
Private Corporate Saving
The growth of private corporate saving is determined as much by macro-
environment as by micro-conditions at the firm-level.  There are a few factors
relevant to us in making an assessment of prospects.
First, the growth of corporate sector as a whole, which in our case has been
accelerating in the post-reform period.
Second, the growth of corporate income which had seen large increases for a
while was followed by some deceleration.  However, competitive pressures, apart
from infrastructural bottlenecks, could result in thinner margins for corporate, unless
compensated by efficiency.
Third, the tax treatment has a strong influence on incentives to plough back
profits.  In fact, improvements in corporate saving in the recent past, could be
attributed at least in part, to a more favorable tax regime.
Finally, macro-economic stability and policy-stance especially in regard to
interest rates and exchange rates would influence a corporate's decision to invest
and to plough back profits.  In terms of prospects a favorable macro-economic
environment should help corporate saving to increase substantially from the
average rate of 3.4 per cent in the Eighth Plan so far - which is itself a great
improvement over the Seventh Plan average of 2 per cent.  Hence the corporate
saving could be in the range of 4.0 to 4.5 per cent of GDP in the next Plan period.
Public Saving
Public sector saving will have an important bearing on the total saving
performance of the country, and the success in this regard would depend on strong
fiscal management.  The contribution of public sector saving has to be analysed atthe center, state and local government levels and in terms of government sector and
public enterprise sector.
In regard to government administration, the tax-GDP ratio of the centre had
come down an average of 11.2 per cent in late eighties to 10.2 per cent during the
last five years.  This is partly explicable by the fact that the adjustment process
required substantial reduction in customs duty.  Since much progress has already
been made in this area, it should be possible to expect an upward movement in this
ratio.  Coupled with efforts to extend the tax base and inculcating basic compliance
culture, it should be possible to target a ratio that was achieved in late eighties at
11.2 per cent.  With a healthy growth in GDP, it should be possible to achieve a
higher ratio of 11.5 per cent.  However, in regard to state governments, their tax-
GDP ratio has been 5.7 per cent and considering the inelastic nature of their
resource base it may be unrealistic to expect any substantial improvement in this
ratio and at best 6 per cent could be hoped for.
The critical part of the fiscal management relates to expenditure.  In the
Central Government, the non-discretionary expenditures, particularly interest
payments, account for the single largest item.  More important, the debt already
incurred is in the overhang and interest rates have already been set on these debts.
Hence, the scope for reduction in expenditure on this account is limited and is
governed by the incremental cost of additional borrowings.  The cost of such fresh
borrowings would critically depend on inflation, particularly the inflationary
expectations as well as the extent of fiscal deficit.  Similarly, the wage bill in the
government is essentially a committed expenditure except at the increment.  The
direct and indirect subsidies would appear to be a major area of discretionary
expenditure. However, there has been a substantial under-funding of maintenance
in the past, necessitating adequate provisions in future to avoid erosion of the value
of the capital assets both at the central and state levels.
As regards state governments, it will be difficult to envisage substantial
reduction in expenditure if adequate emphasis has to be given on education and
health.  In fact, most of the expenditure on these heads are in terms of wages and
hence in the nature of non-discretionary expenditure.  The cost recovery, particularly
in the area of water will be critical to finances of the state.  Overall, however, the
functioning of the state governments is closely linked to the delivery of services and
improvement in efficiency is more important than reduction in expenditure.  Indeed,since the state governments provide most of the public goods, including law and
order, it would be in appropriate to suggest reductions in this expenditure.
In respect of public enterprises, their contribution during the ninth Plan may
be enhanced if efficiency improves and market orientation is assured.  At the same
time, dividends from the equities held by the Government in the central public
enterprises would be reduced to the extent privatization has occurred.  Incidentally,
there may be a need to have a higher dividend than in the past to maintain their
attractiveness in the capital market.
As regards, state public enterprises, the critical factors relate to user fee or
cost recovery, particularly in regard to Electricity Boards and Transport
Undertakings which together have about two-third of the investment and
employment instate public enterprises.  Unless there is a dramatic change, their
contribution to saving would continue to be negative.
To assess the prospect, it would be necessary to know that the public sector
saving assumed for the Eighth Plan was 2 per cent of GDP while the realization so
far is 1.3 per cent.  Hence it is reasonable to assume that the public sector saving
would be in the range of 2-2.4 per cent.
Foreign Saving
The level of foreign saving will depend as much on our own policy
environment as on the global developments.  In assessing the prospects, three
factors are important.
First, the current account deficit should be such that it can be financed by
normal capital flows.  Since the share of foreign trade is relatively small, we should
be cautious in setting the level of the sustainable current account-GDP ratio.
Second, the flow of foreign saving would be enhanced if the economic
fundamentals are regarded as good.  Since domestic saving forms part of such
fundamentals it being at a comfortable level would be of help.  Foreign saving thus
would not be a substitute but a supplement.
Third, the overall creditability and sustainability of macroeconomic policies
matter a great deal for a sustained flow of foreign saving.  The policy and regulatory
environment needed for attracting large foreign saving should also take into account
the time needed to prepare the local institutions and industry to compete and
collaborate. No doubt, this is a transitional phenomenon, which may affect the early
part of the Ninth Plan.It may, therefore, be realistic to assume foreign saving in the range of 2.0 to
2.4 per cent of GDP as against the Eighth Plan target of 1.6 per cent (and actual
being far less due to adjustment programme).
Scenarios
From the analysis, it is very clear that, under the most optimistic scenario the
saving would be 20 per cent in respect of households; 4.5 per cent in regard to
corporate sector; 2.4 per cent in respect of public sector and 2.4 per cent in respect
of foreign saving. This would give a saving rate of 29.3 per cent. Assuming that
ICOR would be four, we could aim for a growth of 7.3 per cent. However, under not
so optimistic scenario, the growth rate would be lower. Assuming the ICOR to be 4
per cent, a 6.5 per cent growth would be possible even if the overall investment rate
is 26 per cent. This is the minimum that one needs to aim at. As Dr. Rangarajan,
Governor, Reserve Bank of India has mentioned in Calcutta, "Over the medium term
to maintain the growth rate of 6.5 per cent or even better, we need to address two
major constraints. One is with respect to saving and the other with respect to
infrastructure facilities. Given the need to contain the current account deficit at
around 2 per cent of GDP, a high growth rate can be sustained only if the domestic
saving rate goes up. Among the components of saving, the one that would
particularly need attention will be public sector saving."
New Realities
In making any assessment of saving and growth, it is necessary to recognise
the general reform ambience in which the economy is placed.
First, there are constraints on the freedom of action in the context of the
globalisation of Indian economy.
Secondly, reform implies larger role for the government in social sector and
perhaps infrastructure, and in both, the role of the states would be larger than that of
the Centre. These should be reflected in investment needs and expenditure
projections.
Thirdly, more than direct investment in public sector, the role of policy
preconditions and procedures for achieving faster growth with stabilisation needs to
be recognised.
Fourthly, the importance of price stability in the context of globalisation and
possible adverse implications for inflationary expectation and the interest ratesshould be appreciated. Price stability is critical not only as an 'anti-poverty measure'
but also for maintaining a competitive level of real exchange rate in the economy,
since our trade-partners are moving towards low inflation targets. It is also
necessary for sustaining the desired rate of growth.
Fifthly, the analysts of our economy would look at both the quantitative and
qualitative dimensions of fiscal reform. Reducing fiscal deficit by constraining capital
expenditures could harm the growth process, particularly in the transition towards
effective private sector participation. Also, reducing fiscal deficit by constraining
provision of public goods, especially education and health, would be similarly
counter-productive. In effect, hard choices have to be made between subsidy for
power and primary education as also between subsidy for water and primary health.
When we speak of growth scenarios, there is a justifiable concern for poverty
issues. Here, we may recall what Professor Suresh Tendulkar has recently said: "In
the Indian context, however, competitive populism practiced by all political parties
would end up providing short-term palliatives against poverty at the cost of the long-
term cure i.e., rapid growth, because the mostly non-poor, politically vocal and
influential organised sector workers have been successfully evading the pains of
stabilisation and structural adjustment. Obviously, a slow-down in the rate of
economic growth is the inevitable consequence, with adverse impact on the long-
term cure for poverty." Perhaps Professor Tendulkar is suggesting that policy
makers have to tackle what has been described as "the tyranny of ten per cent," i.e.
of the proportion of work force in the organised sector.
The Critical Issue
The prospects are bright if we can ensure sound macro-economic policies
coupled with effective institutional as well as regulatory measures operating at the
micro-level. There is also need to ensure quick responses to global developments
as well as market realities within the country.
In the Ninth Plan period, the rewards of sound macro-economic management
appear to be high. More important, the penalty for inappropriate or delayed policy
responses and ineffective instruments could be severe.