Urban Co-operative Banks: Agenda for Future Reforms*
It is very gratifying to note that Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce
and Industry (FICCI) as Apex representative body of Indian Trade & Commerce has
evinced keen interest in Urban Co-operative Banks ( UCBs), the purveyors of credit to
As urban co-operative banking sector is under focussed scrutiny of media and
observers of co-operative credit movement, I feel it is very apt that organisers chose
'Reforms in urban banking sector' as theme for today’s discussion. Before
approaching the subject proper, I would make a brief mention about the size, role and
Urban Banking Sector - 
The High Power Committee on Urban Co-operative Banks constituted by RBI
in 1999, has aptly commented that the co-operative credit endeavour was the first ever
attempt at micro credit dispensation in India. UCBs were essentially designed to tap
the resources of lower and middle income groups and extend credit support to their
economic activities.  Over a century old urban co-operative credit movement today
has a network of 2,084 urban co-operative banks with 7,368 branch outlets spread
over the country. Their total deposit sources aggregated Rs.71 ,701 crore and
outstanding loans accounted for  Rs.45,856 
The deposits of UCBs are equivalent to 9% of commercial banks' deposits.
Few states such as Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil 
account for over 80% of urban co-operative banks presence and 75% of their total
deposits. Predominant concentration of Urban Co-operative Banks in these 5 states is
mainly on account of emergence of strong co-operative leadership. UCBs normally
confine their area of operation to localised geographical regions. But over a period of
time, their area have crossed the frontiers of districts and in some cases the states of
their registration. The client profile of UCBs predominantly comprises priority sector
segments viz. small business establishments, SSIs, retail traders, professional, self-
employed persons and SRTOs, etc. who would not normally find it easy to have
access to large commercial banks. There are weak banks in the total population of
urban cooperative banks. But most of the banks may be rated as satisfactory to very
good banks.  Many of them are highly computerized. We should, therefore, judge
each entity on its performance.  Wrong doings by a few should not make us berate the
entire lot as it would hurt the honest managements who should in fact get
encouragement.
As regards their regulation, which has become a subject of intense debate in
the recent past, UCBs essentially being co-operative societies are governed by their
respective state governments out of the powers derived from respective State Co-
operative Societies Acts. Being banking institutions, they are also governed by the
Reserve Bank of India by virtue of powers conferred on it under the Banking
Regulations Act. As UCBs are member driven institutions, every member has to have
stake in the capital and irrespective of a member’s shareholding , each member has
only one vote.
The urban co-operative banking sector being an integral part of financial
system, RBI has brought in a series of reforms in it.  The recent Madhava Rao
Agenda of Reforms
Nadu
crore as at the end of June 2000.
A  Bird’s eye-view
reach of the urban cooperative banks in the map of Indian Banking System.
small and medium enterprises.Committee which is also called High Power Committee (HPC) on UCBs, has dwelt
extensively on certain regulatory issues related to UCBs' licensing policy, future set
up of weak and unlicensed banks, application of capital adequacy norms, resolution of
conflicts arising of dual control over UCBs etc.  RBI has accepted these
recommendations and implemented them.  However, issues related to dual control
necessitate legislative changes to State and Central Acts and there is hardly any
progress in this area.  In the backdrop of the present scenario, future agenda for
reforms in urban co-operative banking sector, as I perceive is four 
(a) 
 
(c) 
(d) 
Unlike the other segments of co-operative credit sector, UCBs today undertake
multifarious banking activities. Some of them have also been permitted to undertake
forex and merchant banking activities. There is a view emerging in the recent past that
UCBs being members of payment system, beneficiaries of deposit insurance scheme
and enjoying unlimited access to public deposits, it is an imperative necessity to apply
exactly the same regulatory rigours to UCBs as applicable to commercial banks.
While broadly agreeing with this argument, I feel that their institutional frame work,
size of operations and balance sheet, nature of business, product mix and above all the
skill levels, may have necessarily to be kept in view while deciding on the supervisory
and regulatory rigours. Therefore, without undermining the regulatory efficacy, there
is a need to fine-tune the prudential prescription.  The view expressed by my
distinguished colleague Deputy Governor Dr. Y.V. Reddy, in the context of
implementation of Financial Standards and Codes in India is equally applicable in
UCBs’ adoption of prudential standards. He said “although the notion of a code of
good practices is intuitively appealing, the temptation to prescribe universally valid
model codes which do not allow for differences in institutional development,
legislative frame work and more broadly, different stages of development must be
avoided”. Notwithstanding cultural differences between UCBs and commercial banks,
RBI has been gradually attempting at regulatory convergence for both. To begin with,
in 1993, RBI introduced Income Recognition and Asset Classification Norms to
UCBs.  In 1995, the prudential exposure norms to single/group borrowers were also
made applicable to them.  However, introduction of capital adequacy norms was
delayed due to statutory limitations on UCBs' right to raise unlimited capital but these
are also now going to be implemented from 31 March 2002, in a phased time-frame.
The future agenda for reforms as I 
 Today, main risk exposure of UCBs is not the credit risk but interest
rates risk. Most of the UCBs interest rates particularly on deposits are
out of sync with the rest of the banking sector. In this backdrop,
observance of Risk and Asset Liability Management guidelines
assumes importance. RBI has recently constituted a Working Group to
evolve guidelines keeping in view the specifics of UCB sector. The
Group is expected to submit its recommendations very soon.
 As market discipline is an important supervisory tool in approach to
new Capital adequacy framework, prescription of disclosure standards
for , perhaps is of imminent necessity. UCBs, therefore, should
be able to disclose their level of owned funds, unimpaired networth,
CRAR, Gross/Net NPAs, operating results, ROA, compliance with
2
UCBs
(ii)
(i)
visualise should focus on these following issues:
(a) Aligning UCB sector with rest of financial system
Resolving the issues emanating from dual control
Improving governance
Deciding the future of weak entities (b)
Aligning urban co-operative banking sector with the rest of the financial system
fold :reserve requirements, per employee productivity, etc. with balance
 Strengthening the audit systems is of paramount concern for  RBI as it
is an important tool in its supervisory kit.  It had taken a lead in
appointing an expert panel in 1995 for reforming the audit systems in
vogue in UCBs. The panel suggested professionalisation of audit,
mandatory concurrent audit for larger banks, redesigning audit format,
etc. RBI had accepted these recommendations and advised States to
initiate measures. Unfortunately, many state governments have yet to
 Yet another important issue which is engaging the attention of the
observers of co-operative banking movement is defining the frontiers
of UCBs.  Whether they should have unlimited access to inter-bank
markets?  Whether their reach should be nation-wide?  Whether they
In view of special role assigned to , in the recent Monetary and
Credit Policy Statement made by the Governor, it was decisively stated
that they should not have unrestricted access to inter-bank markets as
resorting to this avenue is essentially to meet their temporary liquidity
mismatches rather than raising short term resources to fund their long
term assets. By their sheer volatile nature, neither capital market nor its
instruments can be investment avenues for UCBs who are
representatives of small depositors. As regards their area of operation,
we have very recently taken a decision to allow only such UCBs with
Rs. 50 
 Whether UCBs membership of Payment System should be
unconditional?  This issue has come into focus in the wake of
Madhavpura Mercantile Co-operative Bank crisis.  In case of
commercial banks, in the event of payment crisis, CRR balances would
be available besides SLR securities, whereas in respect of UCBs, their
SLR investments need not entirely be in Government Securities and in
case of non-scheduled banks maintenance of CRR balances with RBI
is not mandatory.  Whether a system can be evolved whereby fire-
walls can be erected to avert payment crisis of co-operative banks by
way of lodging certain Government Securities, mandatory cash
deposits with clearing houses for meeting payment obligations in the
event of liquidity crisis? Whether such an act would further pre-empt
the resources of UCBs? Or these deposits would constitute part of SLR
Well these are issues which require informed deliberations for crystalising into
The sheer number of weak banks which is well over 200 is a cause of concern. In
a large number of cases licenses have already been cancelled and the banks have
closed down.  This process is taken up very cautiously so as not to create panic in the
society.  Closure is decided only after all other options are exhausted. Level of capital,
history of losses and size of NPAs are some of the factors which weigh with us in
taking a decision on closure. Possibilities of rehabilitation are invariably explored
before such a decision is arrived at.  Rehabilitation may involve the following
(a) Registrars should direct the co-operative courts for speedy recovery process
3
and execution of decrees
strategies :
(b) Future set-up of weak Banks
policy inputs.
enquiry. funds?  This issue needs extensive 
(v)
crore owned funds to go beyond their state of jurisdiction.
UCBs
can have access to capital market?
(iv)
respond positively despite five years of persistent persuasion by RBI.
(iii)
sheet figures. This issue is engaging the attention of RBI. 
(c) 
(d) Merger with a well-managed bank. However, a forcible merger should be
It is extremely important that there is a mechanism to ensure that an effective
system of internal governance is in place.  Chief Executive should be a person of
clean image and display a professional attitude. Board should consist of
knowledgeable persons who are aware of their responsibilities as board members.
There should be a board level committee which should focus attention on the findings
of audit and inspection teams and ensure compliance thereof.  The Committee should
also ensure compliance with various regulatory instructions issued by RBI as also
state governments.  It is ultimately the board’s responsibility that all prudential norms
Duality of command over UCBs perhaps has become an intense issue of
debate in co-operative circles. Academics, co-operators and bankers made vociferous
Rao Committee that dual control over UCBs must 
as that was instrumental in stifling their growth. Narsimham Committee II had also
unequivocally recommended for ending dual control regime over UCBs. Is dual
command the causative factor for the ills of UCBs? Is it an impediment in effective
supervision over them? Having been closely associated with the regulation of the
cooperative banking structure for quite some time, I am indeed inclined to agree with
the Madhava Rao Committee recommendation on this issue.  The Committee aptly
observed “…. that dual control regime, per se, need not cause any hindrance to the
growth of urban banking movement.  It is the absence of clear cut demarcation
between functions of RBI and that of State Govt. that adversely affects the smooth
functioning of UCBs.”  Most of the issues emanating out of dual control regime are
due to overlapping jurisdiction of RBI and state governments.  It, therefore,
recommended demarcation of banking related functions and such of those which
warrant only state governments’ action. RBI has concurred with its recommendations
and is impressing upon the state governments for bringing in legislative amendments.
Duality in command does come in the way of effective supervision.  In the case of
commercial banks RBI has the wherewithal under the Banking Regulation Act for
dealing with crucial aspects of functioning of commercial banks.  In the case of co-
operative banks, however, many areas which directly relate to supervision over them
have been kept beyond RBI’s authority.  Situation gets somewhat messy as may be
 RBI has no authority to deal with delinquent management in a cooperative
 Making investments out of surplus resources being clearly a banking function
should be entirely within the decision making powers of cooperative banks
subject to RBI guidelines but this needs approval of the Registrar.
 Similarly, writing off an unrealisable debt also requires permission of the
Registrar.
 There was an instance where on request made by RBI, the Registrar
superseded the board of a cooperative bank.  But subsequently the State
Government in its wisdom annulled Registrar’s orders and restored the Board.
It is strange but true.
4
(iv)
(iii)
(ii)
bank. This requires intervention of the Registrar of Cooperative Societies.
(i)
indicated by a few illustrations as follows:
end Madhava representations to the 
(d) Dual control dilemma
of governance are observed by the bank.
(c) Improving Governance
strictly avoided.
Avenues should be explored for the bank getting additional capital
Unviable branches should either be relocated or closed down (b) It is open for a bank whose licence has been cancelled to appeal to the
government. RBI is required to appear before the Appellate Authority. Often
RBI is advised to review its decision. It is a matter of satisfaction, however,
that RBI's decisions have been supported by government and in no case RBI’s
decision has been struck down.  Nevertheless the exercise has to be gone
through.
(a) One approach is by bringing in the subject of cooperation under concurrent list
so as to enable the Union Government to legislate in matters pertaining to
cooperative banking.  But such a move involves amendments to the
 Another way of approaching this issue is the states enacting progressive
legislations thereby making Registrars confine their acts only to register and
accept byelaws. As a result, dual command over UCBs will be ceased
automatically.  Though a lead has been taken by the Governments of 
 and Karnataka in this direction, most of the states are yet to follow.
Even in Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka, it does not make any change in the
status of existing banks unless they are registered under the new legislation.
Unless a uniform initiative is taken by all the states, perhaps it would be
(c) Yet another approach is to demarcate the regulatory roles of state governments
and RBI in the State Acts, as suggested by the Madhava Rao Committee. I
rather tend to agree with this approach since it is best way to resolve dual
control dilemma. There have also been suggestions that the Banking
Regulation Act, which is a central statute may be amended in a manner that it
enables RBI to assume certain powers which are at present available to state
governments under the respective State Cooperative Societies Act, However,
Here I would like to make it clear that while RBI is in favour of ending the dual
control, as far as Madhavpura episode is concerned, the immediate cause of its
problems did not arise out of the present regime of dual control.  What happened in
the case of Madhavpura was ostensibly due to lack of observance of prudential
As an institution cooperative banks have made a place for themselves and by
and large doing very well in their respective areas.  Their strongest point is their easy
accessibility by their clients.  However, their number being very large puts a severe
strain on the supervising and monitoring system.  Most of the banks keep a low
profile and go about their job without much fan-fare.  RBI inspects them usually once
in two years unless there are any supervisory concerns in which case the frequency of
inspection is increased. One may, however, question this and say that 
would not have happened had our inspections been annual like in the case of
commercial banks.  My humble submission is that Madhavpura episode did not have
much to do with frequency of inspections for, it is always possible for 
to indulge in objectionable practices during the gap between two inspections.  It needs
to be appreciated that it is not possible for RBI to oversee day-to-day transactions of
RBI has recently mooted the idea of supervision of UCBs to be entrusted to a
separate apex authority. The reason is that these banks number more than 2,000 and
5
banks.
managements
Madhavpura
Case for a Separate Supervisory Structure?
banking practices.
the legal advice given to RBI does not support such a move.
difficult to remove irritants of dual control regime.
Pradesh
Andhra
(b)
Constitution.
I feel there are 3 ways of resolving dual control issues:
(v)are spread across the country. The sheer magnitude of their number and geographical
spread as also the level of professionalism generally available in these banks perhaps
needs a separate agency for focussed supervision. The issues that would need to be
addressed in this connection are the status, structure and management of this body, its
relationship with RBI, its resources, staffing and location. No final view has yet been
Friends, Urban Cooperative Banking sector has come to occupy a formidable
place in the Indian Financial System.  However, sustenance of its growth is attendant
to professionalisation of its management, inculcating good corporate governance,
technology absorption and scrupulous adherence to regulatory framework. I hope the
sector will learn from its past experiences and adjust to new realities since banking is
I thank the FICCI and all of you for having given me this opportunity to share my
Shri 
6
organised by FICCI on May 10, 2001 at Delhi Urban Co-operative Banks: Future Reforms 
Capoor Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Seminar on Jagdish * Keynote Address by 
views on this important segment of our financial system.
risky business.
Concluding Remarks
taken as the proposal has to go through a consultative process.