Implementation of Financial Standards and Codes:
*
In this paper it is proposed to describe the Indian perspective and approach in regard to
Forum(FSF). The Indian efforts in this direction also seek  to
association with global efforts in evolving and promoting financial standards and codes,
Advisory Groups in the course of preparation of Reports. Section VI indicates the current
status, while Section VII touches on the plans 
I. India’s  Stand
1.1 India is fully supportive of the need
monetary and financial policies and improvements in dissemination of relevant data. 
establishment of a high-powered Standing Committee
Standards and Codes (Standing Committee) 
India has been voicing, in 
process taking duly into account the
institutional and legal structure and stage of development in different countries.
a voluntary approach, fair, equitable, and continuous 
spearheading the implementation and assessment of codes and standards.  India advocates
 regarding the manner of international financial institutions fora, some of its concerns
the  international international enterprise. At the same time, 
 to this underscores India’s commitment
 on International Financial
The
monetary system, including increased transparency in formulation and implementation of
accepted standards in areas relevant to the maintenance of stability in the international
 to observe certain minimum universally
Reports. Section VIII brings out some highlights of Indian experience so far.
for  following up on the submission of
implementation. Section V provides an account of the work processes followed by
been  put in place to guide the process of institutional arrangements that have 
Section III describes the Indian approach to the implementation.  Section IV mentions the
initiatives for implementation of standards and codes. While Section II narrates India’s
. Section I explains India’s stand on global The paper is schematized as follows
implementation of standards and codes among member countries.
complement and support the ongoing initiatives of the     G-20 aimed at encouraging
Financial Stability 
the implementation of international financial standards and codes advocated by the
Indian Perspective and Approach1.2 the
 codes which do not allow for
1.3 voluntary adoption
 rather than a big bang. In fact, the process may, in any case, be a
.
does 
 In other words, the transformation of a best practice goal should not result
in premature 
support.
1.4 The extent pace and sequencing should ideally be left to the country autho
only 
evalution of data as between the authorities and the private sector.
1.5
vis-à-vis national authorities.  In any case
2
also have a potential to become overly intrusive 
overwhelming and also highly demanding of manpower and financial resources. They
It must also be added that the plethora of codes, standards and principles could be
because the goal of transparency could best be served by a balanced and symmetric
Article IV reports should also be left to the judgment of individual governments. This is
  The release of with  the countries’ specific permission. individual countries 
ROSCs (Reports on Observance of Standards and Codes) in respect of may furnish the 
In keeping with this spirit, it has been held that the International Monetary Fund  (Fund)
rities.
conditionality for countries that approach the Fund for balance of payments
performers’.
not degenerate into categorizing countries as ‘performers’ and ‘non-
It is also important that the manner in which these international standards are monitored
voluntary participation and country ownership a near universal acceptance based on 
Principles of Banking Supervision offers an interesting example of how a standard attains
medium term one and hence one should not look for instant compliance. Basle Core
and gradualism
Moreover, it stands to reason that the accent should be on 
development and its ground realities.
environments without adequate consideration being given to a country’s stage of
recommend the practices of major industrial countries to developing country
different stages of development must be avoided.  Sometimes there is a tendency to
differences in institutional development, legislative framework and, more broadly,
temptation to prescribe universally valid model
Although the notion of a code of good practices is intuitively appealing, prioritisation of Codes for considering implementation is inevitable
1.6.
1. 7. Some of the other serious concerns that deserve attention in this regard pertain to
reckoned in individual cases. 
sense the “one size fits all” approach may have to 
1.8
while ensuring financial stability, greater 
codes are not equally relevant to all segments of private sector and further they do 
 reflecting concerns of both public policy and market
participants.
1.9 It is gratifying to note that  there is a better appreciation of India’s
stand 
Standards  and Codes
3
International 
II . India’s Association with the Global Efforts in Fostering
in the international fora as compared with the past.
currently
to evolve over a period
tend
All  standards and evolving and prioritizing of core standards is of utmost necessity. 
 in consultation with the private sector
standards is to catalyze orderly capital flows, Since the primary motive for having 
be  eschewed.
from the standpoint of the relative openness of the economy’s capital account and in this
The relative importance of financial standards in crisis prevention must also be adjudged
overemphasising financial standards could detract attention from other policy priorities.
Since financial crises can have multiple causes,
the specificity and the source of financial difficulties that might have to be adequately
country-ownership.
explored.  Besides being cost-effective, such an approach would also greatly facilitate
regard, the potential for self-assessment on the part of individual countries needs to be
priorities for implementing them would have to vary from country to coutry.  In this
Work on standards and codes is evolving in relevant interational fora and
and financial stability.
research on the relationship between implementation of standards and macroeconomic
of each country. There is a strong case for undertaking or fostering more intensified
 in respect some 2.1 
taking active part in 
 of developing and promoting implementation of financial standards and codes.
Although India is not a , it was one of
Task Force on the
The Task Force was set up to explore key issues relating to standards/codes/core
2.2   The Reserve Bank is also represented at  the 
Implementation
2.3  worked closely with  the 
Banking Supervision(BCBS).
 
2.4 From its inception, India was also 
 constituted by the Committee on Payment and
Commissions (IOSCO).
4
Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the International Organisation of Securities
Force on Securities Settlement Systems
represented on the Group on Joint Task
authorities seeking to strengthen their current supervisory regime.
 aimed at guiding supervisory for Effective Banking Supervision’ Core Principles
authorities of a few non-G-10 countries including India, the BCBS drew up the 25 ‘
the supervisory In 1997, in consultation with 
Basel Committee on Reserve Bank of India officials 
with a cross section of relevant market participants.
strategy to foster implementation of standards and, for this purpose, engages in a dialogue
official incentives could best reinforce one another within the framework of the overall
Force Report. The Group has been ascertaining how various elements of market and
 of Standards instituted by the FSF following submission of the Task
Follow Up Group on Incentives for
standards relevant for a sound financial system.
principles and consider the strategy for fostering the implementation of international
 and to participate in the Joint Committee Group meeting. Implementation of Standards
the countries specially requested to help the Forum in 
member  of the Financial Stability Forum(FSF)
@
task
the  work of several key international fora devoted to the been 
India has been closely associated with various standard setting bodies and has2.5 As a member of the Core Principles Liaison Group (CPLG) constituted by the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision(BCBS)
2.6 Working Group on 
set up by the CPLG.
consultative paper issued by the Basel Committee. 
2.7 that has sought participation in the joint IMF-
 Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP).  As part of the Reports
, 
2.8 rmore, the professional expertise in the Reserve Bank of India has been
 to IMF/World Bank in their FSAP exercises in other countries.
3.1
 of the standards and codes, and on the
  
country, while not ignoring their 
part of the process of
 in the5
 Thus, they are viewed as an integral financial stability.
relevance to domestic as well as international
institutional development of part of process need to consider them as 
on the efficiency-enhancing elements based 
codes  is The Indian approach to implementation of financial standards and 
III. Indian Approach
made available
Furthe
Settlement system and Corporate governance.
Transparency, Banking Supervision, Securities Market Regulation, Payment and
., Monetary and Financial Policy viz standards and codes has already been assessed
compliance in respect of five on Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs), India’s 
World Bank
India is one of the countries 
international financial agencies.
representatives of supervisory agencies from several non G-10 countries as well as from
The meeting was attended by 26
hosted the meeting of the Group in Delhi to discuss the salient features of the second
 Recently, during February 6 to 9, 2001, the Reserve Bank of India
Capital(WGC) The Reserve Bank is also represented in the 
attending the meetings of the Group and actively contributing to the discussions.
, the Reserve Bank has been
the final recommendations.
for public consultation.  Based on the comments received, the Task Force will develop
The CPSS and IOSCO have since released the report of the Task force in January 2001, most appropriate to the country’s needs. The emphasis is on
 to promote adoption by the , 
 at the
that . The process consists of the initial recognition ,
 of issues pertaining to the
 in India, vis-à-vis
economies,  particularly to understand India’s position and  to   on
some of the more important codes and standards. The process seeks to 
comprehensive course of possible actions 
selected standards and codes.
3.3 The next stage involves putting efforts for the 
outreach programs like seminars and workshops. The objective is to 
viewpoints and, hence, 
6
Standing Committee
IV. Institutional Arrangements
favorable public disposition towards the necessity of change.
Such a participative and consultative approach is advocated to secure a convergence of
private sector organizations to enhance  the sense of involvement and to build confidence.
from  relevant public and by invitation of and consideration of inputs and feedback 
and  to garner a higher level of general awareness on the subject.  This is to be followed
and stimulation of interest among public- authorities and other stake holders in the debate
obtain  involvement
the  reports mentioned and by means of expert opinion on the subject in the form of 
 of widest possible dissemination
 through publication of Reports on each of the public domain approach is put in the 
for achieving the best practices. This
map  out a
prioritize actions
 industrialized and  emerging the  levels of adherence comparison of 
given the prevailing legal and institutional practices. It is also common to seek
feasibility of compliance and the earmarking of the possible time frame for transition
present status of applicability, relevance and the existing degree of compliance, the
in-depth assessment by independent experts followed by 
is on  record of standards and codes in relevant areas. This identification and taking 
it follows a systematic process
3.2   The Indian approach to the implementation of standards and codes is noteworthy in
instance of a central authority.
rather than prescribing compliance regulating bodies and market participants 
self relevant official agencies creating awareness
economic reform4.1
December 1999, 
Standards and Codes’
4.2 The Committee has been enjoined with the 
the context of the international developments and discussions as part of the efforts to
consider 
 on
the above to all concerned organizations in public or private sectors.
4.3 Committee by itself will not take a view
will identify action
arrangements to track the progress in
implementation.
7
Advisory Groups
measure.  The Committee will no doubt make 
whole process, while leaving it to the concerned institutions to consider appropriate
India(SEBI) etc., thus acting as a catalyst in the India, Securities and Exchange Board of 
 viz., Government, Reserve Bank of mention of these to the concerned authorities
make a points that may arise out of the views expressed and also 
Advisory Groups constituted by it in different subject areas.  The Standing Committee
the Codes and it will disseminate views expressed on the subject mainly on the basis of 
 on the Standards and The Standing 
reaching out its reports status and progress in regard to the codes and practices; and 
desirable  in the light of evolving international practices, periodically reviewing the and 
 and practices as necessary plotting a road map for aligning India’s standards
standards and codes to Indian financial system.  The Committee has also been asked to
create a sound international Financial Architecture, considering all aspects of these
 in monitoring developments in global standards and codes being evolved especially
responsibility of identifying and
Committee could co-opt members depending on the subject under consideration.
India and Secretary, Economic Affairs, Government of India as Alternate Chairman. The
 under the Chairmanship of Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of
constituted a ‘Standing Committee on International Financial
system, the Reserve Bank of India in consultation with Government of India, in
implementation of appropriate changes in respect to various segments of the  financial
to  guide  the overall process of relevant areas of the financial system in India and 
codes in In order to facilitate positioning of international financial standards and 4.4
system are entrusted with the task of studying,
4.5
Financial Action Task 
into by the Standing Committee.
4.6 Advisory Groups eminent
 
bodies.
choice 
left to the Chairmen of Advisory
  The members are  in relevant subject areas. The
Bank of India, SEBI, etc., as special invitees.
 by 8
on the understanding of extant position relating to the relevant standards and codes and
  Such officials help in providing inputs
including officials from Government, Reserve Groups have, however, the option of 
generally non-official experts Groups.
 of these  Advisory Groups, was completely members
of the Standing Committee, taking into account the experience and expertise, the 
 While the Chairmen of these Advisory Groups were identified and nominated by
or other regulatory experts not generally holding official positions in Government
are  chaired It may need to be mentioned that all 
Force(FATF) on money laundering is not being presently looked
twelfth area namely ‘Market Integrity’ associated with the forty recommendations of the
Transparency, Insurance Regulation, Bankruptcy Laws and Corporate Governance. The
Banking Supervision, Securities Market Regulation, Accounting and Auditing, Fiscal
Monetary and Financial Policies, Data Dissemination, Payments and Settlement System,
 attention and assessment by Advisory Groups. These are, Transparency in immediate
identified  ten core subjects for financial system, the Standing Committee has so far 
international financial institutions and other standard setting bodies pertaining to the
taken together) areas for which standards and codes that have been prescribed by
subjects(actually eleven as Accounting and Auditing are Out of the set of twelve 
standards, and to chalk out a course of action for achieving the best practices.
India’s position and  prioritize actions on some of the more important codes and
India, vis-à-vis in industrialized and also emerging economies particularly to understand
the prevailing legal and institutional practices, comparing the levels of adherence in
the feasibility of compliance and the time frame over which this could be achieved given
,  reviewing applicability and relevance and compliance of relevant standards and codes
 in detail, the present status of
 pertaining to the financial in ten core subject areas Financial Standards and Codes 
 constituted by the Standing Committee on International The Advisory Groups4.7
option of 
 and  many did exercise the option. The Advisory Groups may also
  in certain subject areas to evolve a consistent
approach. In finalizing its Report, the Standing Committee would, however, attempt to
public, as soon as they are submitted to the Standing Committee.
4.8
report to Government/RBI. 
provided by the Reserve Bank of India.
V. 
5.1
 of work. Thus ,  some Groups
India. 
5.2 
9
already  constituted some study groups and hence it was argued on occasions that the
In some of the subject areas, concerned governmental or regulatory bodies had
in  parts submitted sequentially. turned out to be in favour of final reports, sometimes 
ile an Advisory Group gave an interim report, the general preference Wh
background material collected and analysed by professionals in Reserve Bank of
basic technical papers among each of the members and most depended heavily on the
mounted special studies or technical papers,   some divided the work of preparing
decided to design its own methods and processes
Advisory Group In view of the varied nature of the subject areas, each 
Work Processes
The Secretariat support to the Standing Committee is
Group and  is required to review its own status after the completion of one year and
also  periodically reviews the progress of Advisory The Standing Committee 
The Reports of the Advisory Groups are made consolidate these overlapping areas. 
jointly  deliberate on  overlapping issues
amongst themselves
having  interactions/consultations interest, the Advisory Groups have the 
In order to facilitate exchange of information and expertise on matters of mutual
of achieving best practices in the areas covered by them.
and  the necessity unbiased recommendations with regard to the feasibility of compliance 
assessment of relevance as well as state of compliance with standards and codes and give
Groups outside the sphere of official influence and allows them to make critical
also the steps under way towards improvements. This arrangement keeps the Advisoryclarify that the work of the Advisory Groups 
official and non-official initiatives, and that the work is not meant to be
  It also became necessary to encourage the Advisory Groups 
 such parallel, though partial,
so 
5.3 perception of
 i.e. regulator or government body.  The non-official status 
favour of making
transparency. There have also been occasions when the Group 
5.5
particular, the Report of the Advisory Group on Monetary and Financial Policies took
on10
Accounting Standards Board of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI).
comparative structure of Accounting Standards in India and standards issued by the
Standards(IAS), the US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles(US GAAP) and the
Accounting and Auditing has conducted in depth studies of the International Accounting
bankruptcy in the US and selected countries in Europe and Asia. The Advisory Group on
Group on Bankruptcy Laws has examined the existing Acts on insolvency and
countries namely, the UK, USA, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. The Advisory
practices  in five comprehensive account of extant institutional arrangements and 
 In reviewing international experience in various subject areas. been studying and 
In the preparation of their respective Reports, most Advisory Groups have also
functioning of official bodies in the context of standards.
tended to comment 
while the mandate was, say on, recommendations on substantive policy-issues, 
5.4    In some of the Advisory Groups there has been a view in 
own independent assessment of  degree of compliance.
the Advisory Groups has enabled them to consider the official stance but make its
of concerned authorities
compliance with international standards differed from the official stance of
Some Advisory Groups had to reckon with the fact that their 
eminent as to be involved in several of the initiatives.
several cases since one or more members of relevant Advisory Group happened to be
appropriate inputs to such efforts whenever sought.  The process was made easier in
 efforts and provide account in their deliberations
to take intrusive.
is without prejudice to any other
Advisory Groups are  duplicating such efforts.  In such cases, it became necessary to5.6 In the cou having the
 
National Stock 
Corporation(HDFC) and ICICI Bank. The Advisory Group on Bankruptcy Laws also
includes practicing professionals and eminent academics, including the former Director
of National Law School as the Chairman of the Group.
5.7 The Advisory Groups were 
5.8
VI.  Current Status
6.1
already been received by the Standing 
have11
 : Transparency of Monetary & Committee
As of now, the reports/part of reports in respect of the following subjects 
dissemination.
  wider public placed on the Reserve Bank of India’s website for immediate
when  the Reports are received by the Standing Committee, they are As and 
reference.
narrative  to facilitate easy recommendation of the Group as a supplement to the 
international standard/code, current status in India and the corresponding
encouraged to prepare in tabular form the given
on Banking Supervision has eminent experts from the Housing Development Finance
Similarly, the Advisory Group on Securities Market Regulation and the Advisory Group
India(ICAI) and other well known market participants and practicing professionals.
Accounting and Auditing has a member from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
Exchange(NSE) and a member from academia. The Advisory Group on
Advisory Group on Payments and Settlement System has special invitees from the
participants and members from professional bodies as special invitees. For example, the
and Auditor General of India.  Advisory Groups have, in most cases, co-opted market
extensive discussions with all State Finance Secretaries and the Office of Comptroller
Life Insurance Corporation of India and the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency had
 The Advisory Group on Insurance Regulation met the officials of as well as academics.
members from professional bodies benefit of discussions with market participants,
,  the Advisory Groups have also been rse of their workwww.rbi.org.in and are 
6.2 to the first in these
presented as an  Appendix to this paper.
7.1
2000.
7.2 would consolidate the Reports of all Advisory Groups
prepare its own report containing executive summaries/highlights of all the reports,
follow up.   The Standing Committee report 
public as the Advisory Group reports.
7.3
the Standing Committee 
7.4 For each Report, 
 to the12
be also be identified and finalised in consultation with the Chairman of each Advisory
organizations, international institutions and experts, both local and international, would
 covering both public sector and private sector a mailing list
to concretise the views on recommendations.
for a day in an appropriate  institution/centre for creating awareness and this would help
organise a seminar/workshop The Advisory Group would be requested to help 
also would be widely disseminated
action points requiring attention by regulatory authorities/agencies concerned with the
and 
Standing Committee The 
accordance with the decisions of the Standing Committee meeting held on September 20,
The submission  of the Reports by Advisory Groups would be followed up in
VII.   Plans for follow up
importance for national economies in the current milieu.
be seen, the effort is to make the readers aware of what  standards and codes are and their
 As may Monetary and Financial Policies’ is 
 series of Reports on ‘Transparency in The ‘Foreword’ 
and discussion.
 for wider dissemination in the process of being published > <
(Final), Bankruptcy Laws (Interim). All Reports have been placed on the RBI website
Regulation (Final- Parts I and II), Banking Supervision (Part I), Accounting and Auditing
Financial Policies (Final), Payment and Settlement System (Parts I and II ), Insurance7.5 ttee would prepare an annual review of status and
8.1 The Indian position which 
8.2 Second, the need to 
 has .
8.3
8.4
 makes a detailed reference to the subject (vide Box 6.4 on
publications of Reserve Bank of India .
13
to this in several 
International Financial Standards and Codes).  There have also been extensive references
Budget Documents
widely read Economic Survey 2000-01 of Government of India released as part of set of
several means by which the codes and standards are disseminated. For  example, the
 in terms of a multiplier effect Fourth, the participative processes also have 
Committee and related it to the ongoing amendments to the Company Law.
recent address to the Accountants and Auditors referred to the work of the Standing
 and instant. For example, the Secretary Department of  Company Affairs in a direct
be indirect and not necessarily Third, the impact of the process could often 
also elicited broad support benchmarks
 Indian standards and codes with international assess
reasonable.
considered by a broad spectrum of experts, intellectuals and market participants as
 of  relevance of international financial standard and codes has been contextual degree
recognises the significance, scope, limits and
VIII. Highlights
submit it to the Ministry of Finance.
, and implementation of standards and codes and progress regarding compliance with
The Standing Commi
recommendations of the Advisory Group from these addressees.
Group. The Standing Committee would request specific comments/feedback on the8.5
participated
8.6 Sixth, such a process 
to recognise this
and try to arrive at a consensus.
8.7
 through
8.8 areas of overlap
Groups were observed.  Also, each Advisory Group 
,
 come up.
8.9
had concerns about the Advisory Groups findings but special efforts by
 helped assuage these concerns.
8.10 ed substantial technical and
8.11
significance to the market participants and such issues may be policy or procedural or
14
 issues since there is a preoccupation with immediate issues of operational compliance
it difficult to focus entirely on Eleventh, the Advisory Groups have found  
pooled and collated.
 located in several agencies, public and private.  These had to be professional inputs
Tenth, the work of the Advisory Groups requir
the Advisory Groups
occasions 
regulatory bodies of market participants involved with current practices have, on
Ninth, several standard setting bodies including professional associations and self-
especially when the jurisdictional issues
quite complex regulatory and standard setting bodies.  The process thus becomes 
 with several had to interact
 among the areas covered by different Advisory Eighth, many 
members of national standing.
their participation as special invitees and the efforts of advisory group which have
but could be significantly overcome independent assessment is understandable 
 to such an some concern on the part of official authorities Seventh, 
compliance with such codes and standards.  It is considered necessary 
bodies or authorities and domestic independent opinion as regards the extent of
 between official brought out the possible differing views
in the exercise in a purely honorary capacity, as a national endeavor.
contributed to the process of benchmarking, and identifying gaps  and they 
Fifth, several prominent intellectuals, professionals, and market participantssight of.
8.12 is not
the importance of
8.13 Finally, 
implementation demands significant resources and is time-consuming.  Moreover, most
15
should be toward harmony and ultimate convergence rather than mechanical compliance.
adoption of the standards has to be driven by self-interest of the country and attempts
of the follow-up activities require some legislative changes.  In the ultimate analysis,
four lessons from the exercise appear to be relevant.  The process of
disclosures.
sector’s participation in the process helped a better appreciation of 
The private matched by eagerness to be transparent on the part of private sector. 
for disclosure and transparency in public agencies Twelfth, the enthusiasm 
main focus has not been, however,  lost may even be of short term relevance. The i
What are Standards?
considered crucial.
adoption and implementation of international standards for the financial system are
domestic and international financial stability, the on-going efforts in development,
safeguarding global financial stability. In this context of achieving a sound basis for
initiatives have been directed towards preventing the recurrence of such crises and
of the international financial system in the wake of the recent financial crises. The
The international community has emphasised the need for strengthening the architecture
Bank or the Government of India or other concerned regulatory agencies.
codes  undertaken by non-official experts, and do not reflect the views of the Reserve
reports are the product of independent evaluation and assessment of standards and
We would, however, like to emphasize that the recommendations contained in these
task of promoting  a sound and stable global financial system.
this direction, expecting them  to contribute in their own significant way in the overall
place in this area in the recent years. We also highlight the  ongoing efforts in India in
enterprise, particularly, focusing on key concepts and the developments that have taken
financial standards and codes, we would like to put forth  a general overview of this
have been taken by the international community in the adoption and implementation of
practices.  In view of the  importance of  the subject, and the far reaching initiatives that
financial standards and codes and suggest means for achieving the best international
made critical assessment of India’s  status and compliance with prescribed international
experts of our country in various subject areas of the financial system. These reports have
We have great pleasure in placing in the public domain, the reports  prepared by eminent
Introduction
FOREWORD
Appendixclassified by their degree of specificity and reckoned on the basis of their sectoral or
and other domestic factors.
ii
fundamental rules that offer flexibility in implementation to suit country priorities and
distinguished by  their degree of  specificity covering (i) principles or general
comparability across jurisdictions.  For ease of implementation, standards are
areas of the financial system, thereby, allowing clear assessment methodologies for
growth. Standards also promote convergence of practices among countries in various
benefits in strengthening financial systems and helping in achieving sustained economic
The standards devised by standard setting bodies are widely accepted as promising
What is New about Standards?
development taking into account the stage of development, level of institutional capacity
standards must fit into a country's overall strategy for economic and financial sector
in itself, however, is not sufficient to ensure financial stability. The implementation of
sound financial fundamentals and sustained economic growth. The adoption of standards
distress and contagion. Standards are not ends in themselves but a means for promoting
investment and improve market integrity and, thereby, minimize the risks of financial
vulnerabilities. Standards also facilitate informed decision making in lending and
supervision, enhancing transparency, facilitating institutional development and reducing
internationally. They play an important role in strengthening financial regulation and
Standards help to promote sound financial systems domestically and financial stability
Why are Standards Important?
therefore, interdependent or sometimes functionally overlapping.
functional attributes. They cover a broad range of areas in the financial system and are,
understanding of the weaknesses that precipitated financial crises. Standards are
the financial system. Standards have developed mostly as a result of the recognition and
are generally accepted as good principles, practices and guidelines for relevant areas in
Standards set out by international financial institutions and other standard setting bodiesCompendium, which are organised under three broad headings and fifteen subject areas,
iii
accounting, auditing, payment and settlement, market integrity and market functioning)
institutional and market infrastructure (covering insolvency, corporate governance,
policy transparency, fiscal policy transparency, data dissemination and data compilation),
viz., macroeconomic policy and data transparency (covering monetary and financial
setting bodies represented on the Forum. Currently there are 69 standards cited in the
initiative of the Financial Stability Forum and is a joint product of the various standards
Standards, which serves as a common reference for various standards. This is basically an
international supervisory and regulatory bodies. The FSF has posted The Compendium of
among central banks, international financial institutions, national authorities and
has drawn together various standard-setting bodies constituted by means of cooperation
international cooperation in supervision and surveillance of financial markets. The FSF
functioning of markets and reducing systemic risk through information exchange and
with the mandate to promote international financial stability by improving the
The Financial Stability Forum (FSF) was initiated by members of G-7 in February, 1999
What are the Key Standards?
domestic economic and financial systems and preserve financial stability.
system, central bank and Government as they are key components of efforts to strengthen
operate efficiently. They are important to the regulators concerned with the financial
can serve as a means of providing some kind of benchmark for market participants to
Standards serve many purposes and are of special interest to market participants. They
For Whom are Standards Relevant?
implementation plans under different economic  circumstances.
choice of prioritization and methodological guidance, countries can have effective
required for relative objective assessment of the degree of compliance. In providing this
and (iii)specific  methodologies/guidelines which provide detailed guidance on steps
circumstances, (ii) practices that are more specific and demonstrate practical applications,Who are the International Standard Setting Bodies?
are various international organizations which  have made significant contribution to
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has developed international standards for data
and stability of payment, clearing, settlement and related arrangements.
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC), an independent private sector
Accounting Standards (IAS).
iv
body, is charged with the responsibility of developing and approving International
for Systemically Important Payments Systems' that are aimed at enhancing the efficiency
Committee on Payment and Settlement System (CPSS) has advocated ‘Core Principles
banking supervision.
Effective Banking Supervision’ which ensure best supervisory practices in the area of
Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has formulated the ‘Core Principles of
has contributed to the development of international standards for banking supervision.
dissemination and transparency practices in fiscal, monetary, and financial policies, and
raising standards of soundness and risk-awareness in financial systems.
and international financial institutions charged with fostering standards and codes. There
coordination and cooperation among regulatory bodies, international regulatory bodies
therefore, become imperative to strengthen financial systems through intensified
exposed to  potential threat  of contagion from problems in financial markets. It has,
growing degree of global interdependence and linkages, the world economy can be
International standards setting bodies had existed for a long time, but in the light of the
regulation, insurance supervision and financial conglomerate supervision).
and financial regulation and supervision (covering banking supervision, securitiesInternational Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) has established core
Standards Setting Bodies in India
deems fit. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority(IRDA) is entrusted
inter alia ,  provides legal framework for incorporation and proper
v
regulatory bodies such as other Government departments and autonomous institutions
appointment of cost auditors, investigation of complaints, coordination with other
financial health and compliance with statutory provisions, prescribing cost audit rules and
functioning of companies, surveillance over the working of corporate sector to ensure
Company Affairs, 
thereto. The Department of Company Affairs(DCA) of the Ministry of Law, Justice and
ensure orderly growth of the insurance industry and for matters therewith or incidental
with the task of protecting the interests of the policy holders, to regulate, promote and
to promote the development of, and to regulate the securities market by measures as it
India(SEBI ) is charged with the duty to protect the interests of investors in securities and
exchange and Government securities markets.  The Securities and Exchange Board in
regulation and supervision of banks and other financial institutions and money, foreign
financial sector. For example, the Reserve Bank of India(RBI) is responsible for
who have the legal authority to set and implement regulatory rules and procedures in the
In India, we have standard setting bodies which are, in practice, the national regulators,
and regulations covering financial markets and enterprises.
policies for efficient functioning of markets and encourages convergence of policies, laws
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) promotes
against offences.
integrity of markets through rigorous application of standards and effective enforcements
standards for effective surveillance of international securities transactions and promotes
supervisory practices.
standards that are fundamental to developing effective insurance regulation and
International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) is responsible for settingAdvisory Groups in India
vi
areas.
aim of sensitizing public opinion and creating  awareness for  the concerned  subject
available its reports to all concerned organizations in public and private sectors with and
periodically reviewing the progress in regard to the codes and practices and making
standards to Indian financial system. The Committee is also assigned with the task of
international financial architecture and to consider all aspects of applicability of these
being evolved by standard setting bodies as part of the effort to create a sound
been entrusted with the task of monitoring developments in global standards and codes
Financial Standards and Codes was set up on December 8, 1999. The Committee has
international financial standards in India, a Standing Committee on International
With a view to promote and assist in the task of adoption and implementation of
India’s Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes
India.
view to promoting and protecting interests of institutions, investors and depositors in
setting and maintaining standards for different segments of the financial system with a
exchanges, among others, which play a critical role in developing codes of conduct and
Primary Dealers Association of India(PDAI), clearing house associations and stock
Mutual Funds of India(AMFI), Foreign Exchange Dealers Association of India(FEDAI),
India(FIMMDA), Association of Merchant Bankers of India(AMBI), Association of
Association(IBA), Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of
Further, we have self regulatory organizations such as the Indian Banks
Secretaries(ICS) and Institute of Cost and Work Accountants of India(ICWAI).
bodies i.e., Institute of Chartered Accountants of India(ICAI), Institute of Company
like SEBI, RBI and stock exchanges and monitoring the development of professionalaccounting and auditing, banking supervision, bankruptcy, corporate governance, data
 to study present status of applicability and relevance and compliance of
relevant standards and codes,
 to review the feasibility of compliance and the time frame over which this
 to compare the levels of adherence in India, vis-à-vis in industrialized and
also emerging economies particularly to understand India’s position and
 
The present Report prepared by the Advisory Group on ‘Transparency in Monetary and
Financial Policies’ chaired by Shri M. Narasimham, Chairman, Administrative Staff
College of India  with  Shri S.S Tarapore, former Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of
India  as member was submitted to the Standing Committee in September 2000. Good
transparency practices are important for strengthening institutional governance and
increasing the efficiency of markets. By setting out clear mandates and responsibilities
and encouraging open processes for the formulation, conduct and implementation of
operational procedures, transparency also serves to increase the effectiveness, credibility
and accountability of monetary and financial policies. The Advisory Group has reviewed,
in detail, the IMF codes on ‘ Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial
’ and  recommended a set of actions duly taking into account the Indian context
vis-à-vis the best practices on the basis of a survey of experience of select countries. In
vii
Policies
About this Report
to chalk out a course of action for achieving the best practices. (iv)
prioritize actions on some of the more important codes and standards, and
(iii)
could be achieved given the prevailing legal and institutional practices,
(ii)
(i)
reference : Advisory Groups had, in general, the following terms of 
financial policies, payments and settlement system and securities market regulation. The
dissemination, fiscal transparency, insurance regulation, transparency of monetary and
official positions in government or other regulatory bodies in ten major areas -
of the financial system under the Chairmanship of eminent experts, generally not holding
,  Advisory Groups were constituted in different areas To assist the Standing Committeeparticular, explaining the overall concept and the context of transparency, the Report
makes a critical evaluation of India’s compliance with standards and codes and suggests
measures to improve transparency in the formulation and implementation of monetary
We are grateful to the Chairman and Member of the Advisory Group for the efforts they
have undertaken in preparing the Report. The Report of the Group can also be accessed
www.rbi.org.in >.
We are publishing the report with the objective of inviting comments from the widest
section of market participants and other interested observers on the issues addressed by
the Advisory Group. We shall be grateful to receive views and comments on the Report
which may be addressed to the Secretariat, Standing Committee on International
Financial Standards and Codes, 24 Floor, Central Office, Reserve Bank of India, Fort,
Mumbai- 400001. It is requested that the responses on the Report may kindly be sent as
early as possible and in any case, before end March, 2001 for suitable consideration by
the Standing Committee.
What Next ?
,  not taking any particular view on the recommendations of the Advisory
Group, the Standing Committee would prepare a summary and highlight key aspects of
the recommendations of the Report as also identify action points requiring attention by
regulatory authorities/agencies concerned so that the follow up could be undertaken. The
Standing Committee would help organize seminars and workshops to enhance awareness
and concretize views on recommendations of the Report and seek comments/feedback
from both private and public sector organizations, international institutions and  experts.
We hope to review and complete these tasks in the next few months. However, it is
proposed that an annual review of status and progress regarding compliance with and
viii
Although
th
Purpose of this Report
on the Reserve Bank web site <
and other financial policies.implementation of standards and codes will also be subsequently prepared and submitted
(Y.V Reddy)
and Codes and Codes
                                                       
 Paper presented by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Conference on
International Standards and Codes organised by IMF-World Bank at Washington DC on March 7-8, 2001.
@
of markets and reducing systemic risk through enhanced information exchange and international
cooperation in financial market supervision and surveillance. The FSF is a grouping of  officials
responsible for financial stability in key financial centers, international financial institutions, international
ix
supervisory and regulatory bodies and committees of central bank experts.
 Established by G-7 with the purpose of promoting international financial stability, improving functioning
Himanshu Joshi for his valuable assistance. Dr. Reddy is thankful to Dr. 
*
Financial Standards Financial Standards
on International on International
Standing Committee Standing Committee
Alternate-Chairman Chairman
(Ajit Kumar)
to the Ministry of Finance.