“India’s Economy in the 
I am grateful to Dr. Kapila Vatsayayan and Shri N.N. Vohra for inviting me to
deliver the Dr. C.D.Deshmukh Memorial Lecture today. This annual Lecture in memory
of one of India’s most distinguished thinkers and policy makers is a highly prestigious
occasion, and one of the highlights of the India International Centre (IIC) calendar of
events.  When I was first asked, I must confess that I was reluctant as I was not sure
whether matters which dominate my professional life these days – monetary policy and
finance – would be of interest to the occupationally diversified and enlightened
membership of the IIC.  This is, however, too important an occasion to miss. As a partial
compensation to you, I have decided not to talk about “money and finance” at all –
except in very general terms. Rather, I propose to do some loud thinking on some issues
pertaining to India’s post-independence development strategy, and new strategic choices
.*
2. A long time ago, when I first took up an economic advisory position in the
Government of India, a senior and wiser friend, who is also a brilliant economist, told me
that the opposite of whatever one thinks is right about India’s economy is also likely to be
true, and vice versa! So, his advice was that, in considering policy or strategic options,
we must always consider the opposite view and make a choice based on probabilistic
assessment of alternatives. The inspiration for the title of today’s talk is precisely this – as
we look around, it is possible to take a most optimistic view of India’s economy or
exactly the opposite, as reflected in a recent piece by a well-known and thoughtful senior
1
journalist with the title, “Quit the pretence, the economy is on the wrong track 
On the one hand, we see India’s economy clocking one of the highest rates of growth in
the world, India’s new technology entrepreneurs being celebrated as amongst the most
innovative and successful, and India’s managers occupying the highest positions in the
world of finance and business consultancies. On the other hand, India’s public and social
services are reputed to be among the worst in the world, India’s infrastructure – be it
roads or power – are full of potholes, and many of India’s largest enterprises, particularly
in the public sector, are uncompetitive and losing money. Instances on both sides – the
best and the worst of India –could be multiplied. What is the truth and where are we
heading? In answering this question, it is necessary to do a bit of dispassionate
introspection about the reasons behind our successes and failures. It is also necessary
that, while looking ahead to the future, we prepare ourselves to abandon or modify
strategies that have not worked, and move decisively in the directions which 
India’s comparative advantage in the world of today and tomorrow.
I.
3. As we reflect on the history of human civilization in the millennium that has just
ended, it is surprising to recall just how recent is the story of economic growth. As Paul
Krugman has noted in a recent book, “economic growth, at least economic growth that
raises living standards, is a modern invention. From the dawn of history to the Eighteenth
century, the world was essentially Malthusian. Improvements in technology and capital
investments were always overtaken by population growth; the number of people slowly
Dawn?”
The Post-Independence Development Record, 1950-1990
maximise
. ........”
Twentry-first Century for us at the beginning of the 
Twenty-First Century: A New Beginning or A False2
increased, but their average standards of living did not.”  Up to about the end of the
Nineteenth century, the only countries where per capita incomes were increasing on a
sustained basis for any length of time were the Western countries, particularly, England,
Germany, France and the United States. During this entire period, the then so-called
under-developed or Third World countries continued to be exporters of primary products
and importers of industrial products with stagnant, and in some cases, declining per
capita incomes. A large number of them were also colonies of the Western powers, and
the connection between these two situations- the colonial state and income stagnation –
4. The development strategies of the newly independent and developing countries,
including India, in mid-Twentieth century were framed against this background.  The
central and the leading role for breaking away from the colonial legacy and for speeding
up the process of industrialisation was assigned to the State. The need for the
Government to occupy the commanding heights and to lead from the top received further
support from the astounding success of the Soviet Union in emerging as a rival centre of
political and industrial power within a very short period. India, at that time, played a
pioneering role in giving expression to the aspirations of the newly independent Third
World countries in the economic field. Thus, in 1956, India’s Second Five Year Plan
“The pattern of development and the structure of socio-economic relations should be
so planned that they result not only in appreciable increases in national income and
employment but also in greater equality in incomes and wealth. Major decisions
regarding production, distribution, consumption and investment – and in fact all
significant socio-economic relationships – must be made by agencies informed by
5. In practice, it meant, that all allocation decisions were to be made by the
Government or its agencies. The need of raising resources for development was, of
course, considered important. However, the primary emphasis was to be on increasing the
domestic savings rate by suppressing consumption, high taxation, and appropriating
profits through ownership of commercial enterprises.  Accelerated capital accumulation
through these means was considered to be the key to development. In a celebrated
observation which guided many a planner and policy maker in developing countries,
Professor W. Arthur Lewis observed that:
“The central problem in the theory of economic development is to understand the
process by which a community which was previously saving and investing 4 to 5 per
cent of its national income or less, converts itself to an economy where voluntary
saving is running at about 12 to 15 per cent of national income and more. This is the
central problem because the central fact of economic development is rapid capital
3
.
6. In the process of capital accumulation, the role of financial system was essentially
limited, as allocation decisions were to be made by the central planning authorities and
not by the financial markets. To a large extent, financial system also had a limited role in
providing incentives for savings and capital accumulation as interest rates were
controlled, and generally “repressed”, and household savings were pre-empted through
accumulation (including knowledge and skills with capital)”
social purpose.”
outlined the goals of development strategy in the following terms:
was not missed by their leaders and intellectuals.high levels of statutory reserve and liquidity ratio. New banks and financial institutions
were set up, and old ones were taken over, in order to act primarily as deposit taking
agencies and providers of credit and finance for designated and centrally determined
purposes.
7. While the reasons for adopting a centrally directed strategy of development were
understandable against the background of the colonial rule, it, however, soon became
clear that actual results of this strategy were far below expectations. Instead of showing
high growth, high public savings and a high degree of self-reliance, India was actually
showing one of the lowest rates of growth in the developing world with rising public
deficits and periodic balance of payments crises. According to one calculation, in 30 out
of 35 years between 1956 and 1991, India had balance of payment problems of varying
intensity. Thankfully, public memories are short! However, looking back, it is hard to
believe that for as long as 40 years between 1950 and 1990, India’s growth rate averaged
less than 4 per cent per annum, and per capita income growth was less than 2 per cent per
annum. This was at a time when the developing world, including the Sub-Saharan Africa
8. In my view, however, the most striking failure was not in terms of growth, or
even in the precarious situation of the balance of payments. Although the argument is not
convincing, it could still be argued by some that the low growth outcome was due to a
number of factors beyond India’s control, such as, the border wars, severe droughts,
periodic oil shocks, and – finally – inhospitable global environment! The balance of
payments difficulties could also – with some imagination – be attributed to the global
woes of primary producers, and the struggle of a poor developing country like India to
industrialise and become self-reliant in heavy industry (which hitherto was the monopoly
of the rich industrialised countries). The most conspicuous failure, in my view, for which
there is no alibi , and the responsibility for which lies squarely and indisputably at our
doors, is the erosion in public savings and the inability of the public sector to generate
9. It will be recalled that an important assumption in the choice of post-
independence development strategy was the generation of public savings, which could be
used for higher and higher levels of investment. However, this did not happen, and the
public sector- instead of being a generator of savings for the community’s good –
became, over time, a consumer of community’s savings. This reversal in roles had
become evident by the early Seventies, and the process reached its culmination by the
early, Eighties. By then, the Government began to borrow not only to meet its own
revenue expenditure but also to finance public sector deficits and investments. During the
period 1960-1975, total public sector borrowings (including Government) averaged 4.4
per cent of GDP. These increased to 6 per cent of GDP by 1980- 81, and further to 9 per
cent by 1989-90. Thus, the public sector, which was supposed to generate resources for
the growth of the rest of the economy, gradually became a net drain on the society as a
whole.  It is interesting to note that the Central Government’s total internal public debt by
the year 1994-95 was close to Rs.5 ,00,000 crore, and nearly one-third of it was accounted
for by assets held in the public sector. The interest payments on public debt amounted to
nearly Rs.40 ,000 crore, which was financed by new net borrowings, and represented
nearly 70 per cent of the Centre’s fiscal deficit. In effect, by 1994-95, one-third of the
resources for investment or provision of public services.
and other least developed countries, showed a growth rate of 5.2 per cent per annum.interest payments was on account of the Government’s past investment in the public
sector. In the last five years since then, the Centre’s internal debt has almost doubled to
,70,000 crore in 1999-2000. This sharp increase in internal debt is partly accounted
for by the need to borrow higher and higher amounts to service the past debt.
10. A large part of the cherished “family silver” has thus been financed out of
4
borrowings, and kept polished with further borrowings by an impoverished family. In
the annals of development history, it is hard to find another example of a perfectly
sensible idea – the need for higher public investment for greater public good – leading to
exactly the opposite result,  higher public consumption with diminishing returns for
11. The State-dominated development paradigm has shifted rather sharply in recent
years. Almost all developing countries have moved towards a more market-determined
strategy of development. There were several factors which contributed to this change in
perception. First and the foremost reason for questioning the earlier strategy, as
mentioned above, was the simple fact that actual results in terms of growth of incomes or
industrial development were well below expectations. While saving rates were rising, as
per the Arthur Lewis model, so were capital-output ratios because of inefficiencies in the
allocation and use of resources. Paradoxically, a strategy which was expected to reduce
dependency on foreign aid and foreign trade, also resulted in greater dependence on aid
and emergency assistance from abroad.
12. An equally important factor contributing to the change in perceptions was the
astonishing success of Japan and the East Asian countries in accelerating their rates of
growth by relying on market - oriented pattern of industrialisation (with, of course,
varying degrees of “guidance” by the State). Japan’s per capita rate of growth of 8 per
cent per annum during 1953 – 1973 was unprecedented in the history of economic
development. No economy had ever grown at that rate before, and Japan emerged from
the ruins of war to become the world’s second largest economy.  Similar was the record
of industrialisation in East Asia particularly in countries like Hong Kong, Singapore,
Taiwan and South Korea. In the Fifties, their per capita incomes or the degree of
industrialisation was no different from those of the rest of Asia. However, within a period
of 30 years, they were able to catch up with the industrialised countries of the West.  A
final and decisive development leading to the demise of the old strategy was the collapse
of the Soviet Union and the acceptance of market-led development strategies by all
countries of Eastern Europe.
13. Beginning in 1991, when India was in the midst of an acute economic crisis, the
Government of India also introduced a number of measures to improve the working of
the economy. These measures, spread over a number of years, had two broad objectives.
One was the reorientation of the economy from a statist, centrally directed and highly
controlled economy to what is referred to in the current jargon as a ‘market-friendly
economy’. A reduction in direct controls and physical planning was expected to improve
the efficiency of the economy. It was to be made more ‘open’ to external trade and
external flows through a reduction in trade barriers and liberalisation of foreign
investment policies. A second objective of the reform measures was macro-economic
–The Shift in the Development Paradigm The 1990s II.
the public!
i.e.
Rs.9stabilisation. This was to be achieved by substantially reducing fiscal deficits and the
14. Compared with the historical trend, the impact of these policies has been positive
and significant. The growth rate of the economy during 1992-93 to 1999-2000 was close
to 6.5 per cent per annum. The balance of payments position has also substantially
improved. Despite several unfavourable external developments, including the imposition
of sanctions in 1998 and sharp rise in oil prices more recently, foreign exchange reserves
are at a record level. Exports have done well, current account deficits have been
moderate, and India’s external debt (as a percentage of GDP) and the debt servicing
burden have actually come down since the early Nineties. There is also evidence of
considerable restructuring in the corporate sector with attention being given to cost-
competitiveness and financial viability. Industrial growth increased sharply during the
period 1993 to 1996 to over 9 per cent per annum. The industrial growth rate came down
to 5.5 per cent per annum in the next two years, but increased again to 8 per cent upto the
end of 1999-2000.  The rate of inflation also came down sharply – from 10.3 per cent in
1990-91 to a modest 3.3 per cent in 1999-2000.  Fiscal deficit has also come down
somewhat - from 8.3 per cent in 1990-91 to 5.6 per cent in 1999-2000.
15. There has been considerable debate in the country about the content, the pace and
the results of the reform process. I do not propose to enter this particular debate, except to
the  first 40 years of development, there is very little
doubt that India’s economy – by any standard of measurement – is stronger and more
resilient today than was the case a decade ago. I leave you to judge whether this outcome
is due to the reform process, astute short-term economic management, 
external circumstances, or just plain old good luck! There is also little doubt that India’s
“potential” for growth combined with external and domestic financial stability is greater
today – at the beginning of the Twenty-First century than was the case 20, 50 or 100
years ago.
16. A most remarkable  feature of the so-called “New Economy” is the role of the
services sector (of which the IT or Information Technology sector is a part) in generating
growth of income and employment. It will be recalled  that the focus of attention in
conventional economics, including development economics, was on production of goods
–manufactured products and agricultural commodities. It was, of course, recognised that
the services sector (which includes transport, communication, trade, banking,
construction and public administration, etc.) was an important source of income and
employment in most economies.  However, overall, the growth of services was perceived
at best as a byproduct of developments in the primary and secondary sectors, and at worst
as a drag on the prospects for long-term economic growth. Services were believed to be
mainly non-tradable activities with slow productivity growth and low employment
potential. In developing countries, the conventional view of the growth of the services
sector was even worse.  It was seen to divert scarce resources away from production of
17. In the last few years, there has been a phenomenal change in the conventional
view of services and their role in the economy. The development of certain services is
goods, and contribute to accentuation of income inequalities.
III. India in the New Global Economy
favourable
say that compared with the record of 
government’s draft on society’s savings.now regarded as one of the preconditions of economic growth, and not as one of its
consequences. The boundary between goods and services is also disappearing, as services
of various kinds are delinked from the manufacturing process and become essential
elements of the productive structure. Many industrial products are not only manufactured
– they are also designed, marketed, advertised, distributed, leased and serviced. A
18. The change in the image and role of services has been brought about by
unprecedented and unforeseen advances in computer and communication technology in
the last two decades.  An important aspect of the “services revolution” is that geography
and levels of industrialisation are no longer the primary determinants of the location of
facilities for production of services.  As a result, the traditional role of developing
countries is also changing – from mere recipients to important providers of long-distance
19. From India’s point of view, some of the recent global developments, which
• The fastest growing segment of services is the rapid expansion of knowledge-based
services, such as, professional and technical services. India has a tremendous
advantage of the supply of such services because of a developed structure of
technological and educational institutions, and lower labour costs.
• Progress in information technology is making it increasingly possible to unbundle the
production and consumption of information-intensive service activities. These
activities – research and development, computing, inventory management, quality
control, accounting, personnel administration, secretarial, marketing, advertising,
distribution, and legal services – are performed in all economic sectors.
• Unlike most other prices, world prices of transport and communication services have
fallen dramatically. By 1960, sea transport costs were less than a third of their 1920
level, and they have continued to fall.  The cost of a telephone call fell more than ten-
fold between 1970 and 2000. Moreover, the cost of communication is also becoming
independent of distance. The most dramatic example in this area is, of course,
provided by the ‘Internet’. India’s geographical distance from several important
industrial markets (for instance, North America) is no longer an important element in
• Further, India does not necessarily have to be a low-cost producer of certain types of
goods (e.g., computers or discs) before it can become an efficient supplier of services
embodied in them (e.g., software or music). It is possible now to provide value added
services without waiting to ‘catch up’ in technology for production of sophisticated
equipment or products.
• The decline in the share of manufacturing in the output of rich countries implies a
relative decline in their demand for industrial raw materials and fuels. This means that
growth in exports of developing countries in the future will depend less on natural
resource endowments and more on efficiency in providing services and service-
intensive goods.
20. As a result of the above developments, t he sources of comparative advantage of
the cost structure of skill-based services.
provide opportunities for substantial growth, are the following:
services.
significant and rising part of the value added by manufacturers now consists of services.nations are vastly different today from what they were 50 or even 20 years ago. And,
there are very few developing countries which are as well placed as India to take
advantage of the phenomenal changes that have occurred in production technologies,
international trade, capital movement, and deployment of skilled manpower. India today
has the knowledge and the skills to produce and process a wide variety of industrial and
consumer products and services. Another important factor in India’s favour is
international capital mobility and integration of global financial markets. Domestic
savings continue to be important for development. However, scarcity of domestic capital
is no longer a binding constraint. Increased mobility of capital has ensured that global
resources would flow to countries which can show high growth and high returns. It is
possible now for India to take advantage of a virtuous circle of higher growth, higher
external capital inflows, and higher domestic incomes and savings, which in turn can lead
to further growth.
21. At the same time, it must be recognised that the “death of distance” and the
growing integration of global product, services and financial markets in recent years has
also presented new challenges for management of the national economy – not only in
India but all over the world. The trend towards integration of markets, particularly
financial markets, is by no means an unmixed blessing. Unlike the old days, a heavy price
may have to be paid by national economies for somnolence , sloth and non-conformity to
generally accepted international norms and standards of macro-economic management,
disclosure, transparency and financial accountability. If a country does not put its
financial house in order, fresh investments, trade and technology are likely to pass it by.
Faced with this situation, only a few countries, with certain special advantages and
resource endowments, may still manage to grow at an acceptable rate. Other 
which need capital and external flows to meet their trade or current account deficits, are
likely to find it increasingly difficult to meet their import requirements of essential
22. Another consequence of recent glob al trends is the greater vulnerability of
national economies to developments outside their own borders. In addition to the direct
effects (which are currently most visible in the volatile stock markets), the indirect effects
due to “contagion” can be quite serious. A crisis in any one or a group of countries, can
be transmitted to other countries – including countries which may not have any strong
economic linkages with crisis-affected countries. Thus, the Nineties have been marked by
a large number of currency crises (for example, in Mexico, Russia, Asia and Brazil);
substantial swings in exchange rates (including the exchange rate of three leading
currencies –the dollar, the Euro and the Yen); and run ups in asset prices followed by
sharp collapse (for example, in Japan and East Asia). While the crises initially occurred
23. The lessons of recent developments are clear. Advances in IT, the increasing role
of services, the integration of financial and capital markets, and the diminished role of
distance provide tremendous new opportunities for countries like India. At the same time,
like other countries, we are also likely to be subject to greater vulnerability and new risks.
Thus, at the beginning of the new century, the challenge before us is in two directions –
how to seize the new opportunities, while at the same time, protecting ourselves against
unanticipated risks?  Insularity or isolation is not the answer, as such an approach would
in one or two specific countries, their adverse effects were felt across the world.
commodities (such as, oil), raw materials and machines.
countries24. India has to move vigorously to take advantage of expanding opportunities in
trade and become a location of choice for IT and other industries and services so that
,  are substantially enhanced. It must also keep some
safety nets handy by building a diversified and efficient financial system which can aid
and protect the development process at all times – good and bad. Can these objectives be
India’s Tryst with Destiny?
25. There has been a fair amount of debate in the country on the implications of the
new directions in India’s economic policy.  As far as I can see, there is no  major
disagreement with the ends or objectives of new economic policies.  Most, though not all,
commentators seem to agree that efficiency in the use of resources and growth
performance of the economy need to be improved. There is also broad agreement that the
Government’s fiscal deficits should be reduced, that exports should be increased, and that
more should be done for improving the health and education of the poor. There is,
however, a substantial difference of views on the instruments that should be used to
achieve these objectives, and whether current policies will succeed in raising the growth
rate of the economy in the long run. Concern has also been expressed on certain political
and social implications of the new policies, particularly whether they will make the
country more amenable to external pressures and hurt the development of the country’s
domestic resources. These issues are important, and deserve to be fully considered in the
26. In considering these is sues, it is not possible to escape from the responsibility of
paying attention to the nature and character of our State apparatus, and to our previous
record. We cannot decry the widespread corruption and ‘ criminalisation of politics’ – a
phrase which has figured prominently in Parliament in recent years – on the one hand,
and ask for more discretionary powers for the State on the other.  To do so is to suffer
from a form of ‘cognitive dissonance’.  It is also important to remember that, as pointed
out in the earlier part of this talk, the results of India’s old policies in promoting growth
or reducing poverty were highly unsatisfactory, and in any case, far worse than those
registered by more open and competitive economies.  As for external pressures, there is
hardly any doubt that an aid-dependent economy with persistent balance of payments
crises (as was the case in India from 1956 to 1991) is likely to be much more vulnerable
27. In my judgement, keeping in view the actual economic and non-economic results
of the old strategy, the phenomenal changes that have taken place in the world economy,
and India’s present comparative advantage, the present direction of policies to make India
more open and more competitive is right and deserves to be accelerated.  Without a major
transformation of our economic policies and effort to align them with contemporary
realities of global trade, investment and technology, it is not feasible for India to occupy
realise its full potential for growth and development.
28. A decisive move towards more and deeper economic reforms is the first strategic
priority for the future.  However, it will be a grave mistake to misconstrue the need for
economic reforms with a call for less role for Government or public policy in widening
the high ground and 
than a country which is not so dependent on aid or emergency assistance from abroad.
Twenty-First century. evolution of India’s economic policy in the 
IV.
met? This is the real question to ponder for the future.
growth rates, along with employment
promote neither growth nor stability.opportunities and creating a positive environment for equitable development. In
developing countries, such as India, with massive illiteracy and underdevelopment of
infrastructure, Government must continue to have an important and crucial role in
creating the necessary conditions for growth through investments in areas, such as,
education, health, water supply, irrigation, infrastructure, etc. These tasks cannot be taken
over by the market. Successful economic reforms must result in strengthening the ability
of Governments to do what they need to do by helping to generate higher growth, higher
revenue and higher productivity. As the recent experience of several transitional and
emerging market economies shows, economic reforms are necessary but by no means a
sufficient condition for growth and development.
29. In this connection, a core issue, with multiple dimensions, which would need to
be resolved in years to come is what can perhaps be described as growing “public-
private” dichotomy in our economic life. It is a striking fact of our present situation that
economic renewal and positive growth impulses are now occurring largely outside the
public sector – at the level of private corporations ( e.g . software companies), autonomous
institutions ( e.g .  or ), or individuals at the top of their professions in India and
abroad. In the Governmental or public sector, on the other hand, we see a marked
deterioration at all levels – not only in terms of output, profits and public savings (to
which I made a reference earlier), but also in the provision of vital public services in the
fields of education, health, water and transport. These two elements – fiscal deterioration
and inability to provide essential services – are, of course, intimately connected.  Most of
our public resources are now dissipated in payment of salaries or interest on past debt
with little or no resources available for expansion of public or publicly supported services
in vital sectors.
30. In considering the reasons for the decay and deterioration that is taking place in
our public services, I am reminded of an observation by A.H.Hanson nearly 40 years ago
on the reasons for the then prevailing crisis of Indian Planning. He was an admirer of
Indian planners, but after seeing the results on the ground, he was compelled to ask:
“The men are able, the organization is adequate, the procedures are intelligently
“For various reasons, Indian Planners have never treated the ‘objective function’ with
sufficient respect. Their tendency is to give themselves the fullest benefit of every
possible doubt ... Too many of their aims are contingent upon the adoption, by
various sections of the Indian community ,  of attitudes they are exceedingly unlikely
5
to adopt ...... ”
31. That was 1963! Today, in 2001, and after more than 50 y ears of experience of
independent administration, we still seem to be giving ourselves the benefit of the doubt.
Over time, our problems in the management of public resources at different levels have
only become more and more intractable. Let us look at some of the problems that now
• We can be justifiably proud of the fact that the “rule of law” prevails in our country,
and that even the mightiest are not above the law. The delays in the judicial process
bedevil our public delivery systems:
Hanson’s answer to this question is also revealing:
devised. Why, then, have the Plans, since 1956, so persistently run into crisis?”
IITs IIMsmay be legendary, but there is a widespread respect for the “rule of law”.  However,
for historical reasons, it is also a fact that our legal system provides full protection to
the private interests of the so-called “public servant”, often at the expense of the
public that he or she is supposed to serve. In addition to complete job security, any
organisation can go on strike – hospitals,
universities, schools, banks, buses, post offices ,  railways, municipalities -  in search
of higher wages, promotions and bonuses for themselves irrespective of the costs and
inconvenience to the public (in whose name they have been appointed in the first
place).  Problems have only become worse over time and there is little or no
• The “authority” of Governments at, both Centre and States, to enforce their decisions
has eroded over time. Governments can pass orders, for example, for relocation of
unauthorised industrial units or other structures, but implementation can be delayed if
they run counter to the private interests of some (at the expense of the general public
interest). Similarly, Governments may decide to restructure public utilities to cut
down waste or output losses, but these decisions do not necessarily have to be
implemented if they adversely affect the interests of public servants employed in
• Governments at different levels may announce plans and programmes to provide
social services (such as, expand literacy), but these initiatives are unlikely to be
implemented on the ground because of fiscal stringency. For example, in 1994, the
Tenth Finance Commission projected a rate of growth in real terms of 2.5 per cent for
expenditure on elementary education upto the end of the century in respect of four
States where the incidence of poverty and illiteracy was among the highest in the
country. This projected rate of growth in expenditure was lower than the growth of
population in the relevant age group, and grossly insufficient to cover  new
programmes  of adult literates.  In the five years since the Tenth Finance
Commission’s report, it is interesting to note that the real expenditure on elementary
education, outside of salaries of Government teachers, in these four States has
• The process and procedures for conducting business in Government and public
service organisations, over time have become non-functional. There are multiplicity
of Departments involved in the simplest of decisions, and administrative rules
generally concentrate on the process rather than results. There is very little
decentralisation of decision-making powers, particularly financial powers. Thus,
while local authorities have been given significant authority in some States for
implementing national programmes, their financial authority is limited. Transfers to
local authorities for health spending, for example, average less than 15 per cent of
State Government budgets.
• The multiplicity of functions and responsibilities placed  upon ill-equipped and ill-
trained staff in public offices and local institutions make it almost impossible to
deliver services with any degree of efficiency, particularly in rural areas. For
example, a “multi-purpose” female health worker is required to perform as many as
forty-seven tasks to be undertaken on a regular basis!
actually been negative!
organisations. these 
accountability of the public servant to perform the public duty.
group of public servants in any public sector 32. Let us also ponder, for a moment, who suffers the most from fiscal stringency and
the atrophy of the public delivery systems. It is certainly not the affluent classes, or
persons elected or appointed by the people to serve them. They can always go to private
hospitals, private schools, autonomous universities or institutes of higher education, and
have similar alternative means of meeting their other requirements. The worst affected
are likely to be the poor, the unemployed, and the illiterate who are dependent on public
services, public investment and public programmes.  It is useful to keep this perspective
in mind as a fair amount of defence of the “status quo ” in respect of the public sector is
33. In addition to economic reforms, which already figure prominently in the national
discourse, it is now important to embark on an urgent programme to revitalise the
governance and public delivery systems at all levels of Government – centre, state and
districts. Without strengthening the ability of the Government to do what it alone can do,
and narrowing the focus of its activities to what matters most for the future development
of the country – education, health, clean environment, and a functioning infrastructure –
34. In my view, this is really the harder part of the so-called second generation
reforms. The non-governmental sector now has a dynamism and momentum of its own.
While there will be problems, and there will be arguments for and against a particular
policy to liberalise, to open up, or to introduce more competition, I am confident that
progress in the desired direction is unavoidable and irreversible.  At the same time, it is
also clear that unless we put our fiscal house in order and improve our public delivery
systems, no amount of macro-policy reforms by themselves will be sustainable or yield
permanent results. If  of primary schools run by Government agencies, thousands of
primary health centres set up by district authorities, and hundreds of Central and State
Universities continue to under-perform or decline, two or three hi-tech cities and one or
two new business schools and technical institutes cannot make up for the gigantic loss of
human resources. It is simply a question of relative proportions, and inextricable linkages
35. In order to overcome some of the problems that I mentioned a little while ago, we
need to move on a number of fronts. We need legal reform to focus sharply on the
interests of the public, and not those of the public servant, in the functioning of the
governmental and public delivery systems. Clear mechanisms for establishing
accountability for performance are essential, and all forms of special protection for
persons working for Government or public sector agencies (except for armed forces or
agencies engaged in maintenance of law and order) deserve to be eliminated. We need
institutional reform. All public monopolies should be eliminated, and there should be no
purchase preference for public sector enterprises or agencies. Government should be free
to engage the services of non-governmental organisations or private service providers at
competitive costs to ensure effective delivery of essential services.  We need freedom of
information and full disclosure of all financial decisions made by Governments and its
multifarious agencies on a daily rather than quarterly or annual basis. We need a new
“political-bureaucratic” compact based on well-defined division of responsibility and
accountability. The public system cannot function without respect for conventions and
mutual trust and harmony among different agencies of the state.  Above all, we need
between public good and private progress.
lakhs
India cannot adequately seize the opportunities that lie ahead.
done in the name of the weaker sections of the society.fiscal empowerment as, without financial resources, it is not feasible to lay a road or
build a school. The last is a most difficult task in view of the deadweight of the past ,  but
36. Let me end with two prognostications about India’s potential for long-term
growth that I came across recently. The first is by a well known Indian economist with a
distinguished record of forecasting. He has observed that, “it is possible for India to have
a per capita income of US $ 30,000 by the year 2047. If the Indian economy does as well
6
as some of the world’s fast-growing economies have done ,  it could be even higher.”
7
The second projection is by a Professor in business management in the United States. He
estimates that, by the year 2025, India’s GDP would exceed that of Japan and India
37. Both forecasts, independently arrived at in two different parts of the world, are, of
course, contingent on a number of factors. There is, however, no doubt that, if we have
the will, and we are able to realise even half our potential in the next 20 or 25 years,
Thank you.
 
1
   in  
2
3
  
1954.
4
  It may be mentioned that some parts of the public sector, particularly oil and telecommunications have
been quite profitable. This partly reflects their erstwhile monopoly position  and the administered price
5
6
 Kirit Parikh, “Economy” in India Briefing – A Transformative Fifty Years, published by M.E.Sharp Inc.,
New York, 1999, for Asia Society. Parikh’s per capita income forecasts assume a dollar-rupee exchange
7
 J.A., 
are also on purchasing power parity basis.
Rosensweig’s forecasts The Free Press, New York, 1998. Winning the Global Game, Rosensweig 
rate based on purchasing power parity.
Kegan Paul, 1969. Routledge and London: Planning and Politicians, Hanson A.H., 
, October-December 1963, reprinted in Political Quarterly  Hanson A.H., “The Crisis of Indian Planning”, 
regimes. These profitable sectors have been largely self-financing without the need for budget transfers.
 Vol.22, Manchester School, Labour”, W.A. Lewis, “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of 
 The Penguin Press, London, 1999. The Return of Depression Economics, Krugman,  Paul 
, November 11, 2000. Mumbai Indian Express, Gupta Shekhar
,1999) of India, Hyderabad
 (Administrative Staff College Finance and Development: Which Way Now? (Viking/Penguin, 1996); and 
 Century, Economic Policy: Preparing for the 21 India’s (Oxford University Press, 1991); The Way Ahead,
st
India’s Economic Crisis: * Parts of this Lecture draw on some of my previous publications, particularly
India’s poverty would have become a distant memory.
would then be the third largest economy in the world (behind US and China).
it can no longer be avoided.