Agenda for Banking in the Millenium
Thank you Dr. 
Mr Bhide, Chairman, Deputy Governors, Chairmen of Banking Industry, Faculty of
I am very glad to be here.  This is a very important occasion because, as Dr.
Subrahmanyam pointed out, this kind of Conference is taking place after nearly 10 years.
And it is taking place at an opportune moment when we are beginning the new
Millenium.  We have ended a century and your discussions would give direction to the
banking in the next 20/25 years.  The agenda is long and I would straightaway move over
to it.  To my mind, in the next 25 years perhaps we would have to deal with three
different sets of issues although they are inter-related.
One, the whole question of financial reform of which banking is a part.  Next, the
supervisory and regulatory matters which affect the banks and other financial
intermediaries.  Finally, the banks' internal management issues which are directly within
themselves.  Some of these issues have certain amount of
It is significant to first consider why have we undertaken financial reforms after
40/50 years of independence?  I think this is related to the change in the direction of the
economy.  In the old Planning era, financial intermediaries played a well-defined role.
They were expected to mobilise financial savings and allocate them among the
productive sectors of the economy as directed.
Financial savings in our country are relatively small - about 10 per cent of the
national income - while domestic savings are about 25 per cent.  Financial intermediaries
are expected to offer to the depositors, the rates of return that are real.  And the banks are
a special component of these financial intermediaries. Different financial intermediaries
are not indeed competitors to the banking intermediaries but an integral part of the
financial system.  If they all function competitively, we should see an increase in the
financial savings.  We should, therefore, work towards a thriving financial system that is
diversified, competitive, deep and broad.
Banks obviously have a special place in the financial system because bank deposits are
the only non- collateralised savings.  Banks are highly leveraged.  Their leveraging in fact
is at a much higher level than mutual funds, post office or capital markets.  When we talk
about liberalisation in the banking system in India, we do have some achievements to
recount.  Our banking system is well-structured.  Pre- emption of bank deposits is much
lower now compared to earlier, banks have much greater operational freedom now and so
on.  But our market development, particularly debt market, is still in infancy.  While our
capital markets are flourishing, our money markets are less developed.  Our priority,
*
Financial Reforms
relevance and interconnection and we would go over them in some detail here.
the purview of the management 
NIBM and distinguished guests,
Subrahmanyam,therefore, should be to develop the structure of financial system that is competitive, well
We have taken some action in the development of new instruments and new
institutions to make the money market as well as debt broader and deeper.  We, however,
have a long way to go.  Liquidity of debt markets and the market dimensions need to be
addressed as significant issues.  For instance, our debt markets are dominated by private
placements.  We also have certain rigidities in our system with which it cannot be 
functioning.  Our interest rates are not flexible enough for obvious reasons.  I have dealt
with this in the October Policy statement so I do not want to repeat it.  But you can not
have a financial system with rigid interest rates that do not reflect different phases of a
We also have a problem of legal reforms.  You cannot have a financial system in
which there is no sanctity of contract and which is why there are NPAs.  We have no law
to deal with the problem of insolvency, breach of contract, defaults and enforcement of
You cannot have a strong financial system functioning well with such constraints.
To sum up, we have done well on the arithmetical side but we have a long 
way to go particularly in terms of development of market and debt markets and we have
some way to go for contract enforcement.  I hope you will deliberate upon some of these
Second issue is regulatory and supervisory.  Financial markets are different from
product markets and therefore, greater liberalisation goes along with deeper supervision
and higher degree of regulation.  This is because financial markets are volatile where
herd mentality catches up fast.  Moreover, there are negative externalities that can
destabilise financial markets.  And destabilisation in financial markets affects even those
who are not in financial markets.  On the other hand, financial markets can drive the real
economy.  Therefore, transparency, disclosures much stronger, prudential norms and
capitalisation are a must.  This is essential because bank depositors have no other security
except that banks are well-regulated.  We are constrained partly because of the
We have introduced CAMELS sys tem and are following the best BIS and
international norms.  The reason to follow international norms is mobility of capital and
that is why, it is necessary to make those prudential norms international and tougher.  The
health of the financial system is now an international concern.  The willingness of the rest
of the world to do business with us or any other country by way of trade or direct
investment or any other kind of investments will depend on their confidence in us.
Rating agencies also follow international norms while rating any country or banking
system.  Our financial system, I believe is not vulnerable because it is publicly owned.
inflexibility of the human resources side.
areas during the sessions in this conference.
long
And money is mobile.
security.  Then there are constraints arising out of fiscal deficits.
business cycle.
well-
structured and deep.  We have made some progress in the last few years in this direction.But over a period of time we will also be globally rated.  International standards are,
therefore, important.
The Bank for International Settlement (BIS) has circulated a consultative paper on new
norms for capital adequacy.   The RBI is currently studying this paper and will shortly
send its comments to BIS.  Once implemented, you will find that the capital adequacy
norms are going to be tougher whether we like it or not.  This will have tremendous
implications both for NPAs, provisioning, capital adequacy and the whole range of
management issues that we are going talk about later in this session. When higher and
higher capital would be required, the question of government ownership of banks and the
percentage of this ownership will come to the forefront.  Even if the economy grows at
the current rate and the capital adequacy norms are at the same level as at present, the
banks, barring of course, the three weak banks, will require fresh capital worth Rs.10 ,000
crore in the next five years or so whereas the current headroom available to banks is
Rs.1000 crore.
It is important to discuss just how and from where will this additional capital
come?  Both, the RBI and the Government giving money have the same monetary
implications.  We need to debate upon this issue and resolve it in the interest of the real
economy.  I believe that there is a pragmatic case for raising the legislative floor for
outside holding in banks.  On a case by case basis we could consider outside holding,
particularly the good banks can raise money without affecting their public sector
character even without diluting the government's holding.  The government could appoint
the chairman and the board if it wishes through a transparent process.  The question is
while being in the public sector, why can't our banks be strong and adequately
capitalised?  I know that this is a matter not within your purview or the Reserve Bank's
purview but in the nation's purview and needs to be debated to find some pragmatic
I will now briefly deal with the set of issues that are relevant to the bank
managements.  I congratulate the NIBM faculty for preparing papers on IT, HRM and
Risk Management which are extremely important for internal management of banks.  Let
me dwell upon them individually.  First, information technology.  This is no longer a
matter of choice.  The question no longer is whether you would be computerised or not.
Those who do not use IT will be out of business.  If you are not computerised, you will
not be able to do business 15 to 10 years down the road. You would have to use the
modern means of communication.  What is more important from the banking point of
view is that the use of information technology could produce tremendous results.  It can
reduce your costs.  As for human resources management (HRM), for the banking
industry, there is no other input except human resources and the output depends entirely
on the quality of human resources and we have a lot of ground to cover in this area.
There are many constraints because it is a part of the public service that provides job
 in the area of corporate governance in banking and finance is how to
ensure quality in the absence of transparency and modernity.  Risk management in banks
The concern
security.  But development of this area is vital.
answers.is equally important.  I have just mentioned about capital adequacy ratio.  If banks have
to maintain risk weighted capital, they need to put in place a risk management system.
Appropriate risk management system will help banks increase their profitability.  This
will improve the rating of banks which is crucial for confidence.  Confidence in financial
transaction is most important.  It is also important to open up the system.  I believe that
we do not have the monopoly of wisdom and therefore you would have seen us adopting
a consultative route.  You would have seen numerous groups and committees set up in
the RBI.  Guidelines too are circulated before issuing them and are finalised only after
receiving your comments.  We have set up Regulation Review Authority to ensure that
regulatory systems are contemporary and deal with regulation not as a control item but in
the interest of participants and of the markets.  Regulations should facilitate delivery and
not cause delays.   I hope that all of us together would be able to build an open and
competitive system.  This should be done by mutual agreement and consultation.  If need
I would end with a word on NIBM. As you can see, this is a very fine facility that
the Reserve Bank has created.  The Reserve Bank Governor used to be the chairperson of
this Institute.  It is a national asset which is owned by all banks.  But there is an
interesting anecdote about its utility. When I asked a bank chairman if he would 
NIBM if it were not there, the answer was a pleasant silence.  So a committee was set up
under Shri S.S. Tarapore to deliberate on the issues that ail NIBM.  It should not remain
mere institute. It has a great history and great potential.  And this potential you have to
use to your advantage.  We therefore persuaded Shri Bhide, a commercial banker, to take
over its Chairmanship.  I would like this Institute to be vibrant and a critical place for all
of you to obtain technical input.  This should be taken as a new collaboration, new era not
only for the banking system but also the National Institute of Bank Management under
Bhide's leadership.
Inaugural speech by Dr. Bimal 
of the Bank Chairmen held on January 6, 2000 at the National Institute of Bank
Management, 
Pune.
Jalan, Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Conference
I wish you the best in the deliberations and thank you for listening to me.
Shri 
miss
be, we should not hesitate in bringing outsiders to tell us how to do business.