Managing Public Debt and Promoting Debt Markets in India*
I welcome this opportunity to be with you and benefit from the deliberations.  There is an
increasing awareness of the importance of domestic-debt markets, particularly in our region.
Recent events in the Asian region have bought to light the importance of avoiding excessive
reliance on the banking system for financial intermediation even as the health of the banking
systems is being improved.  Diversification of means of intermediation and competition
therein within a country adds to both efficiency and stability of the domestic financial system
and avoids shift of financial intermediation outside the country.  Central bankers have a
special interest in fixed income markets because they are to be addressed for ensuring a
transmission channel of monetary policy.  In many countries government securities market is
critical in view of its role in creating the risk free yield curve as a benchmark for pricing other
securities.  Of course, the investors and intermediaries do look for efficient, reasonably stable
and transparent fixed income market, and the regulators do strive to ensure these.  In brief,
the current challenge before us appears to be the mechanisms by which we encourage
development of debt markets, as also carefully craft appropriate roles for manager of public-
Perhaps, India has been reasonably successful in meeting this challenge so far.  No doubt, the
progress in equity markets has been impressive in India, as it has been in most of the Asian
region.  But, the recent compulsions of a larger access to market borrowings by government
as a source of financing fiscal deficit, and greater opportunities for  to access
capital markets for their debt needs in addition to Development Financial Institutions, have
provided challenges and opportunities for the policy makers in managing public debt and
organisers suggested that we should share with you our
Before narrating our experience, it is essential to recognise that country context is very very
critical, and generalisations would be inadvisable.  Apart from the size and structure of the
economy, state of fiscal and financial sectors, pattern of corporate structures and cultures,
degree of openness of the economy, the foreign currency component of public debt which is
low in India, and the maturity pattern of such external obligations which is generally of
longer duration in India needs to be .  In brief, the domestic dimension of debt in
general and public debt in particular is dominant in India’s debt markets and this address
In fact, I was happy to read in BIS review, a speech by Governor,  Mongol Sonakul on
development of bond markets in Thailand, where he made a lucid presentation of the benefits
of bond market, necessary conditions for development of bond markets and the criticality of a
deep and liquid government bond market.
Similarly Mr. Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority said
recently in May at Chang Mai : “there has been notably little disagreement about the
desirability of developing domestic and regional bond markets.  But there has also been little
progress.  And there has been no lack of explanation of why this is the case”.
Chatu
today would naturally reflect such an orientation.
emphasised
approaches, processes and strategies for our mutual benefit.
promoting debt markets in India.  The 
corporates
debt and regulator of debt markets as a whole.
Friends,Background and Role of RBI
Recent years have seen significant transformation in the debt market in India with far
reaching implications. As the process of reform continues, the role of financial markets in the
economy gets significantly enhanced. While this process essentially involves domestic
liberalisation, the decision to open up the economy adds urgency and complexity to the
process of developing financial markets in India. The Reserve Bank of India has been taking
special efforts to develop the various segments of financial markets, in particular, money,
Government securities and forex markets. Government securities market constitutes a
predominant portion of debt markets in India. The relative share of non-Government bonds
has also picked up in recent years, as a logical extension of reforms in the Government
securities markets and opening up of the financial sector. Even so, given the size of the
sovereign debt, central to the development of debt market is the development of the
The primary interest of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in financial markets is because of its
criticality in acting as the transmission channel of monetary policy especially while moving
towards reliance on indirect instruments of policy.  Currently, the Government  securities
market is the overwhelming part of the overall debt market. Interest rates in this market
provide benchmarks for the system as a whole. In the recent past, several initiatives have
launched the market into a high growth trajectory, in terms of depth, liquidity and turnover,
participants, etc. Several initiatives for development of this market have helped the success of
a large borrowing programme in recent years. This is critical not only from the point of view
of the Reserve Bank, which is both the debt manager and regulator, but also from the point of
view of investors who are concerned about the monetary and fiscal management in the
The Reserve Bank's strategy takes into account the considerations of both policy makers and
investors.  Reform has encompassed market practices in both primary and secondary markets,
strengthening the institutional structure, developing new and innovative instruments,
widening the participant base, rationalising tax measures, establishing a regulatory
The approach to reform in the Government Securities market has several features which may
interest the observers. First, the reform process is characterised by the caution with a tilt
the  careful sequencing, by the mutually reinforcing monetary
measures and by the complementarity with other policies. Creating a conducive policy
environment as will be explained later has been a priority.  Further, the reform in this market
has always  been undertaken within the overall monetary policy framework and is
coordinated with reform in money and forex markets. Second, it progressed on the basis of a
clear-cut agenda, which has aided the sequencing process. Third, major reforms were
implemented in phases, allowing for transition so as not to detabilise market participants.
Fourth, the entire process has been facilitated through collaborative approach imparting
transparency in intentions. The Reserve Bank and Government have been working in close
coordination on all issues.   At a policy level, this involves legislative changes and many
other parameters.  At an operating level, there is a Working Group consisting of senior
officials from Reserve Bank of India and Government of India on cash and debt management,
which helps the process of consultation on management of government debt. In fact, RBI has
2
towards preserving stability, by 
Approach to Reform
framework, initiating changes in legal framework, and imparting transparency in operations.
country.
Government securities market.initiated a process of periodical meetings with Finance Secretaries at State level (India is a
federation of States) which has helped treasury management as well as debt management
operations at State level. Fifth, a formal consultative mechanism with market participants was
established by the Reserve Bank through a Technical Advisory Committee on Money and
Government Securities Markets where important policy and operational changes proposed to
be implemented are discussed. The Technical Advisory Committee has appointed working
groups to more closely look into the technical details of policy proposals. This Committee
has representation from banks - public sector, private and foreign, mutual funds, financial
institutions, credit rating agencies, Primary Dealers Association and Fixed Income, Money
Market and Derivatives Association (a self-regulatory organisation) and independent
economists, apart from representation from Government. The Reserve Bank also holds
separate consultations with Primary Dealers Association on important issues concerning
public debt. Sixth, before finalising important policy changes especially on operational
aspects, draft guidelines on issues are circulated as consultative papers to market participants
and their comments are given serious consideration before issuing final guidelines. Seventh,
coordination with Securities and Exchange Board of India, the regulator of stock exchanges
and corporate debt except those with initial maturities upto one year is ensured both at a
policy level and at operational level.  In particular, at a policy level, coordination is ensured
through a High Level Committee on Capital Markets presided by Governor, and at an
operational level through a technical group of officials, both of which include nominees of
Ministry of Finance. Eighth, international best practices are constantly reviewed in inter-
departmental Working Groups within RBI before designing and opertionalising changes.
Ninth, public debate is generated on the changes contemplated by announcing the intentions
and proposals for structural reform through Monetary and Credit Policy statements and
speeches of senior officials.  Consultation and transparency are at the core of the reform
process.  Finally, in all these processes, the interests of investors and intermediaries are kept
in view and these include a liquid market to facilitate easy entry and exit, tools for hedging,
transparency in operations, an efficient settlement system, an enabling legal environment, and
a clear and simple, but robust regulatory framework. Of course, development of technological
There are three main segments in the debt markets in India, viz., Government Securities,
Public Sector Units (PSU) bonds and corporate securities. The market for Government
Securities comprises the Centre, State and State-Sponsored securities. The PSU bonds are
generally treated as surrogates of sovereign paper, sometimes due to explicit guarantee and
often due to the comfort of public ownership.  Some of the PSU bonds are tax free while
most bonds, including government securities are not tax free. The Government Securities
segment is the most dominant among these three segments. Many of the reforms in pre-1997
period were fundamental, like introduction of auction systems and PDs. The reform in the
Government Securities market which began in 1992, with Reserve Bank playing a lead role,
entered into a very active phase since April 1997, with particular emphasis on development
Since the sixties and until the nineties, the Government Securities market remained dormant
since the government was borrowing at preannounced coupon rates from basically a captive
group of investors, such as banks.  In a way, we had a passive internal debt management
3
Creating a Conducive Policy Environment
of secondary and retail markets.
Segments of Debt Markets
infrastructure  overrides all these objectives in the sense that it facilitates these objectives.policy.  This, coupled with automatic monetisation of budget deficit prevented development
of a deep and vibrant Government Securities market.  As long as automatic 
existed, it was difficult to assure a framework for Government securities market in terms of
matching demand and supply through a price discovery mechanism.  Hence, a most
significant development has been the elimination of the practice of automatic monetisation of
the Central Government budget deficit through Ad hoc Treasury Bills with effect from April
1, 1997 and the introduction of a new scheme of Ways and Means Advances (WMA).  In the
nineties, several other measures were taken for creating an enabling environment for efficient
market conditions. For instance, the total effective statutory pre- of the banking
system has been progressively brought down, the administrative structure of interest rates has
almost been dismantled, prudential norms have been introduced gradually in line with
international best practices, banking supervision has been strengthened, transparency and
disclosure standards were enhanced to be on par with international standards, and risk
There are several ways of analysing market development, and perhaps a convenient way is to
From the investor point of view, a range of Treasury Bills give a variety of options for
managing cash surpluses. At the same time, for Government spending long-term funds 
needed to be raised in a cost-effective manner. Keeping these in view, over the reform period,
a variety of Treasury Bills of 14-day, 91-day, 182-day and 364-day maturity have been
introduced. In the long-term segment, the vanilla or the fixed coupon bonds are the most
commonly issued instruments. However, over the years, given the large market borrowing
programme of the Government and a large variety of investors, we have tried to innovate and
issued zero coupon bonds, floating rate bonds, and capital indexed bonds. Government dated
securities have been issued in a maturity range of  2 to 20 years depending on prevailing
conditions in the market. Currently, the weighted average maturity of outstanding marketable
The non-Government debt market has a wider variety of bonds from very short-term to long-
term maturity. These bonds have many innovative features like step-up, call and put options,
and include structured obligations, etc. Much of the PSU bonds and corporate securities are
Repos are permitted in Government securities.  It has also been decided to extend repos in
PSU bonds and private corporate debt securities, provided they are held in 
form in a depository and the transactions are done in recognised stock exchanges.  The
Early during the reform process, the Reserve Bank promoted the Discount and Finance House
of India and Securities Trading Corporation of India to promote the development of the
money market and secondary market for government securities. The Reserve Bank has
4
operationalised.
Institution Development
system is yet to be fully 
dematerialised
privately placed.
debt is 7.75 years.
are
Instrument Development
track measures in regard to instruments, institutions and participants.
Market Development Measures
management practices have been prescribed.
emptions
monetisationsubsequently sold its majority shares to market participants and these institutions have since
Since the inception in 1995, the number of Primary Dealers ( PDs) in Government Securities
has progressively increased from 6 to 15. The obligations cast upon PDs include an annual
minimum bidding commitment for dated securities and Treasury Bills with a minimum
success ratio and commitment to underwrite the gap between the subscribed/accepted amount
in respect of dated securities and the notified amount, where there is a short-fall.  The PDs are
allowed access to call money as well as repos/reverse repo markets and to trade in all money
market instruments.  They have access to Subsidiary General Ledger (SGL) and current
account facility with the Reserve Bank.  The Reserve Bank also conducts exclusive Open
Market Operations (OMO) in T-Bills through PDs.  A second level satellite dealer system
exits, with the main objective of retailing Government Securities. These satellite dealers are
SDs have graduated as
PDs.
It may be of interest to some of you to note that among the Primary Dealers, the newly
The Reserve Bank has also encouraged the setting up of mutual funds dealing exclusively in
gilts, called gilt funds. Like PDs and SDs, these gilt funds are also provided with liquidity
Significant reforms in the non-Government debt market should also be recognised. National
and local stock exchanges have been set up with facility for trading in corporate debt, and for
that matter, even Government debt, through screen based systems. The securities and
Exchange Board of India regulates the primary issuances in capital and non-Government debt
markets and ensures sound trading practices through stock exchanges. Depositories have been
As is well known, a large participant base would result in lower cost of borrowing for the
Government. In fact, retailing of Government Securities is high on the agenda of further
Banks are the major investors in the Government Securities markets. Traditionally, banks are
required to maintain a part of their net demand and time liabilities in the form of liquid assets
of which Government Securities have always formed the predominant share. Despite
lowering the Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) to the minimum of 25 per cent, banks are
holding a much larger share of Government Stock as a portfolio choice. Other major
investors in Government Stock are financial institutions, insurance companies, mutual funds,
corporates, individuals, non-resident Indians and overseas corporate bodies. Foreign
institutional investors are permitted to invest in Treasury Bills and dated Government
Often, the same participants are present in the non-Government debt market also, either as
issuers or investors. For example, banks are issuers in the debt market for their Tier-II capital.
On the other hand, they are investors in PSU bonds and corporate securities. Foreign
5
Securities in both primary and secondary markets.
reforms.
Participants
set up to facilitate dematerialisation and quicker transfer mechanisms.
support, among other facilities.
are, J.P. Morgan, ABN Amro, Deutsche Bank, and DSP-Merrill Lynch. licensed 
also given some liquidity support by the Reserve Bank. A few of these 
obtained Primary Dealership in Government Securities.Institutional Investors are relatively more active in non-Government debt segment as
compared to the Government debt segment.
It will be useful to identify the progress in primary and secondary market. Credible systems
have been established ensuring transparent mechanisms of issuance in the primary market
and creating efficient mechanisms for trading and settlement in the secondary market for
Primary Market
Since 1992, after the market orientation of Government borrowing programme, and later after
the abolition of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficit, the Reserve Bank has been resorting
to primary market issues at greater frequency.  Efforts are made to raise all issues directly
from the market.  Dated Securities are generally issued through auctions or tap sale.  Primary
Dealers are permitted to underwrite the entire notified amount of the auctions.  Depending on
prevailing market conditions, dated securities are sometimes privately placed with the RBI,
and subsequently offloaded in the secondary market when conditions turn conducive.  Issues
Until recently, Government dated securities were issued through yield based auctions. A
beginning has been made during the current year with regard to consolidation of Government
debt with a view to developing benchmark securities and development of a market for
STRIPS. Most of the current primary  issues are, therefore, reissuances of existing stock
through reopening, and this has helped in consolidation of Government debt to some extent
as also in creating a critical fungible mass for active trading and enhanced liquidity in the
secondary market.
Treasury Bills are issued through auctions.  The notified amounts with respect to T-Bills have
been rationalised in the recent period.  A calendar of T-Bills is announced in advance.  Non-
competitive bids from select participants are accepted outside the notified amount.  Both
discriminatory and uniform price auction methods are used, as appropriate to each of the T-
A large part of the issuance in the non-Government debt market is currently on private
placement basis. Stringent entry and disclosure norms for public issues coupled with low cost
of issuance, ease of structuring instruments and saving of time lag in issuance has led to the
rapid growth of the private placement market in recent years.  Total resource 
from the private placement market has increased sharply over 4-fold between 1995-96 and
1999-00, The share of private placement issues in total mobilisation from the primary capital
market (public issues and private placements) thus increased from about 40 per cent in 1995-
96 to around 85 per cent by 1999-2000.
Banks and Primary Dealers are the major players in the secondary market for Government
Securities.  Most of Government Securities transactions in the secondary market are through
over-the-counter (OTC) negotiated deals.  However, banks are allowed to transact through
brokers who are members of the National Stock Exchange and over-the-counter-Exchange of
6
Secondary Market
mobilisation
Bills.
have occasionally devolved on the RBI.
Government Securities.
Progress in Primary and Secondary MarketsIndia, which facilitated screen based trading.  Since 1994, the National Stock Exchange
(NSE) launched the Wholesale Debt Market (WDM) segment, which provides the only
formal platform for trading in a wide range of debt securities, including Government
Securities. The trading system known as National Exchange for Automated Trading (NEAT)
is a fully automated screen based trading system that enables members across the country to
trade simultaneously.  The trading system is an order driven  system which matches best buy
and sell orders on a price-time priority. However, in actual practice, most of the trades in
Government and non-Government debt are usually concluded over-the-counter and later
reported on screen. Thus, data regarding OTC deals are available on a near real time basis on
the NSE screen. Similarly, the dissemination of daily data by the RBI on price and volume of
Currently the Reserve Bank operates the Government Securities Settlement system for those
having Subsidiary General Ledger Accounts in its Public Debt offices through Delivery
Versus payments System. Setting up of a Clearing Corporation for money and debt securities
is in advanced stage of implementation. This will pave the way for further opening up of the
repo market to PSU bonds and bonds of financial institutions held in demat form in
The aggregate volumes of trading in Government and non-Government debt in the secondary
market have increased substantially over the years. However, Treasury Bills and Government
dated securities accounted for the bulk of the trading volume at over 96 per cent of the total
trades. The average annual growth in secondary market transactions since 1994-95 was over
55 per cent, reflecting the increasing depth attained by secondary market in Government
Securities.  For instance, the average annual transactions increased over 10-fold between
1994-95 and 1999-2000.
The turnover in Government securities (calculated by counting twice the volume of
transactions in the case of outright transactions and counting four times the volume of
transactions in the case of repos) fiscal 1999-2000 amounted to Rs.12 ,370 billion of which
the outright turnover aggregated Rs. 9,060 billion. Thus, the average monthly turnover in
Central Government securities aggregated Rs. 1,030 billion in 1999-2000 of which the
average monthly turnover of outright transactions amounted to Rs.755 billion.  The daily
turnover has also witnessed a significant increase and is about Rs. 34 billion.  Reflecting this,
the turnover ratio in dated securities (defined as the ratio of total turnover to total outstanding
securities) increased to 3.2 as on March 31, 2000 from 1.7 as on March 31, 1999.
Development of technology is an integral part of reforming the debt market, especially in the
context of providing a technologically superior dealing and settlement system.  Hence, the
RBI has embarked upon the technological upgradation of debt market.  The RBI has just
commenced a project for complete automation of the operations of its Public Debt Office
(PDO) where the settlement for all Government Securities Transactions takes place.  It will
provide for connectivity between different PDOs, and facilitate on-line screen based
execution for trade and settlement in Government Securities transactions.  The project will be
implemented in phases.  The first phase will cover the PDO  at Mumbai and
facilitate screen based negotiated dealings in Government securities and money market
instruments, tendering of screen based applications in auctions, full-fledged audit trail, debt
servicing, information dissemination, price list for open market operations, central
7
computeristion
Technology Aspects
recognised stock exchanges with essential safeguards. depositories and traded in 
Gilts traded in the secondary markets has greatly aided  the price discovery process.information system for access by monitoring and regulatory authorities, etc.  It is expected
that the first phase will be operationalised well within a year.  In the second phase, other
PDOs would be linked with the central PDO system.  This phase will facilitate active
open market operations of RBI through all regional PDOs.  The entire project is expected to
operationalised in about a year.  The RBI is also separately putting in place real time gross
In order to curb certain unhealthy trends that had developed in the securities market and to
prevent undesirable speculation, the Government had prohibited forward trading in securities
in June 1969 through a Notification. Recognising that rescinding the 1969 Notification is
necessary for developing the debt markets, at the recommendation of the Reserve Bank, the
Government recently brought about amendments to Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act
1956 which made it  possible for Government to delegate some responsibilities to the RBI.
Currently the regulatory jurisdiction over the Government and non-Government debt markets
have been delegated to the Reserve Bank and Securities and Exchange Board of India by the
Government. The Reserve Bank will regulate in relation to any contracts in Government
securities, money market securities, gold related securities and in securities derived from
these securities and in relation to ready forward contracts in bonds, debentures, debenture
These amendments help RBI to put in place, from time to time, appropriate regulatory
framework, keeping in view rapid changes in financial institutions, instruments and practices
governing money, Government Securities and forex markets, apart from gold-related
financial products.  With the delegation of powers by Government to RBI in these matters,
Transparency in operations and data dissemination is the hallmark of our Government
Securities market. The process of policy making and implementation of reform are through
consultative mechanisms. The entire market borrowing programme is announced at the
beginning of the year. Based on this, a calendar of Treasury Bills is pre-announced to the
market. Similarly, near real-time data is  available with regard to auctions of Treasury Bills
and dated Government Securities. The Reserve Bank also publishes all relevant data
 The Government Securities and their management by the Reserve Bank of India is governed
by the Public Debt Act, 1944. The procedures prescribed are archaic and some of the
provisions have ceased to be of relevance in the present context. A new legislation titled the
Government Securities Act proposes to repeal and replace the Public Debt Act. The
Government Securities Bill has already been approved by the Cabinet and is awaiting
Parliament clearance. However, since the Public Debt Act, 1944, is applicable for marketable
loans raised by the RBI on behalf of both the Central and State Governments, the proposal
requires consent of all State Governments. The State Governments have to pass a Resolution
for the purpose either prior to enactment by the Centre or subsequently adopt the same by
8
Legal Changes
pertaining to Government securities market on daily, weekly, monthly and annual basis.
Transparency Aspects
the procedural delays and constraints can be eliminated.
stock, securitised and other debt securities.
Regulatory Aspects
settlement system, which is scheduled to be operational within the same time frame.
be 
regional passing a Resolution. Once the new Act is enacted, the RBI will have substantive powers to
design and introduce an instrument of transfer suited to computer environment.
 Before concluding with the outlook, I must confess that there are several areas which are
important but have not been presented in this address.  These include the dilemmas in the
separation of debt and monetary management; aspects of risk management arising on account
of issuance of long-term debt which may create asset-liability mismatches for banks, and
short term debt which creates recycling problems; determining the extent of transparency
without preempting actions of the Reserve Bank; ensuring removal of impediments on
account of taxation, etc.  These issues are significant and are being  continuously reviewed by
us.
Encouraged by the results of our efforts so far, we are now embarking on an active
programme of consolidation of the reform of debt markets on all fronts, consistent with the
interests of investors, intermediaries, the market borrowing programme of Government and
The outlook for debt markets cannot be divorced from outlook for the economy as a whole.
The GDP growth has averaged close to 6 per cent in eighties and nineties and the market-
analysts’ consensus for this year that it would be around 7 per cent while we in RBI place it
around 6.5 to 7 per cent.  Inflation has been on down trend and moderate in the range of 4 to
6 percent in the last five years and most analysts expect inflation in the current year to be in
the range of 5 to 5.5, close to about 4.5 percent mentioned in RBI’s latest monetary policy.
The interest rates have been generally on the down turn in the last few years, and currently
prime lending rates are around 12 percent – close to market expectations. By and large, the
The exchange rate has been among the most stable and the exchange market continues to be
The current account deficit is universally expected to continue to be below 2 percent of GDP.
Foreign currency reserves are high at $ 35 billion and have been rising every year in the last
three years.  The trend may continue this year also.  The growth with stability was possible
I wish to add that while taking all measures to develop the Government Securities market and
ensure appropriate regulatory framework from time to time, continuous monitoring of
developments on a day-to-day basis in the market is necessary to avoid excess volatility and
In all these efforts in managing policy and Government Securities market, we had unstinted
support from several sources, including multinational banks and investment firms.  Some of
them, either directly or through joint ventures with local firms are playing a very active role
in our debt markets, particularly as Primary Dealers in government markets, duly licensed by
Reserve Bank of India.  I am sure they will share their assessment of what we in RBI 
doing.  Let me advice you that exploring with them for a view on India’s debt markets will be
9
a worthwhile effort for all of you.
intend
maintain orderliness.
inspite of the well-known domestic and international uncertainties.
characterised by non-volatile conditions by global standards.
interest rates have been stable with general inclination towards south, till recently.
within the broad framework of monetary policy.
OutlookLet me wish you very fruitful deliberations and success in your efforts.
* Keynote Address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at Asia Debt Conference
organised by Finance Asia.com at Hong Kong on June 20, 2000.  Dr. Reddy is grateful to Dr. A. Prasad for the
10
assistance.