It gives me great pleasure in being with you, today, to share some thoughts relating to
money and government securities market where the Reserve Bank of India has a pivotal
role to play not only as the debt manager to the Government but also as the monetary
authority of the country. I am indeed thankful to Shri M.R.Ramesh for giving me this
As all of you are aware, in order that the Central Bank conducts the monetary
policy effectively with the help of market based instruments, a well developed money and
government securities market is an important  prerequisite. The effective presence of
such markets is felt, once a well- developed financial system is in place, wherein both
financial markets and financial institutions have important roles to play. As it is well
known, the East Asian crisis is an outcome of the lack of well-developed money and
capital markets.
Crises are part and parcel of the financial world we live in, resulting in financial
stress not only in the respective market segments but also calls for dexterity on the part of
the Central Bank, since it is the Central Bank that takes up the onus of such crisis
management. Evidences suggest that during times of financial stress there is likely to be a
large demand for liquidity which only deep and liquid markets can provide. Let me at this
juncture remind you that the Indian financial system went unscathed by the onset of
Asian crisis because of the cautious and gradual reform measures taken by the Reserve
Bank and Government of India.  We could also come out rather easily from the situation
Kargil incident.
These instances would corroborate the inherent soundness of the policy decisions
that the authorities have contemplated in the past.
we were in a year ago during the 
opportunity to participate in this Seminar.
Securities Market
Current Developments in Money and GovernmentBefore I touch upon the micro aspects in the development of Money and
Government Securities Markets, let me briefly make a mention of the economic
fundamentals.  The market analysis is now placing heavy reliance upon technicalities and
the  short term I think it has to focus on the fundamentals
in order to take a long term view.  Evidences show that in the recent years, the Indian
Economy has exhibited strong degree of resilience. Economic growth continued to be
buoyant and monetary conditions were supportive of growth.  The monetary policy
efforts in ensuring availability of sufficient credit and softening of interest rates were
facilitated by general absence of inflationary pressures.  The external sector gained in
In the above context, I present before you the fact sheet. The overall economic
performance during 1999-2000 remained healthy with the GDP showing a growth of 6.4
per cent. This compares favourably with the trend growth rate of 6.7 per cent during
1995/96 - 1998/99 and 5.1 per cent during the period 1990/91-1994/95. This is in spite of
some weaknesses in the agricultural growth. It is a welcome feature that growth rate of
industrial sector is showing clear signs of revival from 3.7 per cent in 1998-99 to 7.5 per
cent in 1999-2000. On the price front, notwithstanding the year-end spurt, the low order
of inflation during the major part of 1999-2000 led to the decline in the average rate of
inflation (measured by WPI) on a weekly basis to a low of 3.3 per cent in 1999-2000 as
against 5.9 per cent in 1998-99 and the average of 9.0 per cent during 1990/91 -1997/98.
The inflation rate as measured by CPI also moved in tandem and reflected a steep
decline, as the average inflation rate for the year moved down to 3.4 per cent in 1999-
2000 from 13.1 per cent in 1998-99. The external sector continued to be comfortable and
the resilience of the Indian economy was again demonstrated notwithstanding the
significant increase in oil import payments. The current account deficit (CAD) was
restricted to less than 1 per cent. Strong capital flows led by a turn-around in portfolio
inflows, resulted in an overall balance of payments surplus for the fourth successive year.
This enabled an increase in foreign exchange reserves by US $ 5.5 billion during 1999-
2000 to US $ 38.00 billion by end-March, 2000. Net investments by FIIs was buoyant
strength with the enlargement of invisible surplus and capital flows.
sentiments and taking a view on during 1999-2000 and resulted in a large net inflow of around Rs.10 ,000 crore as against
a net 
Financial markets in India remained relatively stable during 1999-2000. The
recovery of South East Asian market economies has had a favourable impact on domestic
financial market conditions. Let me emphasise that a significant feature of the financial
market activity during the nineties has been the growing inter linkages among the money,
foreign exchange and government securities markets. Furthermore, according to the
Report on Currency and Finance, 1998-99, there is an increased integration of different
segments within short-term financial market which is reflected in the co-movement of
interest rates.
Let me now turn to the developments in the money and government securities
market. The activity in the call money market is largely driven by the cash reserve
requirements. Recent years have been witnessing a relatively higher level of activity in
the call market and this could partly be attributed to the evolution of a new institutional
channel in the form of Primary Dealers. The average daily turnover in the recent period is
more than Rs.30 ,000 crore. The turnover and interest rates in the call money market
generally reflect varying liquidity conditions. The monthly average call rates for a greater
part of fiscal 1999-2000 ruled in the range of 8-10 per cent. The pressure on call rates
however continued during the month of June in the current fiscal and stabilised
afterwards.
Among several recent developments, Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) has
received much attention. By now every one is familiar with the scheme and it has
stabilised.   It would be appropriate to continue with the scheme as originally envisaged.
The scheme would eventually meet its ultimate objective of providing desirable quantum
of liquidity according to the needs of the system with flexible rates and help impart
greater stability. Let me say that we have carefully noted all the suggestions received and
shall address all the relevant issues taking into account the suggestions. One suggestion is
advancing the time of announcement of results.  Let me inform you, we shall announce
the LAF auction results by 12.30 p.m. and this measure would give the market
crore during 1998-99. disinvestment of around Rs.800 participants sufficient time to assess their funds requirements and act appropriately. We
shall implement this with effect from Monday, July 31, 2000.
Turning to the Government borrowing programme, in 1999-2000 Government's
programme was well managed without exerting an upward pressure on interest
rates.  In fact, interest rates generally moved down during the year particularly at the long
end of the market.  The debt management operations helped in moderating the interest
rates and in influencing the maturity pattern of the debt issues towards medium to long
duration. The borrowing cost to the government was stabilised at a relatively low level as
reflected in the weighted average interest rate of 11.77 per cent as against 11.86 per cent
As all of you are aware, the net market borrowing programme for the current
fiscal was budgeted at a Rs.76 ,383 crore. Considering the repayment obligations at
,321 crore, the gross borrowing requirements of the Central Government  amount to
Rs.1,17,704 crore. So far, Government has raised an amount of Rs.56 ,683 crore
representing 48 per cent of the gross amount (budgeted). Our own assessment at this
stage is that the market borrowing would not overshoot this budgeted amount. On our
part, we are quite confident of completing the Government's market borrowing
A word on policy measures.  The monetary measures recently announced by the
Reserve Bank are warranted by technical factors to address  what are otherwise construed
as transitory developments in the market. The fact is, even before these announcements
by RBI , there was an upward movement in the yields.  I would urge you to consider and
rationalise all the developments contextually.  Any interpretation out of context will not
be helpful.  It is our endeavour to make our policy approaches more and more transparent
and we welcome all comments and suggestions in this regard.
On the question of short-term and long-term paper, let me say that the results of
sale of two securities of 6 and 10 year  yesterday i.e., on July 28, 2000 clearly
maturities
programme without much difficulty.
Rs.41
in 1998-99.
borrowing indicate the good appetite for the long term paper, as evidenced from the market interest
for the ten year paper.  There is demand for long-term paper by institutional investors like
Life Insurance Corporation (LIC), pension funds and we will continue to cater to that
demand.  You would appreciate that in the ultimate analysis the investment decisions are
related to economic logic and economic fundamentals. Our strategy will continue to be a
mix of auctions, tap sales, private placements and with issues of short-term and long-term
instruments.
I may take this opportunity to flag another important issue which is critical for the
further development of the Government securities market. This relates to the
development of the retail market for Government securities.  A wider investor base
eventually would have a favourable impact on the cost of borrowing. Appreciating this,
the Reserve Bank of India is engaging its attention for an appropriate policy approach to
develop this market. My colleague Mrs. Usha Thorat will deliberate on this issue in
detail. I would appreciate if some concrete suggestions  emerge out of the deliberations
upgradation is a part of the reform of debt market.   RBI is planning
to set up an Electronic Dealing System which will facilitate ( i) electronic bidding in
auctions and (ii) dealing in Government securities and money market instruments
amongst market players and also with RBI.  Such an electronic system will provide
transparency on prices and volumes traded on real time basis to the market.  To facilitate
settlement in Government securities transactions, the dealing system will be linked to
securities settlement system in PDO.  This will include screen based trade reporting
system for settlement, supported by RBI's INFINET, located in this city of Hyderabad, as
communication backbone.  This system will broaden the participation in the auction
The Reserve Bank has taken on hand a comprehensive integrated project on PDO
computerisation and negotiated dealing screen system.  The integrated project would
facilitate on-line screen based execution for trade settlement in Government securities
system and improve the speed of settlement of secondary market transactions.
           Technological 
here.transactions.  The systems will reside at a main location termed as Central PDO at
Mumbai while regional  would have linkages with Central PDO thus acting as
Now, on the issue of a modern settlement system, Governor made a mention in
October 1999 and April 2000 on the need for setting up of a Clearing Corporation for
money and debt securities. It is expected that such a corporation, inter alia, would pave
the way for further opening up of the repo market to PSU bonds and bonds of financial
demat form in depositories.  The proposal to set up such a Corporation
PDs and action to establish such a Corporation is being initiated.
A “Core Group” has been set up to prepare the project report/indicate a road map and
work out all modalities for setting up of the Clearing Corporation for debt securities.  To
begin with, the Clearing Corporation would be for settlement of all Government
securities and other debt securities in demat form to facilitate repo transactions by all the
market participants as also for money market and forex settlement.  I may take this
opportunity to urge the PDAI  to speed up all the process of preparatory work so that we
can quickly move forward. The establishment of the Corporation will be another major
land mark in the institution building for development of markets.
Primary Dealers have to play a significant role in stabilising the markets for  Government
securities;  any measures by market players to contain volatility can greatly contribute to
the orderly development of markets.  As you are aware, from time to time adequate
support has been extended by RBI to the PDs in their endeavours to play their role
effectively in the Gilts market.  Increasingly they should be exploring new sources of
funds. They should be playing a market-making role in the repo market.  They should be
raising and providing funds more and more in the repo market and develop a sound
Gilts.
Wrapping up the 
discussion, let me say -
secondary market in the 
has since come from the 
institutions held in 
extended arms of Central PDO. The new project will be implemented in phases.
PDOs The LAF will continue as a major instrument of liquidity management and
as we go along we can consider refinements.  One measure we could
straight away implement is advancing the time of announcement of results
 Our assessment is that all economic fundamentals/factors are conducive
for the successful completion of the Government borrowing 
 The strategy of auctions, tap issues and private placements will continue.
There will be adequate demand for long term paper and we shall continue
to issue short and 
 We will make further progress in bringing in technology - mediated
 The Core Group should endeavour to complete the preparatory work for
 Primary Dealers have a role to play in stabilising the markets - viewing all
the policy measures in the proper context.
 Primary Dealers also have to look for alternate sources of funds and more
and more recourse to 
 We should take all measures to develop a strong secondary market in
Let me thank you for giving me this opportunity to talk to all of you and let me
I am thankful to Shri R.K. Pattnaik, Director and Shri R. Gurumurthy, Assistant General
Manager of Internal Debt Management Cell, Reserve Bank of India for their assistance.
wish the seminar all success.
Government Securities.
(viii)
Repo market is expected.
(vii)
(vi)
the new Clearing Corporation expeditiously.
(v)
systems in dealings and settlements.
(iv)
long term instruments.
(iii)
this fiscal.
programme
(ii)
to 12.30 p.m.
(i)