Fiscal Transparency and Beyond *
It has always been an extremely productive venture for me to visit Indian Merchants
Chamber and interact with the gathering.  The subject chosen today has special relevance at
this juncture for several reasons.  The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has released a Report on
Fiscal Transparency a few weeks ago and it is necessary to view it and debate it in the context
of fiscal challenges and their linkages with monetary policy.  The Fiscal Responsibility and
Budget Management Bill (FRB) currently under consideration has a special relevance to the
overall policy relating to fiscal management.  Further, the parameters for the Tenth Five Year
In the first section of the presentation, there will be an overview of the fiscal
transparency issues.  It must be noted that the transparency issues are neutral to the substance
and the content of the policy, though transparency is aimed at enhancing the quality and
accountability of the policy.  It will be clear that, while Indian standards are by and large upto
international ones, some improvements are possible and most of these are envisaged in the
proposed FRB.  The second section elaborates on fiscal policy, narrating the various
proposals under consideration at the central and state levels encompassing taxes, expenditures
and public debt.  It would be clear from the narration that there are several substantive issues
that need to be addressed on an urgent basis, and almost all the proposals are well laid out.
Indeed, a qualitative improvement in the fiscal management enhances the scope for
transparency in policies, and both these aspects are addressed in FRB, as summarised in the
third section.  The fourth section elaborates the links between fiscal, monetary and financial
transparency, in particular on management of public debt, where there is, understandably,
convergence in the views of the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency; the Advisory Group
on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies and FRB.  The fifth section explores the
extent of fiscal accountability to Parliament as per the provisions of the Constitution and
attempts to establish that FRB supplements and enhances such accountability.  The linkages
between fiscal and monetary policies are discussed in conceptual terms in the penultimate
section to establish that appropriate legal provisions and institutional structures such as those
envisaged under FRB are only of enabling nature and the actual conduct of macro policies
will have to address a complex set of issues.  The concluding section emphasises the
criticality of addressing the fiscal issues, and focuses on qualitative aspects in the medium
term without which legislative changes and transparency practices will prove to be a burden
The Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes was
constituted in December 1999 to identify and monitor developments in global standards and
codes, consider aspects of applicability of these standards to the Indian financial system,
periodically review the status and make available its Reports to all concerned  in
public or private sector. The Standing Committee in turn established ten separate Advisory
Groups to look into existing Codes and standards in specific areas.  One of these groups, viz.,
Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency, under the chairmanship of Dr. Montek Singh
Ahluwalia, submitted its Report to the Standing Committee in June 2001. The Report has
been put on RBI website and is slated to be widely discussed, along with reports of other
Groups.
organisations
Fiscal Transparency
rather than a benefit.
Plan under contemplation in the Planning Commission do impinge on the fiscal issues.
Mr. Chairman and friends,The Group reviewed and analysed the transparency practices in relation to
international standards in respect of various aspects of fiscal transparency. It has examined the
extent to which fiscal practices in India comply with the International Monetary Fund's 
The IMF Manual on Fiscal Transparency provides four general principles of fiscal
transparency, which form the basic structure of Code of Good Practices. These principles
relate to (a) clarity of roles and responsibilities within government and between governments
and the rest of the economy; (b) public availability of information on fiscal outcomes; (c)
open and transparent budget preparation, execution and reporting; and (d) assurances of
integrity, including those relating to the quality of fiscal data and the need for independent
The overall assessment of the Group is that current fiscal practices at the Central
First, the roles and responsibilities of the central and state governments are well
defined and there is a clear legal framework governing the management of the budget and
extra-budgetary funds. The responsibility of fiscal management is clearly specified. 
interface between the Government and the rest of the economy is governed by elaborate
Second, although the division of expenditure and tax powers is complex, with areas of
overlapping responsibility and multiple channels for resource transfers, the basic
requirements of transparency are met.
Third, the requirement that management of public funds should ensure accountability
is fully met. The ethical standards of behaviour for public servants are clear and well
publicized with statutory laws relating to the behaviour of civil servants, and prescribed
penalties for misconduct.
Fourth, Indian practice complies fully with international standards regarding public
availability of information for the year for which the Budget is presented and also for
Fifth, India subscribes to the Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS), and
advance release calendar dates have been announced for release of data on central
government operations. The aggregate budget outturns of the central government covering
expenditure, revenues and fiscal deficit are publicly available on a monthly basis based on the
Sixth, the institutional mechanisms for independent audit of fiscal data are very
strong. The accounts of both the central government and the State governments are audited
by the CAG, which has developed an enviable reputation for high standards of independent
The Group, however, indicated that there are deficiencies in some important areas 
First, current budget practices could be improved if the basic principles of budget
management are embodied in a general budget system law with Constitutional or near
2
the relevant observations are worth noting.
and
and strict scrutiny.
information provided by the Controller General of Accounts (CGA).
preceding years.
Constitutional and legal framework.
The
Government level satisfy the minimum requirements of the Code in many areas.
scrutiny of fiscal information.
of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency.
CodeConstitutional status. Hence, the Group recommends that the scope of the FRB be amplified
to include the essential elements of a budget law, list macro-economic assumptions regarding
 growth, inflation, export and import growth, current account deficit, savings and
investment rates, and project major categories of expenditure and revenue for two years
Second, since information provided on contingent liabilities, major tax expenditures
and quasi-fiscal activities by both central and state governments and also quantification of
fiscal risks is inadequate, it recommends increased reporting of these elements, because
Third, given the scale of fiscal activity and the size of state level fiscal imbalances and
other relevant extra-budgetary transactions, the group suggests provision of information on
consolidated position of central and state governments, the overall public sector balance, as
also on government equity in public sector enterprises and outstanding loans to these
Fourth, the simplification of the tax structure, with greater use of information
technology, especially electronic filing, is called for in view of the complexity of the tax
structure, especially the large number of exemptions, which create room for uncertainty and
Fifth, from the central bank’s perspective, the Group indicated that the most important
deficiency relates to the prevalence of quasi-fiscal activities ( QFAs) undertaken by the
banking system and by non-financial public sector enterprises, which are not transparently
identified and quantified. It notes that the RBI continues to provide direct support to
government securities at the primary issue stage, in order to limit the impact of government
borrowing on the market interest rate for government securities. It recommends the
implementation of the FRB proposal, that the RBI end the practice of providing direct
support to government securities at the primary issue stage, by the end of 3 years, with effect
The overall assessment by the Group is: “To summarise, current fiscal practices at the
central government level meet most of the minimum requirements of the Code and the gaps
identified above could be closed in a relatively short time.  We recommend that action should
be taken as outlined above to close these gaps so that India can be said to be complying fully
with the Code.  The FRB contains many of the important initiatives need in this context”.
FRBMB for FRB).
In regard to fiscal practices at the state level, they were felt to be generally behind the
standards achieved at the central government level, thus it recommends that the Finance
Secretaries Forum could review the Report of the Advisory Group on Fiscal Transparency
and determine a set of minimum standards on transparency which all state governments
should achieve within a three year period.
In brief, the Group focuses on provisions relating to Budget management in FRB as
an adequate response to the need for enhancing fiscal transparency.  It must be noted that the
GDP3
Group’s recommendations are neutral to the actual content and conduct of fiscal policy.
(The Group uses the acronym 
from April 2004.
administrative discretion.
enterprises and the Oil Pool Account deficit.
ignoring these would understate the potential fiscal risk.
ahead.Transparency in fiscal operations implies openness towards public about structure and
functions of the Government, fiscal policy intention, public sector accounts and fiscal
projection.  Fiscal transparency is important because fiscal soundness is a core requirement
for financial stability and transparency is needed for markets to be able to assess fiscal
soundness accurately. However, there is a distinction between fiscal transparency and the
other two ingredients of good fiscal management ., the soundness of public finances and
the efficiency of fiscal policy instruments.  The soundness of fiscal management relates to the
macro-economic issue of the fiscal balance, which is essential for stability. The efficiency of
fiscal policy instruments relates to the micro-economic issues of the efficiency of particular
expenditure programmes in achieving their objectives and the efficiency of tax policies in
The challenges of fiscal policy in India are well known but the measures envisaged to
enhance the quality of fiscal management need to be debated, not merely at the time of the
budget-presentation but on a more continuous basis preferably in a medium term framework.
It may be worthwhile to briefly recall the current thinking as enunciated by  (a) strategy of
Tenth Five Year Plan, (b) discussion paper on medium term fiscal strategy, (c) Report on Tax
Policy and Tax Administration,      (d) Reports on Expenditure Commission, (e) Report of
Tax Reforms commission in ; and (f) observations of Finance Commission on
Public debt.
The Macroeconomic parameters adopted for the Tenth Plan as set out in the Draft
Approach Paper describes the base-line position and the Tenth Plan target.  The base-line
scenario is described as one emerging from current macro-economic trends supplemented by
(a) Average GDP growth rate per annum is expected to reach 8 per cent in the target
scenario from 6.5 per cent in the base line scenario.
 Gross investment rate is expected to increase to 32.6 per cent from 27.8 per cent in the
(c) Implicit incremental capital out-put ratio ( ICOR) from 4.28 per cent in base line to
(d) GDP to 2.8 per cent of 
(e) Gross domestic savings from 26.3 per cent in base line to increase to 29.8 per cent in
target scenario with public sector savings ratio rising from 2.4 per cent of GDP to 4.6
per cent.
 Within public sector, Government savings would show a turn around from negative
0.6 per cent to 1.7 per cent of GDP, while public enterprises would decline from 3 per
cent to 2.9 per cent.
4
(f)
target scenario.
GDP in Current account deficit to increase from 1.5 per cent of 
improve to 4.08 per cent in the target scenario.
base line.
(b)
pipe line. the fiscal measures, which are already in the 
Tenth  Five Year Plan (2002-2007)  Strategy
Karnataka
raising revenues with minimum economic distortion.
viz
 Fiscal Policy(g) Private corporate sector savings to increase from 4.9 per cent to 5.8 per cent, while
household sector savings would improve from 19.0 per cent to 19.4 per cent in the
Consistent with the macro-parameters, the Tenth Plan approach paper presented a
fiscal correction scenario for the Central Government  needed to achieve GDP target. These
are:
(a) Fiscal Deficit of the Centre is to reduce from 5.0 per cent during the Ninth Plan to 2.6
per cent of GDP in the Tenth Plan.  The combined gross fiscal deficit of the 
 Revenue Deficit of the Centre is to reduce from 3.4 per cent of GDP during Ninth
(c) Revenue receipts of the Centre is to grow from 9.1 per cent of GDP in the ninth Plan
(d) GDP in Ninth Plan to 10.7 per
(e) GDP in the Ninth Plan to 14.0 per
cent of 
 Non-Debt Capital   receipts is to increase from 0.8 per cent of GDP in Ninth Plan to
The draft approach paper identified several decisions that have to be made to achieve
the fiscal correction needed at the Centre.
 Gross Budgetary Support for the Plan should be steadily increased as percentage of
GDP to 5 per cent by the terminal year of the Plan, implying average annual growth
 Reduction in the number of government employees by 3 per cent per year with no
new recruitment during the five year period.  All additional requirements should be
 Non-Plan expenditure excluding interest payments, defence allocations and pay and
allowances held constant in real terms to current level implying annual growth rate of
5 per cent.
 Gross tax (including diesel cess) to GDP ratio rising from 9.16 per cent in 2001-02 to
a buoyancy of 1.44 per cent.
 Disinvestment process to be accelerated, yielding Rs.16 ,000 crore - Rs.17,000 
 Higher tax revenue should be achieved mainly through buoyancy and expansion of
the tax base.  Besides, a widespread and bold imposition of user  charges of all non-
merit goods.
5
(vi)
per year on the average over the first three years of the Tenth Plan.
crore (v)
11.7 per cent in 2006-07 implying 
(iv)
(iii)
rationalisation of various Ministries. made through redeployment and 
(ii)
of 18.3 per cent per annum.
(i)
1.2 per cent in the Tenth Plan.
(f)
GDP in the Tenth Plan.
Total expenditure is to reduce from 15.4 per cent of 
cent in the Tenth Plan.
Revenue Expenditure is to reduce from 12.5 per cent of 
to 10.2 per cent in Tenth Plan.
Plan to 0.5 per cent in the Tenth Plan.
(b)
and States is targeted at 3.3 per cent during the Tenth Plan.
Centre
target scenario.It is obvious that fiscal corrections at the Centre and States, are critical to reach even
the modest targets for growth indicated in the approach paper and decisions needed are
perhaps of a hard nature.
A Discussion Paper ., “India :  Primary Aspects of a Medium Term Fiscal Strategy”
Shome in December 2000,  highlighted major fiscal policy issues in
First, on Centre's tax reform the Paper notes that while bringing down customs tariff
rates to internationally comparable levels is a challenge, a greater challenge remains in terms
of streamlining the exemptions. While there has been palpable progress in restructuring, the
central excise rate structure as well as in reducing distortions by minimising taxation of
inputs, existing leakages from the tax base through exemptions pose a major problem. A
major medium term challenge remains the coordination of central excises ( CENVAT) with a
state level VAT, with the objective of structuring a national VAT.  Finally, it is imperative to
introduce comprehensive taxation of services at the central level at the earliest.  It should also
Second, on State's tax reform,  Paper notes that some states are moving ahead with
their own VAT reforms pertaining only to intra state sales.  These attempts are not as yet
coordinated fully among states and may conflict with agreements on the floor rates of their
sales tax regimes.  It is important to address the issue of a state level VAT that includes
interstate trade.  This will obviously require close coordination among states and also with
the centre Centre.
Third, on expenditure policy, the Paper recommends that in accordance with the Pay
Commission and Expenditure Commission recommendations ,  the Ministry of Finance
should propose a definitive strategy to reduce non-Plan expenditures.  Its wage bill should be
reduced through reduction in Government employment by a tenth as a first step, going upto a
third in the final analysis in reflection of latest Expenditure Commission and Pay
Fourth, turning to subsidies, the Paper reiterates that subsidy reforms should be
directed towards reduction in their size; making them of finite duration; using them for strict
economic objectives; making them transparent; and administering them through final goods,
with a view to  their reach towards the target population at minimum cost.
Recovery rates, even for non-merit services are low.  Most important, an increase in user
charges in agriculture, irrigation, industries, power and transport would substantially mitigate
Fifth, if public debt is to be amortised completely in 5-20 years, the Paper draws
attention to the severe pressure on the primary balance-fiscal balance net of interest payments
- that will ensue.  Of course, if disinvestment in public enterprises progresses with some
success, the proceeds could be utilised to amortise public debt.  In the absence of any such
indication, however, the debt sustainability simulations of the Paper do not assume any role
disinvestment proceeds in retiring public debt.
Finally, the performance of individual states in terms of their fiscal deficit to 
ratios has not changed much over the past decade, with poor performers remaining below the
GDP6
of 
pressures on the fiscal deficit.
maximising
Commission recommendations.
which  should be facilitated by guidance from the 
the
be seriously considered for appropriate assignment at the levels of states and local bodies.
India.  Major observations of the Discussion Paper are:
Parthasarathi prepared by 
viz
Medium Term Fiscal Strategybetter performers. This indicates as per the Paper that the Centre's revenue sharing and
redistribution across states have not necessarily encouraged states to improve their
The Planning Commission constituted an Advisory Group under the Chairmanship of
Prof. Parthasarathi Shome in July 2000 to study tax policy and tax administration issues and
make appropriate recommendations at different levels of Government with the purpose of
generating adequate resources for the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-03 to 2006-07). The Group
The Group has made revenue projections for Tenth Plan period based on an overall
growth in GDP of 15 per cent in normal terms during the Tenth Plan period.  The Group has
observed that the Tax- GDP ratio of Centre and States has declined from 16.07 per cent of
GDP in 1989-90 to 14.18 per cent in 1999-2000.  Consistent with the GDP target, the Group
has set in a target of Tax- GDP ratio of 17.78 per cent by the terminal year of 2006-07 from
14.09 per cent in 1999-2000.  This would imply a 3.69 percentage point increase in Tax-
ratio.  Of this increase, the Centre would have to achieve 2.08 percentage points of GDP and
the States 1.61 percentage points of GDP through intensified tax revenue effort.  In the case
of Central Taxes, the Group assigns increase in terms of  in excise duties from 3.2 per
cent to 3.5 per cent (+0.3 per cent), corporation tax 1.6 per cent to 2.4 per cent (+0.8 per cent)
and personal income tax from 1.4 per cent to 1.9 per cent (+0.5 per cent).  Service tax is
projected to increase from 0.10 per cent of GDP in 1999-2000 to 0.57 per cent of GDP in
2006-07 (+0.47 per cent). At the State level, sales tax is projected to increase from 3.1 per
cent of GDP to 4.1 per cent (+1.0 per cent), and State excise from 0.8 per cent to 1.0 per cent
(+0.2 per cent).
Some of the major recommendations on Tax  policy measures which have revenue
implications are:  (a) m aximum marginal rate of personal income tax rate be retained at 30
per cent and retention of the existing three rate structure with modification in slabs.  (b) 
corporate tax rate not to exceed the maximum marginal personal income tax (30 per cent),
coupled with abolition of the distribution tax on dividends and consequent reduction of the
tax rate for foreign companies to the level recommended for domestic companies, (c) the 20
per cent dividend tax should be abolished, and instead, the Minimum Alternative Tax should
be reconstituted as a tax equal to the aggregate of 0.75 per cent of adjusted net worth plus 10
per cent of the dividend distributed, (d) the income of the Funds should be subjected to tax at
the lowest marginal rate of personal income tax, i.e., at 10 per cent, (e) in respect of Union
Excise Duty, a two-rate structure of 16 per cent together with a higher rate which should be
introduced with an increasing number of items to be converged to fall under the 16 per cent
rate to minimise classification problems. (The rates would have to be adjusted for inclusion
CENVAT ),  (f) the median tariff rate in regard to Customs Duties should be
brought down to 25 percent in the 2002-03 budget since the objective should be to bring
down the median tariff rate to 20 percent in 2003-04 and 15 per cent in 2004-05.
The Group recommended that States should adopt a consumption type Value Added
Tax (VAT) i.e. there should be no distinction between raw materials and capital goods in
allowing VAT credit. The consumption base must comprehensively include manufacturers
and dealers of all  goods indicated in sales tax schedules.  Further, the VAT on services
should be fully integrated with the VAT on goods, both in its design and administration, with
GDPGDP7
of services in the 
the
submitted its Final Report in May 2001.
Tax Administration
Report of the Advisory Group on Tax Policy and
performance.an appropriate mechanism to set-off service input tax against goods output tax and .
A destination based, invoice credit method, dual VAT one at the Central level and another at
the level of States comprising both goods and services could be envisaged by the end of the
.
Of particular reference to financial sector and conduct of monetary policy are the
recommendations relating to elimination of tax incentives on savings .  The Group suggests
that tax incentives under Sections 80CCC, 80, 80L and 10(15) of the Income Tax Act be
abolished, at least in phases.  Tax concessions under Sections 80D, 80DD, 80DDB and 80E
are to be given in the form of tax credit rather than as deduction from income to improve
equity.  The rollover provision relating to capital gains under Section 54, 54B. 54D, 54EA
and 54EB are sought to be removed.  It may be noted that the Union Budget 2001-02 has
The Group also suggested that Provisions of Sections 10(8), 10(8A), 10(8B), and
.
The Government has set up an Expenditure Reforms Commission to improve
expenditure management and to find solution to the process of downsizing of Government in
a systematic way so that the role and administrative structure of the Government are reduced.
The first report deals with Food Subsidy and the second report mainly dealt with 
optimising Government staff strength.
The Union Budget 2001-02 has effected some of the recommendations of the
First, the Budget has proposed that instead of providing subsidised 
financial assistance will be provided to the State Governments to enable them to procure
  to Below Poverty Line families at subsidised rates.
Second, Government has decided to implement the recommendations of the
Expenditure Reforms Commission for a phased programme of complete decontrol of urea by
April 1, 2006.
T hird, downsizing in six Ministries will be implemented by July 31, 2001 and
identified surplus staff transferred to the surplus pool.
There are several aspects of fiscal stress at state level, which have been articulated, in
the annual publication on State Finances brought out by RBI.  Hence, in the current narration,
The Government of Karnataka as a part of efforts towards economic restructuring, set
up the Tax Reforms Commission to ( i) study the existing tax structure and tax collection
procedures in Karnataka and (ii) to recommend measures for augmenting State’s tax revenue
The Report dealt with  ( ) extension of the tax base by increasing coverage and
removing exemptions and concessions, (ii)  and reduction in tax slabs with an
8
rationalisation
i
by widening tax base and preventing tax evasion.
only a latest report on tax reform at state level is described.
Karnataka Report of the Tax Reforms Commission in 
foodgrains
foodgrains,
Expenditure Reforms Commission.
fertiliser subsidy and 
rationalising
Expenditure Reforms Commission
10(9) be deleted, which provide exemption of foreign income and remuneration
already initiated measures in this direction.
Tenth Plan
vice versaeye on the basic growth and equity objectives of each tax, (iii) tax rates (whether ad 
or specific) and their effects on distribution of the tax burden and the incentive-disincentive
structure for economic agents and consumers and (iv) improvements required in governance
With regard to sales tax, the Commission has recommended elimination of
exemptions and concessions, broadening of the tax base and simplification of tax structure.
The Commission has suggested restructuring of sales tax rates by classifying commodities
under three tax rates 4 per cent, 8 per cent and 12 per cent.
The Commission has recommended introduction of value added tax (VAT) at the
State level with a view to minimizing distortions and improving revenue productivity. To
facilitate this, the Report has detailed sequential steps that are required to ensure smooth
The Report has also noted certain inter-State issues with regard to introduction of
VAT.  It is observed that given the floor rates agreed to by States, it would be difficult to
design a VAT that is single rated or two rated by any particular State.  Further, it would be
necessary for the Center to give up power to levy Sales Tax on certain commodities. Yet
another issue relates to revenue loss for the State on account of VAT. The States are
presumably expecting that the Centre will make up the revenue loss emanating from the
process of change. There is a need to consider the issue of revenue compensation to losing
states in a comprehensive manner. Otherwise, the process of VAT introduction in all States is
The commission has recommended that a list of beneficiaries of tax exemptions and
concessions above a limit should be placed before the legislature and the public as a part of
the annual budget exercise. The Report recommends strengthening of the information system
computerisation of the tax returns.
One of the terms of reference of the Eleventh Finance Commission ( ) was to
review the state of finances of the Union and the States and suggest ways and means whereby
Governments, collectively and severally, may bring about a restructuring of public finances so
as to restore budgetary balance and maintain macroeconomic stability. Regarding public debt,
§  First, the ratio of government debt (including external debt) to GDP is currently about 65
per cent. At the current level of indebtedness, over 40 per cent of the gross revenues of the
Centre go into interest payments alone. In case of States, interest payments constitute on an
average about 22 per cent of the revenue receipts.  If the public finances are to be
restructured, the level of government debt should be brought down to a level that would
help to contain interest payments to a reasonable proportion of revenue receipts so that
§ Second, the growth of domestic debt of the Government had slowed down in the nineties
following the fiscal corrections in the early years of the reforms with a narrowing of the
wide gap between debt growth and nominal  growth that prevailed in the eighties (19.4
per cent as against 14.9 per cent). Yet, domestic debt growth continued to outpace growth in
GDP9
adequate revenues are available for providing essential public services.
EFC were: the major observation of the 
EFC
 Eleventh Finance Commission’s Observations on Public Debt
in the State by creating a database on major taxpayers and 
likely to become less viable and it is certain to slow down.
transition to the VAT by drawing a road map for adoption of VAT at State level.
to improve voluntary tax compliance as also to facilitate administration.
valoremGDP in the nineties as well (15.2 per cent as against 12.5 per cent), pointing to the
§  Third, currently, the sustainability condition is violated in the budgets of the Centre, in the
combined accounts of the Centre and States and individually in many States. Unless the
present trends are reversed, and the deficits are brought down, the debt- GDP ratio will keep
growing undermining the solvency of the public sector.
§ Fourth, one of the basic structural weaknesses of the fiscal system is the ballooning of the
pension liabilities of the public sector, a “ticking time bomb,” which may require some
§ Finally, from the angle of solvency and the likely impact of the high debt- ratio on the
economy and the Government budget, for the system as a whole, i.e.,  and States
combined, the debt- ratio needs to be reduced to around 55 per cent from its current
level of 65 per cent. For this level to be attained and sustained, the proportion of interest
payments to revenue receipts should not go beyond 25 per cent as against the current level
of 35 per cent. This will further require raising the level of revenue receipts to GDP to 20
per cent. While for the Centre the desirable norm for interest payments would be 35 per cent
The Government of India constituted the Committee on Fiscal Responsibility
Legislation  on January 17, 2000 to go into various aspects of the fiscal system and
recommended a draft legislation  on fiscal responsibility.  This was followed by an
announcement in the Budget 2000-01 for a strong institutional mechanism embodied in a
“Fiscal Responsibility Act” and bring the necessary legislative proposals to the Parliament.
Accordingly, the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, 2000 was introduced in
Lok 
The Bill envisages that the Central Government is to lay before both Houses of
Parliament, along with the annual Budget in each financial year, three statements of fiscal
policy, viz., Medium-term Fiscal Policy Statement; Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement and
Macro-economic Framework Statement.  Further, the Central Government is required to  take
appropriate measures to eliminate the revenue deficit, bring down the fiscal deficit and build
up adequate revenue surplus and in particular  (a) reduce revenue deficit by an amount
equivalent to one-half per cent, or more of the estimated gross domestic product at the end of
each financial year beginning on the 1 day of April 2001; (b) reduce revenue deficit to nil
within a period of five financial years beginning from the initial financial year on the 1 day
of April 2001 and ending on the 31 day of March 2006; (c) build up surplus amount of
revenue and utilise such amount for discharging liabilities in excess of assets; (d) reduce
fiscal deficit by an amount equivalent to one-half per cent or more of the estimated gross
st 
domestic product at the end of each financial year beginning on the 1 day of April; (e)
reduce fiscal deficit for a financial year to not more than two per cent of the estimated gross
domestic product for that year within a period of five financial years beginning from the
initial financial year on the first day of April 2001 and ending on the 31 day of March 2006,
and (f) not give guarantee for any amount exceeding one-half per cent of the estimated gross
GDPGDP10
domestic product in any financial year and;
st
st
st
st
Sabha in December 2000.
Fiscal Responsibility
of revenue receipts, for the States this ratio should be at about 18 per cent.
Centre
viable scheme of pension funding.
unsustainability of the fiscal deficit.Further, the Central Government has to ensure within a period of ten financial years,
beginning from the initial financial year on the 1 day of April 2001, and ending on the 31
day of March 2011, that the total liabilities (including external debt at current exchange rate
at the end of a financial year) do not exceed fifty per cent of the estimated gross domestic
product for that year.  There are provisions for relaxation from deficit reduction to deal with
unforeseen demands on the finances of the Central Government on account of national
Of particular relevance to Reserve Bank is the prohibition of direct borrowings by the
Central Government from the Reserve Bank of India after three years, except by way of
advances to meet temporary cash needs under certain circumstances.  It must be noted that
this provision does not prohibit participation of Reserve Bank in secondary market and does
not eliminate monetisation.  However, the scope for private placement of debt with RBI or
devolvement of auctions of public debt on RBI is eliminated.  In other words, the extent and
terms of such monetisation would depend on the judgement of Reserve Bank in regard to
overall stability.  Such operational freedom to RBI, whether enshrined in the FRB or not, is
essential to assure the system that conduct of monetary policy balances the three relevant
elements, namely, the fiscal needs of Government, the compulsion of deregulated interest rate
regime and requirements of a more open external sector.  In fact, separation of functions of a
public debt manager from that of monetary authority should be viewed in this context.
In view of the linkage between fiscal and monetary policies, fiscal transparency
should be accompanied by transparency in monetary and financial policies. Thus, the
Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies (Chairman: Shri M.
Narasimham) indicated an overall concept and context of transparency, evaluated India’s
First, in the context of their Report, the Advisory Group explained that transparency
refers to an environment in which the objective of policy, its legal, institutional and economic
framework, policy decisions and their rationale, data and information relating to monetary
and financial policies and the specifics of accountability of different agencies are provided to
the public in an unequivocal and understandable manner and accessible on a timely basis.
Transparency should not be viewed as an end in itself, but a necessary prerequisite of good
governance as policy actions pass through the test of public scrutiny.  The Advisory Group
was of the view that greater transparency would compel the authorities to bring about a
greater degree of rigour in the formulation of strategies and choice of instruments and there
are distinct advantages in a well-informed public debate on the objectives and instruments.
At the same time, the Advisory Group recognized that there may be good reason, for central
banks not to disclose certain internal deliberations and documentation and near-term
monetary and exchange rate policy implementation strategies.  The authorities have to
display considerable finesse while drawing the line on disclosures.  The Advisory Group
further observed that monetary policy is only an aspect of overall economic policy and,
therefore, there is need for convergence in policies as also transparency in other aspects of
Secondly, on the basis of a critical evaluation of India’s compliance with International
Codes, the Advisory Group noted that the RBI’s policies and operations largely conform to
the  Code, but there are clearly a number of areas where improvements need to be made
before India can be said to be fully compliant with the  Code.  In the area of
11
IMF
IMF
economic policy.
compliance with international codes and made several recommendations.
Links between Fiscal, Monetary and Financial Transparency
security or natural calamities of national dimension.
st stdissemination of information and the rationale of policies, the RBI could be considered as
being in accord with international best practices though there could be scope for further
improvement, especially in providing precision to the monetary policy mandate and revealing
of the process of monetary policy formulation.  The Advisory Group recommends that the
process of communicating the policy process, albeit on a post facto basis, needs to be
Thirdly, the Advisory Group recommended that the determination of interest rates
should be exclusively a monetary policy function and that there should be well calibrated
legislative measures to separate debt management and monetary policy functions.  The
Government should set up its own independent Debt Management Office to take over, in a
phased manner, the present debt management functions discharged by the RBI.  The
Advisory Group recognized that separation of debt management and monetary policy is a
necessary but not a sufficient condition for an effective monetary policy, which would also
Fourthly, the Advisory Group was of the view that what the RBI needs, by way of
autonomy is headroom to operate monetary policy and this it would have once debt
management is separated from monetary policy and the fisc is in reasonable balance.  Over a
phased period, as debt management is gradually distanced from monetary policy, the
Government and RBI should progressively work towards greater clarity in publicly setting
out the objectives of monetary policy.  The RBI should evolve a move to greater transparency
in setting out the process of monetary policy formulation so that accountability of the RBI
Fifthly, the Advisory Group made several other recommendations relating to
desirability of single objective for monetary policy with inflation as the objective, setting up
of a Monetary Policy Committee, disclosure requirements in respect of banks, financial
institutions, supervisory authorities, regulators, etc., but these have indirect linkage with
Of particular relevance is the fact that the Fiscal Transparency Group agrees that
transparency requires that the RBI should not intervene in the primary issue of Government
securities, but only in the secondary market where it can independently determine the trade-
off between risking monetary expansion and tolerating high interest rates. It notes that the
RBI as the debt manager is responsible for the success of the Government securities issue,
and is also allowed to pick up Government securities at the primary issue stage; thus, there is
a conflict between this role and its role as the monetary authority. As a debt manager, the RBI
wishes to minimize the cost of raising debt and is, therefore, often tempted to pick up
substantial amounts of Government securities to avoid creating interest rate spikes.  It notes
that the FRB seeks to prohibit RBI support of Government securities in the primary market
after 3 years, and views the same as a desirable step. It should be accompanied by the
Government taking over the debt management function from the RBI as recommended by the
In this regard, it is gratifying to note that Reserve Bank has made a formal
announcement in favour of separation of debt management function in the statement on
Monetary and Credit Policy of April 2001.  As implied in the statement, such separation is
12
predicated on a manageable level of fiscal deficit and Government borrowings.
Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies.
fiscal transparency.
can be properly assessed.
require a reasonable degree of fiscal responsibility.
institutionalised.In this context, it would be useful to critically examine the occasional suggestions in
the media in favour of some special arrangements between the RBI and Government in order
to reduce the growing interest burden on the Government.  Essentially, such special
arrangements imply write off of amounts due from Government or lending to Government by
the RBI at interest rates that are not market-related.  Basically, if a consolidated balance-sheet
view of Government and the RBI is taken, it would make no difference, but precisely for that
reason transparency may be preferred and the integrity of RBI having a separate balance
sheet maintained.  The case for transparency can be addressed on several grounds.  First, at a
philosophical level, authority to spend public money should be distinct from the authority to
create money and their relations accounted for properly.  Secondly, at a pragmatic level, the
political horizon is short term and hence some authority with a longer term view should be
juxtaposed.  Thirdly, operationally, to enable a central bank to conduct Open Market
Operations, especially in the context of external capital flows, there is need to have
marketable securities.  Fourthly, from a developmental perspective, development of debt
markets requires that market for Government securities is well developed, particularly for
financing of infrastructural needs.  Finally, it is necessary to distinguish between market
related operations in primary market, in secondary market and operations in non-market
related securities.  It can be argued, with some justification, that participation of RBI should
continue in primary market as long as fiscal deficit is relatively high and financial-markets
are not well developed.  However, such a justification, as a transitional measure, will not be
favour of non-market related interest rates to be charged by a central bank.
In any case, there should be addition to profits that necessarily accrue as a result of market
related rather than concessional rates.  Thus, movement towards transparency in relations
between RBI and Government in this regard proceeds in stages viz., elimination of automatic
monetisation; movement to market related interest rates in public-debt ;  exit from primary
It is well recognised that transparency augments the scope for accountability in its
broadest sense.  However, in the context of Parliamentary system, the arrangements for
accountability of fiscal management to Parliament gains significance.  In fact, it can be
argued that measures relating to fiscal transparency and fiscal responsibility explained so far
Firstly, it must be noted that currently according to the Constitutional requirement,
Parliamentary approval is needed for levying of taxes and incurring of expenditures.  As per
Article 112, the Annual Financial Statement ( AFS) which corresponds to the popular
conception of a Budget refers to estimated receipts with no distinction between current or
capital; and estimated expenditure divided into charged and otherwise.  In regard to the latter,
however, a distinction is made between revenue expenditure and others.  The AFS is not
required to be approved by Parliament and as such the deviations also do not require
Parliamentary ratification.  No doubt, the object of presenting AFS is to provide transparency
AFS provides a clear and unambiguous picture
of the state of Government accounts.  Since taxes require approval of Parliament and
expenditure needs Parliamentary authorisation, it can be argued that AFS placed before
Parliament for information is adequate to ensure accountability.  In this context, the proposed
Fiscal Responsibility Bill (FRB), by requiring the placement of medium-term fiscal
13
framework etc., before Parliament, partly addresses the issue of enhanced accountability.
on Government account and it is essential that 
complement and enhance accountability, as enshrined in the Constitution of India.
Fiscal Accountability
market for Government debt; and  finally removal of public debt function from RBI.
easy to advance in Secondly, the Parliamentary control over incurring of Government debt, whether
domestic or external is not explicit.  Thus, to the extent that only demands for grants as per
Article 113 and Appropriation Bill as per Article 114, as also supplementary grants as per
Article 115 are approved by Parliament, all expenditures need to be authorised by Parliament.
However, the entire debt servicing is charged as per Article 112(3)(c) and is thus not a
subject matter of Parliamentary approval. In brief, and in practice, Parliament seems to have
no role in formally approving the incurring of public debt or its servicing as per budgetary
procedure set out in the Constitution, although there are separate provisions in the
Constitution on the question of limits to borrowing only, on which Parliament has not yet
legislated. The FRB seeks to address the issue of imposing some overall limits on incurring
debt.
Thirdly, there are Constitutional provisions on public debt, some aspects of borrowing
and guarantees.  Debt is defined in Article 366 to include all liabilities to repay capital sums
or liability under guarantee.  Further, Article 112(3)(c) includes a reference to Sinking Fund
charges also, but establishment of such a fund is not mandatory.  Sinking Fund is not being
operated now except by a few States.  Most important, Article 292 provides for an enabling
legislation by Parliament fixing limits on borrowing and issue of guarantees and Parliament
has not passed any such legislation so far.  In this connection, it is worth noting that the
Article does not cover “other liabilities” which constitute debt but are not borrowings upon
the security of the Consolidated Fund of India.  FRB envisages a ceiling on debt which
includes total liabilities, though not contingent liabilities.  Thus the FRB covers some ground
In considering the issues of linkages between fiscal and monetary policies, it would be
useful to clarify what constitutes fiscal policy and what monetary policy is about.  As Mr.
Premchand puts it, “Government action can be considered to be purely a fiscal policy matter
only when the effect of borrowing is neutral in terms of the availability of money to the
private sector.  Pure fiscal policy is, however, rare, because any change in revenues and
expenditures involves changes in the financing of the budget surplus or deficit and, hence,
always has an interface with monetary policy.  Management of the debt – particularly, the
composition of the instruments, the timing of their issue, and their duration – are aspects
more closely associated with monetary policy”.  While in the academic literature, the optimal
mix of monetary and fiscal policies has been  with respect to different exchange rate
regimes, at an applied level, the relationship between fiscal and monetary policies may be
 in the context of public debt, especially in terms of choice between bond financing
Fiscal deficit, defined to be on cash basis for this discussion, can be financed either
through bond issuance or money creation, and financing of the fiscal deficit may be non-
voluntary or voluntary. Thus, a central bank may be obligated to extend credit to Government
through what has been described as “automatic monetisation”.  Similarly Government
securities may be placed in captive market by legal stipulations, say on provident funds,
Moreover, the financing of fiscal deficit may be at market determined or market
related rates or at rates, the latter being a by-product of non-voluntary financing.
Arguably, captive market finances Government bonds at concessional rates, private sector
14
concessional 
insurance and banking.
and money financing of fiscal deficit.
analysed
analysed
Issues and Coordination
Fiscal and Monetary Policy Linkages
and in some ways goes beyond what Article 292 envisages.may bear the burden; and when a central bank finances in a similar fashion, the Government
It must also be noted that while  of Government deficit could provide
primary liquidity to the market, liquidity creation could take place through other channels
also, viz., the central bank enlarging its holding of foreign currency assets; expanding its
lending to the commercial sector, and conducting open market operations divested from the
Government’s budgetary considerations.  On the whole, the analytics of fiscal-monetary
policy interface is thus not confined only to the quantum of monetisation of fiscal deficit, but
extends to optimal financing mix for the fiscal deficit that stabilises inflation, interest rates
In the light of this broad framework, it would be useful to clarify three important
issues relating to linkages at an operational level which are often debated and sometimes
misunderstood.
First, there is no ideal level of fiscal deficit, and critical factors are : How is it
financed and what is it used for?  While the size of public debt is determined by fiscal policy,
the composition of debt is decided by debt management policy.  The monetary impact
depends on who holds the debt and how the holding changes rather than by who initially
issues or subscribes to the debt.  The fiscal effect depends on the rate at which the size of debt
is changing and the cost of servicing the debt.  The monetary effect is determined by the
effect of public debt on aggregate demand and level of interest rates.
Secondly, the actions of monetary authority also affect public debt in mainly two
ways.  The initial financial cost to Government of placing debt depends, to some extent, on
the stance of monetary policy.  The choice, design and operation of monetary policy
instruments also impact the debt service costs.  For example, liquidity of Government
securities may be enhanced by monetary authority, through open market operations and
Thirdly, the management of public debt affects the conduct of monetary policy,
especially the operational autonomy of the central bank in at least three different ways.  The
perceived sustainability of public debt often affects interest rates.  The public debt
management affects the demand for money.  Above all, the management of public debt, in
countries like India, plays a critical role in development of domestic financial markets and
In view of the complex nature of linkages, coordination between fiscal and monetary
policies has to be considered from several angles.  Since both are aspects of shared overall
macro-economic policy objectives, at the first level the question is whether the relevant
fiscal-monetary policy mix is conducive to the macro objectives.  The relevant policy mix
relates to the level of fiscal deficit and the pattern of financing, especially the extent of
Secondly, whether operating procedures of monetary and fiscal authorities, especially
debt and cash management 
Thirdly, whether credibility of both monetary and fiscal policies is achieved in a
desirable direction.  Thus, a credible monetary policy can help moderate interest rates
15
provided the fiscal authority does not give rise to a different set of expectations.
are consistent and mutually reinforcing.
monetisation and the flow of external savings.
thus on the conduct of monetary policy, especially for its effective transmission.
reserve requirements.
and exchange rates at levels conducive for macroeconomic stability.
monetisation
as owner foregoes the revenue as profit transfer, except that “burden” is less transparent.Fourthly, whether due cognizance has been taken of the fact that monetary and fiscal
Finally, harmonious implementation of policies may require that one policy is not
It should be clear that fiscal issues are wide-ranging and need to be approached from
several angles, transparency being one of them.  It is necessary to appreciate that
transparency is no substitute for sound policy and their inter-relationship is somewhat
complex.  I had an occasion to briefly describe this link recently.  “It is also possible to
attempt a construct of the link between transparency and macroeconomic policy.  Good
macroeconomic policy and good standards is perhaps an ideal situation for a country.  Good
macroeconomic policy and poor transparency though not ideal is perhaps not risk by itself.
Bad macroeconomic policy and good transparency has large elements of risk and warrants
change in policy before launching into transparency.  The most risky combination perhaps is
bad macroeconomic policy and bad standards.  In a more dynamic sense, it can be argued that
As regards the importance and indeed criticality of fiscal policy, Governor Jalan has
articulated it in his recent Dr. Lecture : “At the same time, it is also
clear that unless we put our fiscal house in order and improve our public delivery systems, no
amount of macro-policy reforms by themselves will be sustainable or yield permanent
results”. Dr. Jalan adds : “Above all, we need fiscal empowerment as, without financial
resources, it is not feasible to lay a road or build a school.  The last is a most difficult task in
While considering the fiscal issues, it is not enough to consider quantities and ratios
and in fact, quality of adjustment is indeed more important.  This aspect was eloquently
expressed in the Seventh Conference of State Finance Secretaries.  They argued, that
whenever fiscal adjustment is attempted, there is a cut in non-committed expenditure, but not
in non-essential one.  A predominant part of the budget is committed expenditure, especially
interest, pensions and salaries, which have no flexibility.  As a consequence, there is often an
atrophy of delivery of services in as much as there may be hospitals manned by doctors and
nurses but no medicines, electricity or water supply.  Grants to several institutions performing
vital services are often postponed or reduced on account of fiscal  adjustment.  They
apprehend that cuts in output tend to be highly disproportional to cuts in expenditure making
expenditure cuts of non-committed items highly unproductive, thus undermining the reform
process.
Most important, some measures adopted for reducing fiscal deficit in one year could
have the potential to understate the deficit in the short run and exacerbate the problem in the
medium term.  For example, tax exemptions in lieu of budgetary support for a limited period
may give an impression of effort to reduce fiscal deficit but in reality could erode the
anticipated tax revenues, thus defeating the purpose.  In fact, the actual loss of revenue may
turnout to be more than the expenditures that were necessary to serve the purpose.  Time-
bound offers of tax-concessions have yet another problem of making it difficult for concerned
institution/activities to transit from tax-concessions to tax-payment.  Similarly, intra public-
sector transactions to reduce the fiscal deficit without a change in overall public-sector deficit
can be misleading.  Further, guarantees or letters of comfort may understate fiscal deficit at
16
view of the deadweight of the past, but it can no longer be avoided”.
C.D.Deshmukh Memorial 
transparency provides incentives to adopt good macroeconomic policies”.
Conclusion
unduly burdening the other for too long.
policy adjustments operate in different timeframes.the current juncture, but may have the potential to worsen it in future years.  The plea for
Finally, the related issues of transparency, policy, and institutional arrangements have
to be assessed, not in abstract or in absolutes, but in the current context of budget systems;
processes and practices as they operate now; levels of deficit and structural nature of deficits;
patterns of expenditures, taxes as well as tax-concessions; returns on public investments; and
finally, the maneuverability and flexibility needed for both fiscal and monetary authorities to
rendered by Shri.S.M.Pillai, Dr.B.N.Ananthaswamy, Smt.Abha Prasad, Smt.R.Kaushalya and 
Singh.
17
Shri.Bhupal
Dr.Reddy is thankful for the prompt assistance of  the Indian Merchants’ Chamber on July 17, 2001, at Mumbai. 
Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, to members of the Managing Committee * Address by 
ensure that outcomes are consistent with the intent.
transparency helps resolve these types of policy errors as well.