Indian Agriculture and Reform :
Concerns, Issues and Agenda*
Professor  garu , Vice Chancellor , 
 and friends.
 I am honoured by the fact that you have invited me to deliver the 
address. When the  first spoke to me about this lecture, I humbly submitted
to Professor  that, in the past, many eminent personalities like Governor,
Dr. , Professor G.S. , Professor , Dr. K.  Rao and
Professor  had delivered this address and so we should together explore
an appropriate scholar for the purpose.  But, Professor Parthasarathy insisted and said
that I had no choice. I do realise now that there is some merit in the invitation in the
sense that the Reserve Bank of India is perhaps the first central bank in the world to
have taken interest in matters relating to agriculture and agricultural finance and it
continues to do so.  RBI had conducted the first ever Rural Credit Survey in the
world, promoted the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) and, is financing endowment chairs on the subject in Universities.  Apart
from this, belonging to Andhra Pradesh and having worked in the Finance and
Planning Department in the State of Andhra Pradesh for several years, I have
On hearing the annual report on the activities of the Society, one cannot but be
impressed with the remarkable enthusiasm and commitment with which the Indian
Society of Agricultural Marketing is able to carry on its endeavour.   I think the work
methods of this Society should be advocated as a role model for other similar
academic societies to emulate. There is also a distinguishing feature of th
Conference on Agricultural Marketing. Unlike some associations where thousands of
people assemble for a gala-conference, the discussions in this Conference seem to be
focused and purposeful way. Moreover, this must be one of the few societies, which
does not restrict membership to only those who have specialized qualifications. The
participation is allowed on the basis of the functions that one is performing, be it
regulator, regulated or academia. Hence, by way of productivity or contribution to
knowledge, the approach of this Society to the conduct of a conference is extremely
desirable and I will certainly advocate this model. I am most grateful to the 
for the honour conferred on me by choosing me as the Conference President for the
Now on the subject itself, namely agriculture marketing, I went through the
conference papers carefully and I do not think that there would really be much value
addition in my commenting on these valuable papers. I would, therefore, place before
you some broad perspectives of what we in the RBI have been grappling with, as
The most important aspect that has been referred to in the Reserve Bank of
India Annual Report and in the Report on Currency and Finance of recent years is a
serious concern that of late, real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in agriculture and
allied activities recorded absolute declines.  The decline is of 1.3 per cent in the third
Concerns
concerns and issues relating to agriculture.
year 2000.
organisers
conducted in a
e
naturally been taking significant interest in matters related to agriculture.
Radhakrishna
Subba Vyas Bhalla Rangarajan
Parthasarathy
organisers
Presidential
Sathyanarayana
Prof Radhakrishna Parthasarathyand fourth quarters of 1999-2000. In 2000-01, the first quarter growth of real GDP
originating from agriculture and allied activities of 1.7 per cent has increased to 1.9
per cent in the second quarter. In the third quarter, the lower growth of 1.2 per cent
can still be considered significant when compared with the absolute decline of 1.1 per
cent during  the corresponding quarter of 1999-00.  The movements in the index of
agricultural production suggest that this recent downturn is part of a longer-term
trend. The annual trend growth rate of agricultural production has decelerated to 2.2
per cent in the 1990s from 3.1 per cent in the 1980s. The 1990s also witnessed
considerable degree of variability of agricultural output with five years in the decade
recording absolute declines in output.
Overall, it may be argued by some that the secular decline in output growth is
not a matter of serious concern since structural transformation of the economy may
imply that growth in agriculture would be less than that in non-agricultural sectors.
Although the contribution of agriculture and allied activities to the GDP has declined
from 35 per cent in the 1980s to 25 per cent in 1999-2000, more than two-third of the
population continues to depend upon agriculture.  Growth in sectors other than
agriculture is not absorbing work force on a significant scale. Agricultural
development has, therefore, rightly come to be regarded as an indicator of the quality
of life at the grassroot level making it what may be called peoples sector. The
agricultural sector also makes a significant contribution to India’s exports, accounting
for a little less than a fifth of total merchandise exports. Also, despite some degree of
weatherproofing acquired by the economy in recent years, agriculture continues to
play a critical role in determining the macroeconomic balances in our country
It is no surprise therefore, that considerable anxiety is being expressed in some
quarters that perhaps the poor performance of agriculture in the ‘nineties indicates that
the process of reforms has by-passed the agricultural sector. It is also argued that
while there has been emphasis on trade, industry and the financial sector, attention of
the reform in some sense has not percolated to the agricultural sector, although as will
Observers who compare the performance of India and China feel that in the
reform cycle in China, agricultural reforms were started in the early stage, which
helped increase China’s rate of growth of this sector and consequently the potential
output of the economy as a whole, thereby placing it on a high growth path. In India,
while financial sector reforms have been undertaken early in the reform cycle, the
commentators feel that reforms in agriculture sector have not been as much in the
forefront both in terms of sequencing and overall priority.  This issue of appropriate
priority for agriculture in our reform process needs to be explored further in view of
the fact that the trends in recent years are clearly indicative of a possible long-term
Some studies have been undertaken in the Reserve Bank of India focussing on
some of these issues. The internal research studies seem to indicate that there are two
major areas, which are constraining the upward movement of output towards its
potential for India. These relate to agricultural sector and physical infrastructure.
These preliminary findings, which are yet to be confirmed, add weight to the
2
deceleration in agriculture.
be explained later, terms of trade improved for agriculture.
especially in generating private consumption demand.argument already articulated in the recent Annual Reports that agriculture has to be on
In regard to the importance of agriculture in a broader socio-economic sense,
all the three basic objectives of economic development of the country, namely, output
growth, price stability and poverty alleviation are best served by growth of agriculture
sector. It may sound ironic that agriculture is one sector where there is convergence of
all the three main objectives of economic policy in India but we seem to have
relegated the sector to the background in the process of economic reform.  In fact,
there is a feeling that the economy may face slowdown if there is inadequate pickup
in demand from rural areas and the depressed price conditions in agricultural
commodities in the recent past have brought to the fore the criticality of agriculture
sector in enabling Indian economy to maintain a respectable growth rate.
Eminent economists such as Professor Hanumantha Rao, Professor
Vaidyanathan, Professor Vyas and Dr. Radhakrishna have been working on the
problems of and prospects for agricultural growth and their contributions are well
known.  Hence only select issues relating to macro balances, public expenditure
First issue relates to macro economic balances.  In terms of macro balances,
the overall saving-investment gap in India in the recent years has been between 1.0
and 1.4 per cent of GDP. This is very low, and it has tended to move down in the
second half of 1990s.  This is contrary to the general impression that after
liberalisation, increased dependence is being placed on foreign flows. It is, however
Further, it may be noted that the public sector investment-saving gap has
increased.  The objective of reform is that more investible resources should be
released to the private sector.  But the data, particularly the recent CSO data, indicates
that the contrary has occurred. Earlier, government savings used to be negative and
the public enterprises savings were positive, and between the government and public
enterprises put together, the public sector as a whole showed marginal positive saving.
Now, the government and the public sector as a whole are contributing negatively to
savings. So, during the reforms, though it is popularly felt that more resources have
been released to the private sector to enable them to undertake larger investments, the
way the fiscal reform has been managed did result in a situation where the saving-
investment gap has moved adverse to the private sector, and public sector (including
Government)  has in fact increased in recent years.
It can be observed that out of the gross domestic saving of 22 per cent, 19.8
per cent are household saving, 50-60 per cent of which is financial saving.
Furthermore, about 80 per cent of the financial saving of household sector 
by the public sector (i.e. government and public enterprises) in India.  Moreover, the
continuing revenue deficits of the Centre and States indicate that much of the private
financial savings absorbed by public sector is being used up for consumption and not
investment.
3
is absorbed
dissaving
not so, since the role of foreign savings has been reduced in the second half of 1990s.
policies, and credit flow are addressed here.
Issues
the top of the agenda of reforms in India.The share of gross capital formation in agriculture as a proportion of total
gross domestic capital formation has declined from 6.8 per cent in 1993-94 to 5.5 per
cent in 1998-99. The decline in capital formation has been more pronounced in the
public sector, reflecting the persistent and large revenue deficits. The share of
agriculture and allied activities in total Plan outlay has declined from 6.1 per cent in
the Sixth Plan Period to an estimated 4.4 per cent in the Ninth Plan Period. The share
of irrigation and flood control in total outlay has also shrunk from 10.0 per cent to an
Early correction of overall macro imbalances by improving fiscal management
will help to release higher investible resources in the country, which would benefit
agriculture also.  But, this cannot be an excuse for not increasing public investments
Secondly, while public investment in agriculture is coming down, the subsidy
bill accruing towards agriculture is going up though the general impression is that all
subsidies have been pruned in recent years. Budgetary subsidies for the agriculture
sector have been increasing in nominal terms over the years. The increase is
concentrated on input subsidies, though food subsidies are also incurred to maintain
high levels of food stocks.
The share of fertilizer subsidies in the total explicit subsidies of the central
government steadily increased from 35 per cent in the 1980s to 42 per cent in the first
half of the 1990s and further to 49.8 per cent in the second half. Fertilizer subsidy as a
ratio to GDP fell from 0.8 per cent in 1990-91 to 0.7 per cent in 1999-00. In absolute
,390 crore to Rs.13,463 crore during the same period.  Though
this subsidy is formally attributed to agriculture, in reality, most of it supports
 manufacturing industry. States’ power sector subsidies to agriculture have
also undergone steady growth during the 1990s. Power sector subsidies to agriculture
account for well over one per cent of GDP. Hidden subsidies provided by the States
for agriculture increased from Rs.5 ,938 crore in 1991-92 to Rs.25,577 crore in 1999-
00. In comparison, in 1990-91, the Plan outlay of agriculture sector including
irrigation was Rs.12 ,515 crore,  which increased to Rs.33,858 crore during 1999-
2000.
 Therefore, the issue that arises here is that a conscious choice has to be made
given the overall resource constraint, as to what would be good for agriculture at this
juncture in our country – increase in subsidies or more investment.  Although it is
recognized that subsidies can be regarded as production equivalents, the question that
has to be raised in the context of overall balance is whether it would be worthwhile
shifting the total spending on subsidies to investment, especially in terms of
contribution to agricultural employment and poverty alleviation. Thus, the trade-off
between investment in agriculture and increase in subsidies should be an important
The third issue relates to inadequate flow of credit to agriculture. This could
be viewed in two different ways.  One, the Reserve Bank has been taking a number of
initiatives to ensure adequate credit to agriculture sector and recently the Capoor
Committee had made a number of recommendations on issues relating to cooperative
sector.  Two, the issue may also be viewed in the broader perspective of institutional
4
item on the agenda.
fertiliser
terms, it rose from Rs.4
in agriculture.
estimated 6.5 per cent over the Plan periods.dynamics. There are broadly three categories of institutions which deliver credit to
rural areas, i.e., commercial banks, Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs) and cooperative
banks. Owing to accumulation of losses in public sector banks on account of
NPAs, the flow of credit to rural areas by banks in recent years has not been
up to the mark.  There is also a marked change in the orientation of commercial
banks, which are being subjected to greater competition from private and foreign
banks. Some of the public sector commercial banks are sometimes adopting their
competitors’ strategies without recognising that their comparative advantage lies in
rural and semi-urban areas. Sooner the public sector banks recognise the importance
of rural economies better it is for their long-term commercial sustainability. The
RRBs have been in the early years subjected to an interest rate regime that led
inexorably to accumulated losses, which are continuing to constrain their operations
upto expectations in large parts
dependant on flow of finance from NABARD.
   The issue, therefore, is what are the ideal instruments that would deliver
adequate and timely agricultural credit. It is not necessary that the same institutions
that have been responsible for providing agricultural credit for the last twenty years or
so should continue to do so as they did in the past. The moment agriculture is
accorded high priority, revamping the rural cooperatives also come on top of the
agenda, which would require recapitalising them.  More attention to the actual
revamping process of RRBs would need to be bestowed.
The third item of the agenda will, therefore, be the appropriate institutional
changes that are required to ensure necessary credit flow to agriculture. Clearly, there
is a  need to examine the issue of rural credit and rural credit delivery systems  in an
objective as well as transparent way and accord them priority in legislative actions
Fourthly, as a result of reform measures, there are some commercial banks that
are not able to reach the prescribed target of lending to agriculture. As per the current
prescription, they are required to place funds to the extent of the shortfall with
NABARD, which in turn, would place these funds with State Governments for
investment in agriculture related activities, mainly rural infrastructure.  An issue has
been raised that such a process amounts to indirect borrowings from the banks by
State Governments and that funds originally meant to be deployed for agriculture are
diverted for public investment. Incidentally, it is worth noting that even after
accounting for such Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) allocations
during the reform era, public investment in agriculture has slackened.  Furthermore,
the risk based rates of return on banks’ investments in RIDF are better than similar
returns by lending to agriculture, implying incentive incompatibility of RIDF with the
main objective.  Also, coverage of definition of priority sector lending has been
broadened significantly in the recent years, thus overestimating credit flows to actual
agricultural operations in recent years. It can, therefore, be argued that the RIDF
should be refocused, if possible by diverting such funds to agricultural operations
through revamped systems of RRBs and cooperatives. Incidentally, banks have been
arguing that a constraint facing them with regard to deployment of agriculture credit
is lack of viable credit products, implying lack of demand for credit. On the other
hand, there exists an informal sector which provides agricultural credit at high interest
rates, which indicates that there is no demand constraint. The dichotomy between the
5
and financial allocations.
of the country and is heavily 
even now. The rural co-operatives sector has not come 
mounting formal and informal sectors could be explained by the lack of banks’ capacity to reach
potential borrowers, which in turn could be explained by attitudinal, procedural and
institutional factors. In fact, the very purpose of deregulation of interest rates for this
sector, which was expected to encourage banks to lend higher, does not seem to have
Fifthly, one of areas the Reserve Bank has taken a lot of interest in the recent
past relates to micro-finance. A Committee was constituted under the leadership of
NABARD for this purpose. Lending under micro finance can be formal or informal.
In Professor Ram Reddy memorial Lecture delivered by the same author, it has been
mentioned that the temptation to bureaucratise and regulate microfinance must be
resisted. 
Sixthly, another matter that has been engaging the attention of the policy
makers for the past ten years relates to the huge food stocks, but the problem has
exacerbated in recent years. There are several aspects that need to be carefully
considered.  The world food market and the market instruments by which food stocks
are imported have changed in recent years.   It is possible to buy options so that we
can pay now merely for an option to import specific quantities at a price. Another
issue relates to types of storage facilities that need improvement in public sector and
the compelling requirement of creating private storage facilities. The cost and
efficiency of operations of Food Corporation of India have also been a subject of
scrutiny more recently by a study conducted in Administrative Staff College of India.
The pattern of food consumption, food storage, food production and food trading in
the world have changed.  Therefore, our policy on what constitutes optimal food
stocks would need to be revisited and this was raised in the RBI Annual Report last
year. Of direct interest to the RBI is the monetary and fiscal implications of buffer
stock operations. The Reserve Bank of India has requested the Administrative Staff
College of India to study this issue separately and submit a technical report.
Seventhly, the issue of terms of trade is important. The terms of trade in
agriculture in India is not dwelt upon have except to recognise that the terms of trade
have on the whole moved somewhat favourably to agriculture in recent years.
Recently the global competitiveness of our agriculture sector has gained attention of
policy-makers but the aspect of supply elasticities in our economy needs to be looked
into. If public investment and market infrastructure in agriculture continue to be
inadequate, there could be a serious problem of competitiveness and adequate supply
response. No doubt, India is a large producer of several agricultural products. In terms
of quantity of production, India is the top producer in the world in milk, and second
largest in wheat and rice. We should, therefore, be concerned about improving quality
while maintaining the lead in quantity. If the focus is on global agriculture, it is
important to think of both quality and quantity of production. The issue is whether it
 in global standards has several dimensions. Quality may mean rigid
adherence to global environmental and health standards.  It may also mean rigid
adherence to delivery-schedules, in terms of both quantity and quality, and timeliness.
Global orientation would require a complete re-orientation of what may be called
‘towards a more aggressive thinking’, rather than ‘defensive thinking’, to create an
enabling institutional environment to compete and survive. For example, it is not
6
 Quality
is possible to create an environment where we can compete in terms of quality also.
This aspect is also being carefully looked into by the RBI.
served its purpose fully.desirable to have highly segmented markets, although large quantities are available in
the country. Certification of quality requires institutional arrangements within the
country that carry credibility in both domestic and foreign markets.  In this context,
the institutional arrangements such as commodity exchange assumes importance and
it is an area where we are still rooted in the past.  A thorough review of adequacy of
institutional arrangements in quality control, certification and trading in agriculture
sector should be a national priority to take advantage of global opportunities. Indeed,
with liberalisation of imports, even domestic markets would demand such institutional
changes if our agriculture sector has to survive competition brought about trade
Eighth, another important aspect relates to the mindset on role of middlemen.
In India the general attitude to trade especially in agriculture has been to 
elimination of middlemen or ensure that middlemen’s functions are carried out by
public sector or cooperatives in name, but public sector in reality.  However,
experience has shown that public sector as middleman also utilises other middlemen
and in any case has not been cost effective.  In a modern economy, it is inconceivable
that the role of middlemen can be eliminated. This underscores the need to regulate
the middlemen in order to make them more efficient, competitive and accountable. It
is necessary to move to a situation where an efficient system of market intermediaries
is created in agriculture sector. The related issue of mindset relates to 
There needs to be a mechanism for hedging risks. Again, this should be adequately
regulated in a competitive environment so as to ward off unworthy speculation. 
raises among others, issues of financing trade, settlement mechanisms, ensuring that
futures contracts are honoured, etc. The concept of nationwide multi-commodity
exchange has been mooted in the country. A Committee was appointed, of which RBI
was a member, to work on these issues. The Report of the Committee is under
Ninth, farmers face uncertainties with regard to weather as well as price. The
issue of uncertainty should be distinguished from the issue of commercial viability.
Thus, advocating subsidised credit to tackle the problem of distress among farmers
due to weather failure or depressed prices is not enough. The current regime of
subsidies does not tackle the major problem of agriculture viz. uncertainty.
Uncertainty of weather may be alleviated by insurance-mechanisms but unfortunately
the experience so far, with what has essentially been insurance of credit to agriculture,
has not been encouraging. Commercialisation of agriculture can progress only when
institutional arrangements such as insurance penetrate deep within the agriculture
sector.
  In the financial world, it is recognised that there are certain uncertainties and
hence financial participants are encouraged to devise mechanisms for hedging.
Similarly, modern agriculture too will have to have a mechanism by which farmers
are able to hedge risks. This is possible only if there are proper institutional
mechanisms and incentives to hedge. The traditional approach of handling demand or
supply side problems or problems of uncertainty directly and essentially by
d hoc manner, can no longer serve the purpose.
Finally, Reserve Bank of India recognises Self Regulatory 
( SROs) in the financial sector.  The RBI encourages them to produce standard
7
Organisations
Government in an a
consideration of the Government of India.
This
futures-trading.
favour
liberalisation.documentation for trading in repo market. However, genuine self regulatory
organisations do not seem to have been nurtured in agriculture sector and in any case
interaction between regulatory agencies and SROs has not taken roots in agriculture
sector, though it has achieved some progress in the financial sector.
It is clear that improving the growth rate and competitiveness of agriculture is
very critical at this juncture for a variety of reasons, including the lacklustre
performance of agriculture in the recent past and specially the impact of 
trade-regime being announced. There is some merit in the argument that  the reform
process has bypassed agriculture so far and that this is best illustrated by the co-
existence of segmented and overregulated domestic markets with liberalised export–
Briefly stated, those relevant are overall fiscal imbalances, declining and
inadequate public-investments in agriculture accompanied by increasing share of
patently unproductive and distortionary subsidies.  Serious deficiencies relate to the
legal and institutional framework for flow of credit to agriculture, maintenance of
huge food stocks with considerable fiscal and monetary implications, virtual non-
existence of institutional mechanisms to promote assurance of quality and assured
delivery in a nation-wide market, outdated attitudes to the role of so-called
middlemen, insurance, hedging and finally overarching  with little
attention to promotion of Self-Regulatory . In this background, the
agenda for reform virtually encompasses a thorough change in mindset and overhaul
of legal and institutional mechanisms to enable a growing, healthy and efficient
agriculture sector. In brief, the role of Government in agriculture needs to be
First, there is a need to define the parameters of an optional pattern of
utilisation of fiscal resources in agriculture and a medium term time-bound plan to
transform the existing system of subsidies in favour of a few to a more desirable well
spreadout public investments. In other words, incrementalism in policy-change should
Second, the distortions and outdated policy approaches to the deployment of
credit to agriculture must be recognised and the institutional as well as instrument
changes urgently needed should be spelt out, but this would need governmental
intervention. In a deregulated financial sector, enabling environment and incentives
 uncertainty in agricultural activities is admittedly more than in other
activities and the institutional arrangements, whether in public domain or private
initiative are non-existent. Commercialisation of agriculture and competition warrant
mechanisms to meet uncertainties while enhancing productivity.  Meeting uncertainty
is different from  non-viable operations, and putting in place an
institutional framework for insurance, hedging and public resources to make such
mechanisms initially viable are necessary as part of refocusing the mindset and
resources of government to the emerging challenges of current slowdown and future
8
threat of global competition.
subsidising
  Third,
are infinitely superior to directions or moral suasion.
not be mistaken for a sequenced reform in deployment of public funds in agriculture.
comprehensively and urgently redefined, perhaps somewhat on the following lines.
Organisations
bureaucratisation
import regime in agricultural commodities.
liberalised
Agenda : Redefine Role of Government Fourth, public policy should turn immediate attention to trading and
marketing aspects, with a clear admission of need to change mindset.  For example,
middlemen are inevitable and the issue is how to foster competition and assure
regulation of such middlemen keeping in view the interests of producers as well as
consumers. Certification and credible regulation of trade to ensure competition quality
and transparency protects both producer and consumer far better than price and
distribution controls, provided public distributing systems are oriented to be more
focussed, selective and efficient.  A national commodity exchange is but one element
of reform. More but a different type of governmental intervention is needed in
marketing and trade while genuine co-operatives like in diary sector need to be
Fifth, genuine self-regulatory organisations need to be founded and nurtured
and experiences in other countries may not be irrelevant though our needs and cultural
milieu are unique. A major challenge is to devise nationwide formats that can cater to
nationally integrated markets while allowing for local variations and initiatives
 To sum up, inadequate finance and outdated as well as inappropriate
institutional framework are the twin problems and, of the two, institutional reforms
are needed immediately requiring changes in mindset and redefining the role of
government.
. . 9
 for their assistance. Prasad Patra and Dr
Reddy is thankful to Dr. Michael Vizag on February 3, 2001.  Dr. Society of Agriculture Marketing at 
Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at Conference of Indian * Address by Dr. Y.V. 
particularly at the state level.
considered afresh.