This is the first Bank Economists’ Conference in the new millennium, and the
subject that you have chosen for this important conference “Indian Banking in the New
Millennium” will set the tone and pace of development in the banking and financial
sector for the future.
2. India’s banking system has several outstanding achievements to its credit , the
most striking of which is its reach. An extensive banking network has been established in
the last thirty years, and India’s banking system is no longer confined to metropolitan
cities and large towns: in fact ,  Indian banks are now spread out into the remote corners
of our country.  In terms of the number of branches, India’s banking system is one of the
largest, if not the largest in the world today. An even more significant achievement is the
close association of India’s banking system with India’s development efforts. The
diversification and development of our economy, and the acceleration of the growth
process, are in no small measure due to the active role that banks have played in
financing economic activities in different sectors.
3. Our banking system, however, faces several difficult challenges. Some are 
grown – for example, the high cost of doing business, the high level of non-performing
assets ( NPAs), and the relatively low level of customer satisfaction. Some of the new
challenges are external – for example, the phenomenal growth in the volume of capital
flows across nations and the consequent integration of financial markets across the globe.
Unlike ten or twenty years ago, Indian banks can no longer be insulated from
international developments and international capital movements.  These developments
have brought with them both immense benefits (removal of capital constraints to
development) as well as costs (introduction of possibility of greater volatility and the
4. In view of the do mestic as well as international developments that have been
taking place, it is extremely important for us to chart out a path for efficient development
of banking in the new millennium. The subject chosen by you, therefore, could not be
more timely or more relevant.
5. How should we look at the future of Indian banking in the new millennium? One
way is to continue to do what we are doing now, but try and do it a little better.  The
other, and more exciting challenge, is to set ourselves an altogether different and
ambitious goal which can translate our country’s vast potential into an actual reality.  In
this august assembly, and at the beginning of the new millennium, I would like to take the
latter course and think about the future of Indian banking against the background of the
6. The sources of comparative advantage for nations are no longer factor
endowments of capital, land and labour nor the locational advantages, nor the advantages
of early start or participation in the industrial revolution.  A prosperous country with one
of the best records of economic performance in the 1990s, i.e . the United States, is
actually a net importer of capital.  The cost of manual labour is also rapidly becoming a
smaller and smaller proportion of costs.  In most manufacturing industries in the
shift that is taking place in the sources of comparative advantage amongst the nations.
contagion).
home-
Banking and Finance in the New Millennium.industrial world, this cost is estimated to be no higher than one-eighth of total costs.  This
means that the older growth models of the Twentieth century – a model first developed
East-Asia, no longer works. Another
noteworthy aspect is the steep fall in the material component in the final value of a
product.
7. The primary sources of compara tive advantage of nations today are “skills” and
the ability to adapt and change. These factors determine the prospects of prosperity and
growth of an economy. It is important for the  emerging economies like India to base
their growth on leadership in new technology, knowledge-based services, and manpower
8. Against this background, I believe that the task that India should set for itself in
the new millennium is to transform our banking system from being a largely domestic
one to a truly international one. It is striking that while we have made tremendous strides
in extending the reach of our banking system domestically, internationally the Indian
banking system is conspicuous by its absence.  We have very few branches in other parts
of the world and even  these are mainly confined to India related business. We cannot
claim to have any significant presence in international financial markets and international
banking.  Banking is a service-oriented business requiring high levels of professional and
personal skills and national boundaries are no longer very relevant in mobilisation and
allocation of capital. Under the new circumstances, there is no reason why India should
not emerge as a major international banking centre, just as it has emerged as an important
location in the field of information technology and software.
9. This objective is not something that can be achieved in a short period of time.  It
can take 10 or even 15 years. But the time to begin and plan is now. This is a vision for
the new millennium that I would like to commend for your consideration. Let me now
briefly mention some of the issues that we would need to tackle, if we have to 
10. The institution of banks continues to have a unique place within the financial
system. This is due to their ‘franchise’ i.e ., their unique ability to issue monetary
liabilities by leveraging non- collateralised deposits. Over the last three decades, however,
the role of banking in the process of financial intermediation has been undergoing a
profound transformation, owing to changes in the global financial system. It is now clear
that  a thriving and vibrant banking system requires a well developed financial structure
11. What are the compulsions underlying this interdependence? Firstly, the
proliferation of financial innovations has led to a blurring of the boundaries between
intermediation. Today, banks operate with
a wide variety of financial assets and liabilities, some of which are created by the non-
bank constituents of the financial system. Secondly, specialised markets have come into
being for each class of financial instruments and banks have to transact business in
various segments of the financial market spectrum in the process of their routine day-to-
day business. Thirdly, banks undertake leveraging transformations as part of their
intermediation - asset-liability, debt-equity, collateralised/ non- collateralised, maturity,
traditional banking and other types of financial 
with multiple intermediaries operating in markets with different risk profiles.
A Competitive Financial Sector
vision.
realise this
skills (as did the US and Germany in the second half of the Nineteenth Century).
by Japan in 1955, and then successfully replicated in size and risk.  This necessarily involves other types of financial intermediaries as
counterparties, in syndications and co-financing strategies, as also in the sharing of risk.
Fourthly, active global capital movements and the growing volume of cross-border trade
in financial services have exerted external pressures for reorientation and refocusing of
activities for all players in financial markets.
12. Competitive pressures in the financial sector are thus building up, both within and
from outside the banking system. Other financial intermediaries are increasingly
refocusing on core competencies and niche strategies. Banks as well as other financial
intermediaries are undergoing radical organisational change with an objective of
synergising strength and shedding activities with comparative disadvantage.
Specialisation in financial intermediation provides competitive efficiency, depth and
resilience to the financial system. Together, the spectrum of financial institutions can
13. While we have made some progress in financial sector reforms, w e have a long
distance to cover in order to make our financial system truly competitive, well-structured
and resilient from an international perspective. In the emerging environment, the role of
markets in the formation of a host of financial asset prices is expected to be significantly
enhanced. The progressive easing of barriers to entry and exit will help to enhance
competition  and bring a greater number of participants into various segments of the
financial markets. It will also enable the development of sophisticated financial products
and innovations in market practices. Therefore, markets need to acquire greater depth and
liquidity, especially in the money and debt segments. At the same time, rigidities in the
market microstructure have to be removed so that prices of financial instruments respond
flexibly to different phases of the business cycle. Moreover, financial sector reforms have
to be supported by legal changes which strengthen the enforceability of contracts and
allow for the resolution of problems, such as, insolvency, default and breach of contract.
Continuous improvement in the technological infrastructure is also necessary to keep
pace with the explosive speed of financial innovations. In order to ensure that reforms
proceed apace in all segments of the financial sector, institutional development has to be
intensified. Obviously, financial intermediaries as market participants have a crucial role
to play in the efficient functioning of the financial system. Organisational efficiency,
human skill development and technological upgradation are the key prerequisites for
14. Orderly behaviour of financial markets depends on greater transparency, stringent
conditions for disclosure of assets and liabilities, adequate capitalisation and tighter
prudential norms. We must continue to strengthen our prudential norms and align them
with the international best practices.  Investment decisions need to be based on full
information and an assessment of various types of risks. There is strong 
between prudential regulations and macroeconomic stability which, in turn, provides an
environment for sustainable growth.  Strengthening the financial system is no longer a
matter of choice; it is an essential prerequisite for long run financial stability and for
15. Since the introduction of the capital adequacy ratios under the Basle Accord,
efficient conduct of monetary policy.
complementarity
Prudential Norms
offs. managing the risk-return trade-
bring about further financial deepening and encourage financial saving in the community.concerns have been expressed regarding the applicability of these ratios in the rapidly
changing financial environment. In particular, the “one-size-fits-all” characteristic of
capital ratios has been subjected to some criticism. There is also some evidence, although
by no means conclusive, to suggest that imposition of these norms may have increased
the 
16. In the Indian context, new methods of measuring market risk, such as, the value-
at-risk and pre-commitment approaches, which are rapidly gaining currency in recent
years, should complement the risk weighted capital adequacy ratios until they have been
17. All this has led the Basle Committee to propose a new consultative paper on
capital adequacy framework for comments from national supervisory authorities all over
the world. Based on these comments, the new norms would be finalised. While the
existing Accord specifies explicit capital charges only for credit and market risks, the
new proposal seeks to develop explicit risk weights for interest rate risks and other risks,
particularly operational risk. Further, it seeks to ensure consistency of treatment of
market risk in banking books and in trading books. The proposal also envisages a new
standardised approach to risk weighting of asset in banking book which places a greater
reliance on internal and external credit assessments than in the present Accord.
18. Under the supervisory review of capital adequacy, the new BIS proposal requires
regulators to ensure that banks’ capital positions are consistent with their overall risk
profiles and strategies. Supervisors would have the ability to prescribe capital in excess of
the minimum regulatory ratios. Existing supervisory processes would be supplemented
by internal capital assessment processes which would be subject to review and
intervention. Under market discipline, higher disclosure standards and the role of market
emphasised. In essence, the
new market discipline would provide feedback to the setting up of minimum capital
requirements.
19. The Reserve Bank, which is a member of the international working group set up
by the Basle Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) to provide the non-G10
perspective on the new proposals, has also forwarded its comments to the Basle
Committee. So far, over 200 responses from the international community have been
received by the BCBS. These have been examined and a revised draft is presently under
20. The new nor ms, when implemented, are expected to be tighter than the existing
norms. They are also expected to exert considerable strain on the resources of both banks
and supervisors as skills will have to be acquired for the development, testing and
validation of internal rating models used by the banks. Practices will also have to be
developed for generating accurate risk profiles. Sophisticated tools will need to be
employed for an appropriate evaluation of risks. Banks will have to devote greater
attention to risk management systems and to the competence of risk appraisal and
management personnel.  This will have far reaching implications for the organisation and
management of banks. Overseas operations of banks would be under even greater
21. The new BIS paper has serious implications for the public sector banks as the new
fora.
pressure to conform as early as possible.
discussion in international 
participants in encouraging banks to hold adequate capital are 
validated by more significant empirical evidence.
riskiness of some banks’ portfolios.capital norms could involve injecting fresh capital into the banking system. The issue
acquires significance in view of the Government’s resolve to reduce its holdings in public
sector banks. Moreover, injection of capital by the Government/ Reserve Bank has
ramifications for the conduct of fiscal and monetary policies with consequences for
growth and stability.  On balance, capitalisation of banks through raising equity capital
from the market appears preferable to either direct monetisation or expansion of the fiscal
22. Transparency has come to be regarded as the golden rule for the orderly
behaviour of the financial system. There are several reasons for this development. First ,
transparency backed by prudent supervision enhances the accountability of the financial
system. This, in turn, builds in a check against undue risk-taking and reduces the
probability of failures and systemic risk. In particular, it lessens the vulnerability of
markets to sudden shifts in sentiment.  Secondly, it fosters healthy competition in the
financial system. Transparency of business operations ensures market discipline. Thirdly,
transparency facilitates efficient investment decisions. For banks, it translates into
allocative efficiency and a clear perception of the risk-return trade-off embedded in
23. In the aftermath of the East-Asian crises of 1997-98, i t was realised that
information available in the markets, prior to the crisis, did not reflect the underlying
realities. Dissemination practices, reliability, timeliness, and quality of data/information
also varied sharply from country to country. Hence, considerable attention is being
devoted to developing uniform transparency codes and standards, and substantial
progress has been made. The BIS has provided the primary momentum to the quest for
international standards of transparency and is in the process of expanding its coverage of
reporting information on international bank lending. The IMF has also developed
voluntary standards of transparency and disclosure. At the macro level, there are the
Special Data Dissemination Standards (SDDS)/General Data Dissemination Standards
(GDDS).
24. The IMF has also approved a Code of Good Practices on Fiscal Transparency and
a Code of Good Practices on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies. The
International Organisation of Securities Commission (IOSCO) is coordinating with other
agencies, such as, the International Accounting Standards Committee, to develop proper
accounting and disclosure rules for the securities market. A noteworthy feature of the
exercise is that these efforts encompass the private sector also as many of the standards,
e.g ., accounting, auditing, bankruptcy, corporate governance, and securities market
regulation require to be implemented at the corporate level. The OECD, the BIS, the
World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development are working on
codes for corporate governance. The BIS’s Committee on Payments and Settlements is
seeking best practices for payments and settlements. These international efforts indicate
the critical importance assigned to transparency in the emerging international financial
architecture.
25. India has been fully supportive of these efforts. It has been an active participant in
the Basle process. We were among the earliest countries to join the SDDS. The Reserve
investment proposals.
Transparency and Disclosure Practices
deficit.Bank appointed a Working Group on International Banking Statistics in 1999 to review
the existing information available on cross-border assets and liabilities of the banking
system with a view to enabling banks to prepare for data reporting under the BIS system.
The Group’s recommendations are being implemented as part of our efforts to get a clear
idea of our banking system’s international presence. The existing disclosure practices at a
macro level are already comparable with international standards. Daily and weekly data
on all relevant macroeconomic and financial indicators are put out by the RBI through
‘hard copy’ releases as well as on the RBI’s website. Both the RBI and Government
disseminate a wide variety of financial and economic information through weekly,
26. The Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and Codes, which
was constituted to monitor global developments and consider the applicability of global
standards and codes to Indian conditions, set up Advisory Groups in ten core areas.  The
Advisory Group on Transparency in Monetary and Financial Policies examined issues
relating to the clarity of roles and responsibilities of policy making  authorities and
transparency in monetary policy formulation, conduct and implementation.  The report of
the Advisory Group on Banking Supervision carries recommendations relating to
corporate governance in banks, transparency practices in Indian banking, supervision of
cross border banking and internal rating practices adopted by banks.  The report of the
Advisory Group on Insurance Regulation deals with the applicability of standards set by
the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) and the twenty Insurance
Guidelines issued by the OECD to India.  The Advisory Group on Payment and
Settlement System has also submitted its report which deals with issues relating to inter-
bank payment and settlement covering Core Principles and Central Bank responsibilities.
All these reports are available on the Reserve Bank’s website for public information and
27. Commercial banks in India are also required to maintain disclosure standards on
par with those of international banks. This has been achieved by mandating disclosure of
some of the essential strength indicators and performance related parameters as part of
commercial banks’ balance sheets. The banks in India, since April 1997, even before the
onset of the South East Asian crisis, have been disclosing capital adequacy ratios (both
Tier I and Tier II separately), percentage of NPAs to net advances, provision made
towards NPAs, and gross and net value of investments. Secondly, since March 1998,
banks in India have been asked to disclose further information regarding interest and non-
interest income as a percentage of working funds, operating profit as a percentage of
working funds, and information on the financial position of subsidiaries. Thirdly, with
effect from April 2000, the Reserve Bank has also advised banks to disclose maturity
profile of loans and advances, investments, and lending to sensitive sectors. Fourthly,
public sector banks are required to attach the balance sheets of the subsidiaries to their
balance sheets beginning from the year 2000-01, so as to bring more transparency in
28. The Reserve Bank has set up the Regulations Review Authority (RRA) in April
1999 to provide an opportunity to the public to seek relevant modification of regulations/
circulars/returns issued by the Reserve Bank.  An important contribution of the RRA is
the compilation of subject-wise master circulars on important subjects. The RRA has
debate.
operations and move towards consolidated supervision.
monthly, quarterly and annual publications.decentralised service charges of banks.  It has instituted arrangements to regularly display
updated information on non-bank finance companies on the Bank’s website. Other
improvements effected by the RRA are granting general permission to mutual funds for
issuing units to foreign institutional investors, simplifying procedures for obtaining
succession certificates by banks from legal heirs,  of payment of interest
for abnormal delay in collection of outstation instruments and dissemination of timely
information on foreign investment in Indian companies through the RBI  to
facilitate trading.  Modalities for classification and dissemination of information in
electronic form and through e-mail are being worked out.
29. A working group appointed by the Reserve Bank has recommended the setting up
of a Credit Information Bureau for the collection of information relating to borrowers and
the provision of this information to the entire financial system. The State Bank of India
has entered into an MoU with the HDFC to set up a Credit Information Bureau and the
modalities for setting up of the Bureau in regard to ownership and equity participation,
management structure, security standards, rights and liabilities of the Bureau, etc. , are
being worked out.  The banks and financial institutions are being encouraged to make the
necessary in-house arrangements for collection of such information to the Bureau. The
Bureau is expected to expedite credit and investment decisions by banks and financial
institutions as also curb the growth of fresh NPAs through better institutional
30. The goals of financial sector reforms and macroec onomic stability are best
achieved in an environment fostered by improved transparency. Transparency in balance
sheets, income statements, objectives and policies can help this process. In this sphere,
our goal for the future should be to identify and monitor international developments with
a view to aligning transparency standards and practices in the Indian financial system
Asset-Liability and Risk Management
31. Mismatches between assets and liabilities of banks exp ose them to various types
of risks. The experience of the South East Asian crises showed the dangers posed by
compromising asset-liability management principles and allowing the disproportionate
accumulation of mismatches both on and off the balance sheets, leading to 
even insolvency.  Risk management is a continuous process of planning, organising and
controlling the assets and liabilities, volumes, maturities, rates and yields.  With the
growing complexity of operations in financial markets, banks would have to rapidly
equip themselves with a variety of knowledge-intensive skills and appropriate
32. To help manage this fragile transitional phase, the Reserve Bank has provided
asset-liability managers with guidelines that serve as benchmark for an integrated risk
management system. Asset-Liability Management (ALM) guidelines were issued to
banks in April 1999 for managing liquidity and market risks. In October 1999, the ALM
guidelines were subsumed in a broad framework of guidelines for risk management
systems in banks to cover the management of credit, market and operational risks.  These
guidelines would help to prepare the bank management to meet the challenges posed by
the changing context of regulation and supervision. Banks are encouraged to evolve 
risk
technology.
illiquidity and
with the international best practices.
mechanisms.
website
rationalisationrating systems and internal control mechanisms based on value-at-risk and duration
measures. The primary responsibilities of prescribing risk parameters and 
33. Adequate internal controls are a key prerequisite for the system of risk-based
supervision which is gaining currency all over the world.  Internal control consists of a
wide spectrum of internal inspection and audit, submission of control returns by
branches/controlling offices to higher level offices, visits by controlling officials to the
field level offices, risk management system, simplification of documentation procedures
34. A critical precondition for the smooth functioning of the financial system is the
enforceability of contracts. At present, it is extremely difficult to deal legally with
defaults and breach of contracts and this is one of the major reasons why our banks’
books are saddled with NPAs for a long period of time. Legal reforms must support and
complement financial sector reforms by providing for internal governance as well as
external discipline. The legal framework has to be flexible to enable automation,
electronic fund transfers, recoveries, . In this context, efforts need to be made to
streamline the working of debt recovery tribunals. Undoubtedly, legal reforms are now an
35. The face of banking is changing rapidly and banks all over the world are re-
orienting their strategies, practices, products and clientele in tune with their changing
environment. Increasingly they are focusing on core competencies.  Internationally, bank
mergers are occurring not through acquisition of weak by the strong but among equals in
strength.  The objective of such mergers is to synergise strength of the merging
institutions in a new powerful entity. Activities and even subsidiaries not relevant for
maximising profits and expansion of assets are being divested.  In India, the 
Committee and the Verma Committee have shed considerable light on the possible future
organisational change.
36. Public sector banks, in particular, are now in need of major capital and
management restructuring. The Government has so far contributed an aggregate amount
of Rs.204 billion to recapitalise public sector banks, and more is needed.  This will
impose a substantial fiscal burden, which the budget is unable to bear. Some banks have,
therefore, been encouraged to raise capital through public issues and to raise subordinated
debt for their Tier - II capital.  They have also been allowed to write-off accumulated
losses so as to enable them to have higher earnings per share in their public issues. Both
the Government and the Reserve Bank have proposed dilution of their holdings in these
banks with a view to 
37. While these efforts must continue, there is a need for a major change in
management styles, human resource inputs and technological upgradation to enable
public sector banks to face the intensifying competition. Furthermore, it is necessary to
NPAs in India
38. The most critical condition for bringing about an improvement in the profitability
of banks is a reduction in the level of  . In fact, it is a precondition for the stability
NPAs
Special Problems of 
focus on restructuring in the entire financial system and not the banking industry only.
broadbase their ownership pattern.
course of action for a financial system undergoing an 
Narasimham
important part of the agenda of financial sector reforms.
etc
and efficiency in inter-office communication channels.
effective control systems are vested directly in the boards of directors of the banks.
establishingof the financial system. Although the level of NPAs has declined significantly in recent
years, it is still considered relatively high by international standards. There are, of course,
varying country practices for provisioning and therefore, of carrying NPAs on balance
sheets of banks. Due to time lags in recovery, banks in India continue to hold NPAs on
their books even after making provisions. Moreover, in India, provisioning is relatively
more stringent; for instance, provisions are required to be made even on the secured
portion of advances.  In other countries, identified losses are written off at an early stage
and banks carry very little NPAs on their books.  Even so, the provision adjusted level of
NPAs at 8.1 per cent of net advances for public sector banks ( PSBs) in India is high. 
distribution of  across the public sector banks shows that there is some rigidity to
move down in the category of banks with net  between 10 and 20 per cent of net
advances as also in the category of banks with net  of up to 10 per cent of net
advances. In these categories, there has not been any significant improvement since 1995-
96. The Narasimham Committee has underscored the need for moving to zero net NPA
levels for our banks which have an international presence. If we believe in actualising our
resolve to build a banking system with an international orientation, this must be our
39. Our studies on NPAs in the banking system suggest that the problems of 
has a sizeable overhang component arising from infirmities in the existing processes of
debt recovery, inadequate legal provisions on foreclosure and bankruptcy, and difficulties
in the execution of court decrees. Banks in India face external constraints such as the
dominance of traditional industries in credit portfolios, industrial sickness and labour
problems. The studies also reveal that there are several internal factors such as weak
credit appraisal, non-compliance to lending norms, and wilful default that contribute to
high NPAs. This calls for immediate corrective steps in recovery processes so that the
40. What are the strategies for making this possible? First, at the policy level, 
problems of  should be addressed by strict enforcement of prudential norms and
requirements of transparency.  Secondly, the most important policy contribution in this
area is the need for legislation which will make recovery processes smoother and legal
action quicker. Thirdly, banks are being provided with a menu of alternatives such as
Debt Recovery Tribunals, Lok Adalats and Asset Reconstruction Companies. The
Reserve Bank has provided indicative guidelines for compromise settlement of chronic
NPAs in the small scale sector. Settlement Advisory Committees have also been formed
at regional and head office levels.  These alternatives will no doubt require the enabling
environment to be created by appropriate legal reforms which are being addressed jointly
41. As regards internal factors leading to NPAs, the onus rests with the banks
themselves.  This calls for organisational restructuring, improvement in managerial
efficiency, skill upgradation for proper assessment of creditworthiness and a change in
the attitude of the banks towards legal action which is traditionally viewed as a measure
42. In the banking and financial sector s, the introduction of electronic technology for
New Technology
of the last resort. These are the elements on the agenda of the second phase of reforms.
by the Reserve Bank and the Government of India.
NPAs
the
problem is contained.
NPAs
priority target in the next two to three years.
NPAs
NPAs
NPAs
Thetransactions, settlement of accounts, book-keeping and all other related functions is now
an imperative.  Increasingly, whether we like it or not, all banking transactions are going
to be electronic. Those who do not keep pace with the trend are bound to lose out.
43. Initiatives for technological change have been an integral part of the reform
process. In the recent period, the imperatives for speeding up the modernisation of
technology and intensifying the use of technology have become sharper. First, in
response to the compulsions imposed by the technological environment, the banking
industry has accelerated the pace of computerisation of branch operations, controlling
offices and head offices.  The thrust is on commercially important  which account
for 65 per cent of banking business in terms of value.  There are now a large number of
computerised branches across the country.
44. A switchover from cash based transactions to paper based transact ions is being
accelerated.  MICR clearing of cheques is now operational in ten cities, besides the four
metropolitan cities.  The average daily volume of cheques processed in clearing
operations in four metropolitan cities has amounted to a fairly sizeable daily average
value of about Rs. 20,000 
45. The development and use of communication networks have also helped the
banking industry to improve the quality of its services.  Beginning modestly with leased
line terrestrial technology i.e. the BANKNET and its communication software, the RBI
Net, a milestone was passed in February 1997 with the operationalisation of the Shared
Payment Network System (SPNS) of ATMs of the Indian Banks Association in Mumbai.
In June 1999, the setting up of the INFINET, a Wide Area Satellite based network using
VSAT technology, was a landmark in the use of the communication technology in the
Indian financial system.  Currently, the INFINET connects 439 VSATs.  As additional
transponder space becomes available, connectivity could be extended to 5,000 branches.
10 banks are already using the VSAT network of third party service providers for various
46. Needless to add the payments system plays a critical role in the development of
the financial system.  In India, the design, management and regulation of electronically
based payments system are becoming the focus of policy deliberations.  The imperatives
of developing an effective, efficient and speedy payment and settlement systems are
getting sharper with the introduction of new instruments such as credit cards, 
ATMs, retail Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) and Electronic Clearing Services (ECS).
We are moving towards smart cards, debit cards and financial Electonic Data Interchange
47. Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) is generally regarded as the cornerstone of
an integrated payments system. Setting up an RTGS environment has became the focal
point of payments system reforms all over the world. Access to major financial centres
and cross-border payments systems is becoming conditional to the availability of a full-
fledged domestic RTGS. Apart from providing a real time funds settlement environment,
RTGS is critical to an effective risk control strategy for preventing domino effects of
individual defaults. In the context of internationalisation of the financial sector, RTGS
provides both the technology and process controls to manage risks better.
48. The preparation of the financial system for the implementation of RTGS has been
(EDI) for straight through processing.
telebanking,
banking applications.
crore in 1999-2000.
fully 
centresa priority for the Reserve Bank. Considerable progress has already been made. The main
processing system for RTGS is in place at the National Clearing Cells at the four
metropolitan cities. The system would provide large value fund transfers with settlement
on a gross basis. The Reserve Bank has taken a number of steps towards the development
of the Payment System Generic Architecture Model for both domestic and cross-border
payments. The Model conceives networking of computerised bank branches, with their
controlling offices, central treasury cells and head offices with the proviso for introducing
standardisation of operating system and networking platforms within the bank and a
bank-level standardised gateway to INFINET. System Requirement Specifications would
take into account the international best practices and the specific requirements of Indian
banking. Extending the spread and coverage of the INFINET to cover all commercially
important  in the country, development of the Structured Financial Messaging
backbone for exchange of financial messages based on international standards,
integrating various segments of the payment and settlement system and consolidation of
the various Deferred Net Clearing Settlements constitute the action plan for 2000-01.
49. However, there are several areas of concern that need to be addressed.
Authentication of payments instructions, responsibility of the customer for secrecy of the
security procedure, the legal framework for the payments system, the lack of
standardisation and intra-bank connectivity are some of the areas which deserve urgent
attention.  A Committee on Technology Upgradation in the Banking Sector appointed by
the Reserve Bank has made wide ranging recommendations relating to communication
infrastructure and the use of INFINET, standardisation and security, data warehousing,
data mining and management information systems, new legislation on EFT, human
resource development and other related issues. These recommendations should guide the
path of technological upgradation in the years to come.  Banks will have to evolve a
50. It needs to be emphasised that the process of technological change is only
beginning in India and several countries are way ahead of us in the modernisation of
technology for their financial sectors. Moreover, the intensity of use of the existing
technology is at low levels. Computerisation efforts in our banks have been mostly
directed towards accounting and related activities with lack of emphasis on critical areas
such as management information systems and customer service. We have to redouble our
efforts to equip our financial system with the state-of-the-art technological infrastructure
if it is to achieve an international stature.
51. In a service industry like banking, the most important need is naturally the human
resource development.  During the early phase of banking development in India after
independence, opportunities for employment of the educated man-power were relatively
limited. The banking sector was the preferred employer for the educated persons in the
country in addition to civil services.  In recent years, this position has changed
dramatically.  Certain rigidities have also developed in human resources development
within the banking system itself because of this industry being largely in the public
sector. The public sector’s hierarchical structure, which gives preference to seniority over
performance, is not the best environment for attracting the best talent from among the
young.
Human Resource Development
strategic vision that builds over the present technology base.
centres52. A radical transformation of the existing personnel structure in public sector banks
is unlikely to be practical, at least in the foreseeable future ,   However, certain
improvements can be made in the recruitment practices as well as in further training and
redeployment of those who are already employed. Banks have to create an environment
in which they will be able to expand business largely through redeployment, extensive
training and better incentives. There is a pressing need to develop work practices which
encourage efficiency.  In these areas, a break from past practices is essential. Incentive
structures need to be conceived, supported by appropriate training and motivation, which
align the employee’s goals and orientation with the core competencies and strategic
53. The recommendations of the second Narasimham Committee could provide
useful guidance to banks in designing new recruitment practices and training facilities.
The Committee recommended a system of recruiting skilled manpower from the open
market, including lateral induction of experts. Supporting this should be an ongoing
strategy of redeployment of existing staff in new businesses and activities, after suitable
54. Banks could also explore the feasibility of entering into collaborative
arrangements with universities and other institutions in India and abroad, to identify and
provide specialised training to the financial services industry with an ongoing flow of
emerging training packages. This is particularly important for external regulatory
agencies. Information technology is an area where human resource development is
critical.  Fortunately, Indian professionals are world leaders in this area and a spirit of co-
operation and partnership between the IT and banking industries will result in a strong
55. In the last BECON Conference in Bangalore, I had referred to the role of
economists in our banking system.  In all the above areas that I have highlighted, this role
is even more crucial.  The financial system has been a natural and preferred habitat for
some of the best talent in the field of economics.  In fact, economists have branched out
to specialise in various areas in the commercial sector and have gained considerable
expertise.  Recent developments have released new impulses which have brought finance
and economics even closer.
56. Operational areas of banking are also increasingly drawing the interest of
economists all over the world. In the recent economic literature, there is a proliferation of
work on modelling of various types of risks, internal control mechanisms such as the
value-at-risk and precommitment models, behaviour of financial asset prices and their
impact on banks’ balance sheets and contingent exposures. These are exciting areas for
improving the operational efficiency of banks and economists can make a tangible
contribution to strengthen their functioning. The tools of economists such as probability
analysis, time series techniques, discriminant functions and capital asset pricing models
can be particularly useful in developing independent views of the fundamentals of the
market place. Perhaps this is the reason why one finds so many economists working in
treasuries, dealing and trading rooms of banks today, besides the back office and the data
warehouse.  Fundamental analysis complements technical analysis in most market
The Role of Economists
and modern financial system comparable to the best in the world.
training.
advantages of the institution.research reports. The role of expectations in market processes is crucial and this is
becoming increasingly important as financial liberalisation gathers momentum. Banks
need to increasingly factor in the role of expectations in their forecasts and strategic
57. Economists, on their part, need to break away from the strait jacket of their
narrow specialisation and understand the operational realities faced by banks.
Conventional economic analysis needs to be tempered by the emerging principles of
financial economics to be meaningful in the context of the banking system.  That is why
it is important for economists in the banks to acquire field level experience as well as the
knowledge of operational departments so as to enable them to make a meaningful
58. Let me conclude by reverting back to the question that I raised at the beginning of
this talk.  Is it realistic for India to set itself the goal of becoming a major international
banking and financial centre in the early part of this new century?  I have already
mentioned some of the preconditions that need to be fulfilled for this vision to be
realised.  We have made some progress in several of these areas, such as, the
development of a competitive financial sector with multiple intermediaries; the
movement towards best international practices in regard to capital adequacy, prudential
norms and supervisory standards; strengthening the transparency and disclosure practices
by banks and other financial institutions; and better application of asset-liability and risk
management by financial intermediaries.  Some progress has also been made in reducing
the extent of Non-Performing Assets and introducing speedier mechanisms for settlement
of bank dues ( e.g. Debt Recovery Tribunals).  So far, the progress in respect of legal and
institutional reforms, including bankruptcy procedures, has been slow.  Nevertheless,
there is a growing consensus in favour of such reforms and the high level Committee set
up to suggest appropriate measures in these areas has recently submitted its report.  It is
hoped that the necessary legislative action in these areas will be initiated without much
59. The Indian financial system, and the banking sector in particular, is dominated by
public sector institutions and banks.  A sensitive and controversial question which would
need to be faced, sooner or later, is whether the “public sector character” of our banks
and other institutions is consistent with their being able to play a globally competitive
role in the future.  In order to consider this issue dispassionately, both the advantages and
disadvantages associated with this particular characteristic of the financial system have to
be recognised.  An important advantage is the reduced “vulnerability” of the system as a
whole because of sovereign ownership.  Another important advantage is its wide reach
and the availability of an established institutional infrastructure.  Important
disadvantages, however, are the relative insensitivity of the system to its cost structure,
inability to respond quickly to the changing market trends, and greater rigidities in the
management decision-making processes because of what may be described as
“noncommercial” considerations.  Development of human resources, and introduction of
an appropriate incentive structure to foster a competitive culture have, in this background,
proved to be particularly difficult.
delay.
Conclusion
contribution in a rapidly changing financial system.
plans.60. Can some of these intrinsic disadvantages of publi c sector institutions be
overcome?  Frankly, I do not know.  It is true that almost all the leading banks and
financial institutions in the world today are in the private sector.  At the same time, it is
equally true that the private sector character of a country’s banking system has been no
guarantee of its global success or its economic strength.  The continuing weaknesses and
problems faced by the Japanese banking system, and strong international consensus in
favour of public intervention, provide ample testimony for this observation.  Another
interesting fact is that all the leading central banks around the world are either owned by
Governments or have been set up by statute, and are subject to Governmental or
Parliamentary control.  Yet, in recent years, many of them are functioning as truly
independent institutions with no political or extraneous interference in their operations.
Given the necessary will and a political consensus, in principle, it should be possible for
us to grant, by legislation, complete functional and operational independence to public
sector banks and institutions with the sole objective of providing best service at the least
cost, and thus enable them to compete freely among themselves as well as with other
private sector institutions.  If, in practice, this is not a feasible option, then the only
alternative is for public sector banks to be transformed into widely held private banking
61. The lo ng-term vision for India’s banking system to transform itself from being a
domestic one to the global level may sound far-fetched at present.  However, it is not
beyond our capacity provided we have the will and the determination. Taking the banking
industry to the heights of international excellence will require a combination of new
technologies, better processes of credit and risk appraisal, treasury management, product
diversification, internal control and external regulations and not the least, human
resources. Fortunately, we have a comparative advantage in almost all these areas. Our
professionals are at the forefront of technological change and financial developments all
over the world.  It is time to harness these resources for development of Indian banking in
62. I hope your deliberations at this conference would show us the way, and herald a
Thank you.
Patra of the Reserve Bank of India for his help in the preparation of this lecture. I am thankful to Dr. M.D. 
new beginning for our banking system in the new millennium.
the new century.
corporations, subject to transparency, regulations and accountability to shareholders.