Capoor
At Reserve Bank of India, we are keenly interested in purveyance of credit to all those who need
it, more for the small borrowers and the poorest of the poor the most. Micro Credit, therefore,
has been a thrust area with us though the vehicles of credit extension have been under constant
evolution over a period of time. Without a supportive regulatory environment, a continuum of
institutions providing micro finance cannot flourish and it is thus imperative to promote linkage
and integration of micro credit providers with the formal financial system. As the apex-level
facilitator, RBI’s concern has always been to create an environment that enables micro credit
providers to evolve into institutions capable of achieving wider outreach and critical mass in
operations. The regulatory environment has, therefore, been reviewed from time to time to make
In this context, RBI had set up a Micro Credit Special Cell in April 1999. Earlier, the National
Bank for Agriculture & Rural Development (NABARD) had appointed a Task Force on
the broad thrust of their reports, we have issued detailed guidelines in February 2000 to banks for
mainstreaming micro credit provision in India. It will not be out of place to recount their salient
• In keeping with the reform of the interest rate regime as part of the overall financial
sector reforms in the country ,  the interest rates applicable to loans given by banks to
micro credit organisations or by the micro credit organisations to 
• The banks have been given complete freedom to formulate their own models or
to choose suitable branches/pockets/areas where micro credit programmes can be
implemented. Micro Credit extended by banks to individual borrowers directly or
• The criteria for selection of micro credit organisations have also not been prescribed.
We have only indicated that it may be desirable for banks to deal with micro credit
organisations having proper credentials, track record, 
system of maintaining accounts
through any intermediary is now being reckoned as part of their priority sector lending.
choose any conduit/intermediary for extending micro credit. They have been permitted
Groups/member beneficiaries has been totally left to their discretion.
Self-Help
features :
Supportive Policy and Regulatory Framework for Micro Finance in November 1998. Considering
it easier for these micro credit providers to pursue a process of institutional development.
Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India
Jagdish 
By
Developmental Issues in Micro Creditand records with regular audits in place and manpower for closer supervision and
• Banks in India are now free to prescribe their own lending norms keeping in view the
ground realities. They may devise appropriate loan and savings products and the
period, grace period, margins, etc. The intention is to provide maximum flexibility in
provision of finance to the poor.  Such credit, therefore, may cover not only
• We have asked banks to include micro credit in all their credit plans right from the
branch to the state level. While no target has been prescribed for micro credit, they
have been asked to accord utmost priority to the micro credit sector in preparation of
part of the bank’s corporate credit plan and should be reviewed at the highest level on
a quarterly basis. It is our view that maximum transparency in both credit design &
delivery is necessary as opaque procedures result in sub-optimal benefits. This is
imperative as active involvement of the Top Management of the bank leads to a more
the capacity of appropriate institutions, both formal and traditional and local dialogue
• A simple system requiring minimum procedures and documentation is a pre-condition
they should strive to remove all operational irritants and make arrangements to
expeditiously sanction and disburse micro credit by delegating adequate sanctioning
powers to branch managers.  The loan application forms, procedures and documents
should be made simple.  It would help in providing prompt and hassle-free micro
credit. In fact, banks must make all-out efforts to cut down the cost of financial
intermediation and reduce disbursement lags. In order to have a faster feel of the
, we have also put a revised MIS in
2
place.
ground-level micro credit disbursement movements
for augmenting flow of micro credit.  We have, therefore, advised banks to ensure that
being maintained in the countryside.
flexible process approach with the policy delivery framework strengthened by building
these plans.  Our guidelines also make it clear that micro credit should form an integral
but also include their other credit needs such as housing and shelter improvements.
farm and non-farm activities of the poor consumption and production loans for various 
regard to micro lending keeping in view the prevalent local conditions and the need for
related terms and conditions including the size of the loan, unit cost, unit size, maturity
follow-up.• Savings mobilization being a major issue in micro finance provision, we have
introduced certain major relaxations regarding requirement of registration,
maintenance of percentage of assets and reserve fund for non-profit non-banking
finance companies (NBFC) - Micro Finance Institutions ( MFIs). The MFIs registered
as not-for-profit NBFCs have been exempted from registration and prudential
requirements. As for deposit-accepting-profit-oriented MFIs, the continued insistence
on ratings is primarily to ensure depositor protection, which, especially when it
Keeping in view these initiatives for enabling the micro finance movement in our country to gain
in the country. While the progress has been uneven, it is satisfying to note that some significant
All types of banks in India have to abide by the same prudential norms generally. As far as 
are concerned, there are at present about 700 NGOs under the SHG-bank linkage programme of
SHGs and entrusting them to banks or
SHGs. 
from commercial banks both in terms of institutional structure and product portfolio, application
of distorting the emerging market but it may also reduce the efficiency of these institutions. We,
therefore, consider it desirable and appropriate to support evolution of a self-regulatory
should now get together and come out with a set of proposed self-regulatory norms. Information
dissemination, research, database creation and experience-sharing among the micro finance
With a view to facilitating smoother and more meaningful banking with the poor, a pilot project
for purveying micro credit by linking SHGs with banks was launched by NABARD in 1991-92.
RBI had then advised commercial banks to actively participate in this linkage programme. The
scheme has since been extended to the Regional Rural Banks ( RRBs) and co-operative banks
also. The number of SHGs linked to banks aggregated 1,21,744 as on September 30, 2000. This
translates into an estimated 1.9 million very poor families having been brought within the fold of
3
practitioners would be the initial step to setting out on the self-regulation path.
 which would prescribe codes of conduct and ground rules. These institutions MFIs mechanism for 
, in our view, not only runs the risk MFIs of the same set of regulatory and prudential guidelines to 
 are significantly different MFIs As intermediation like routing bank credit through financial 
intermediation like formation of NABARD either in social 
MFIs
strides have been made in up-scaling the purveying of micro credit across the country.
We have recently taken a review of how these guidelines have impacted provision of micro credit
credit to encourage foreign participation in micro finance projects.
momentum, the Government of India has recently allowed foreign direct investment in micro/rural
involves savings of people, is an overriding concern.formal banking services. More than 85 per cent of the groups linked with banks are exclusive
There is now an urgent need for micro credit providers to shift from a minimalist approach – that
 – to an integrated approach to poverty alleviation taking a
more holistic view of the client including provision of enterprise development services like
marketing infrastructure, introduction of technology and design development. In this context, the
setting up of the Micro Finance Development Fund marks an important step. Pursuant to the
has been created in NABARD to support broadly the following 
exposure to self-help group (SHG) members, partner NGOs, banks and govt. agencies; (b)
(c) meeting the cost of formation and nurturing of 
and (e) promoting research, action research, management information systems and dissemination
In the wake of this post-reforms autonomy given to banks to formulate & adhere to sound credit
rural market entailing household surveys to determine use of available credit, sources, terms &
conditions, transaction costs, household savings, level of indebtedness, impact of technological
change, production, employment & income. Coupled with this, they should also take up supply
important as the actual loan products need to be designed according to the target market.  It is
also imperative that banks beef up their internal supervisory mechanism with training inputs and
The stated end result – reducing poverty – is measurable only in direct relationship to the lives of
objectives and pursuing them to the appropriate extent concerns the problem of alternative
in India acquire critical importance in the fast-emerging and relatively uncharted area of micro
credit delivery. In fact, without the insights of the poor people, who have a long-overlooked
capacity to contribute to the analysis of poverty, we may apprehend only part of the reality of
poverty and its causes. We are now trying to fashion and sharpen our response initiatives
4
perceptions of poverty. It is in this context that dialogue-based studies on micro finance providers
human beings, the number and permutations of possible intervention effects. Choosing the correct
technical backstopping like a revamped MIS.
is 
side studies to take a look at their own branch network and commensurate NGO capabilities. This
practices and respond to market signals, banks may have to initiate demand side assessment of the
building institutional capacity and increasing volumes.
issues like institutional growth and transformation, governance, accessing new sources of funding,
of best practices in micro finance. This Fund is thus expected to address institutional and delivery
SHGs; (d) designing new delivery mechanisms;
providing start-up funds to micro finance institutions and meeting their initial operational deficits;
activities : (a) giving training and
announcement of the Union Finance Minister in his budget speech for the year 2000-01, this Fund
intermediation is offering only financial 
women groups.factoring in the survival strategies of the poor as brought out in such intensive interaction with
them. Further, our recent studies have also thrown up important HRD issues like posting of
The study of the role of central banks in the micro finance sector brings out the commitment, or
otherwise, of the policy planners to assisting development of sustainable micro finance in the
developing economies. It also demonstrates the importance of good policy as an essential pre-
requisite for good practice. Recent policy trends in India happily are pointers to a healthy
I am glad that this panel discussion attempts to identify regulatory thresholds for micro finance
activities and affords an opportunity to deliberate on the role of central banks vis- -vis micro
finance as an important tool in national anti-poverty strategies, especially so as such policy
on more operational flexibility, I am sure that as healthy financial institutions,  would also
Shri Jagdish Capoor, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Asia Pacific Region Micro Credit
Summit Meeting of Councils at New Delhi on February 03, 2001.
5
Address by 
to track compliance with regulatory policies and procedures.
observe internal or voluntary guidelines for risk management and put in place appropriate systems
MFIs
will remain supportive of healthy growth and development in the micro finance sector with accent
While I can assure you that the policy environment in India responses have been country-specific. 
à
development approach to micro finance.
attitudinal shift and an unmistakable commitment of the central bank towards the financial systems
local capacity better.
banking personnel to areas for which they have an affinity to secure greater involvement and build