Knowledge Revolution and Social Development *
It gives me great pleasure to deliver the inaugural address at the IX Economic
Convention 2001 at the H.R. College of Commerce & Economics for more than one reason.
First and the foremost, it provides me an opportunity to be amongst students who would add
to the vast pool of knowledge workers that our economy commands. If this convention helps
shape their future and add to their knowledge bank, I would be most happy to play my part.
Second, I learnt that the annual Convention which is less than a decade old, has already
acquired a place of honour among the academic initiatives being taken in this city.  The last
eight conventions all have been on topics of contemporary relevance for the Indian economy.
I am happy that the present convention has participation from two developed countries, an
indication of growing globalisation of the Indian economy, which in fact was the theme of
the first Economic Convention held in 1993. Lastly, I am happy to talk on the theme of this
convention, viz., ‘Knowledge Revolution and Social Development’. The theme is instantly
thought provoking and immensely relevant for bringing about social and economic
transformation in India as well as other parts of globe.
‘Knowledge’ is as old as any form of life with a cognitive process. It is about knowing or
the familiarity gained by experience. Human life relates knowledge to a person’s range of
information and this information can take a codified or a tacit form – a distinction to which I
return later when I discuss the public policy implications of these two broad forms of
knowledge acquisition. Human history is replete with phases of knowledge advancement at
rapid and slow paces with frequent temporal clustering. Clustering is natural as isolated
breakthroughs provide revolutionary impetus for more new knowledge. The term ‘knowledge
revolution’ in the present milieu connotes the information society that we are headed for with
the support of information technology as well as attendant cultural changes.
Computerisation-led information technology certainly wasn’t the first knowledge revolution
the mankind has seen, but is perhaps no less important than the others witnessed, including
the discovery of fire or the inventions that led to industrial revolution. Comparisons would
lead to more unsettled questions than they would settle, so I would not elaborate. I choose to
play safe and use the term knowledge revolution in the contemporary sense as indicating the
scientific and economic changes that have resulted in emergence of ‘knowledge economy’ or
the ‘new economy’.  After describing this knowledge revolution, my address would try to
provide a perspective to what it has meant or can potentially mean for social development. I
would cover this both from the viewpoint of the Indian and the world economy. In doing so,
the role being played by public policies in supporting this whole process of knowledge
revolution and social development would get a special attention. We would also very briefly
touch upon the proactive function of the Reserve Bank in this regard.
The Role of Information
Knowledge is sometimes confused as a pure ‘public good’ in the sense of its two main
characteristics – non-excludability and non-rivalrousness.  Students of economics would
know that the first of the characteristics imply that knowledge is available to all and that no
one could be excluded from its potential use. This would mean that we operate in a world in
which no information asymmetries exist. If it were so, the Royal Swedish Academy of
Sciences would not have awarded the Bank of Sweden Prize in Economic Sciences in
Memory of Alfred Nobel for the year 2001 to George Akerlof, Michael Spence and Joseph
Stiglitz. This year’s Nobel Prize was awarded to them for their analyses of markets with
asymmetric information.
Akerlof demonstrated in his seminal paper on “Markets for Lemon” that market wherefailure where either no trade will occur or trade will occur with adverse selection of low-
i
quality products . Akerlof analysis, for instance, provided an explanation for high interest
rates in rural credit markets or for difficulties for the aged population to find individual
medical insurance. Spence showed that better informed individual market participants take
costly actions in an attempt to improve on their market outcome by credibly transmitting
information to the poorly informed. This may explain why education is used as a productivity
signalling in job markets or why firms may use dividends to signal their profitability to
agents in the stock market. Stiglitz established that less informed participants extract
information from the better informed, by mechanisms such as the screening performed by
insurance companies dividing customers into risk classes by offering a menu of contracts
where higher deductibles can be exchanged for significantly lower premiums. He also
provided an understanding of many observed market phenomena, including unemployment
and credit rationing in terms of prevalence of information asymmetry.  The key point in the
research of these three is that markets fail or work imperfectly because information is not
symmetrically available to all. Knowledge is clearly not a public good, but is important for
increasing returns. It may be worthwhile to obtain more knowledge, whether through
screening, signalling or through codified material or even in form of skill acquisition.
The Importance of ‘Tacit’ Knowledge
There is a growing recognition that comparative advantage of the firms, organisations or
nations are imbued not just in their factor endowments that include the amount of capital or
size of labour or workforce, but in human capital and knowledge; and especially in tacit
ii
knowledge . Tacit knowledge nowadays is understood as form of personal knowledge that is
not codified in form of books, magazines, web pages, audio or video material. As such, it is
not possible to straight away transmit this knowledge as information from one user to
another. Personal knowledge by its very nature is private information and is used to extract
profits and sometimes monopoly rents. Tacit knowledge, therefore, is substantially rivalrous
in nature. The acquisition of tacit knowledge with one user may not seem to reduce the
amount of tacit knowledge with another, but the very acquisition of such knowledge reduces
it private characteristic and its market valuation in terms of the profits it give or the wages it
earn.
The Role of State
State has played an important role in the transformation of the Indian economy to a
knowledge-based one. In May 1998, the Prime Minister of India formed a National
Taskforce on Information Technology and Software Development to formulate a long term
National IT policy for the country and also remove impediments for the growth of the
infotech industry. The main objective of this was to help India emerge as an IT software
superpower. The Taskforce submitted three very useful reports to the government. This
heralded the launch of one of the rare partnerships between government and industry that
propelled India towards reaping the comparative advantage that the country had in
knowledge industry. The trend has continued unabated with sub-national governments
competing with national government in providing IT infrastructure, education and good
electronic governance. In the last few years, 18 state governments have announced IT
policies.
More recently, the Government of India has come up with the Software Technology Park
(STP) and Electronics Hardware Technology Park (EHTP) Schemes that take the form of
100% Export Oriented Schemes. The former is targeted for undertaking Softwareincluding export of professional services for rendering consultancy services and development
of software. The latter is for undertaking manufacture of electronic hardware
equipment/components and other items. Both these schemes are liberally encompassing and
are benefiting a wide range of enterprises that are in the business of knowledge industry.
The Export-Import policy and the customs duty regime have also helped spur the
knowledge revolution in the Indian economy. We have a liberal customs duty regime.
Computer software can be imported duty free with no duties, additional duties or surcharges
levied thereupon. Books, magazines and periodicals on CD-ROM are also exempt from
import duty.  Under the Exim Policy 1997-2002 announced on 31 March 2000, the
Government provided for recognition to software companies who have acquired ISO 9000
series or IS / ISO 9000 Series or ISO 14000 Series or HACP or WHO-GMP or SEI CMM
Level 2 and above accreditation / certification. Double weightage is being given on FOB or
NFE exports made by such units for granting status certification (e.g. Export House, Trading
House, Star Trading House, Super Star Trading House).  Regarding the tax regime, profits
derived from export of software (including some of IT enabled services) are exempt from
Income Tax under Section 80 HHE. Some encouraging tax holidays are also available to
export-oriented units under various schemes. For venture capital firms or funds, a complete
pass through has been provided on distribution of income as well as undistributed income by
the Venture Capital Company under Section 115U. Further, any income on any investments
made in Venture Capital Undertaking qualifies for exemption under Section 10(23FB).
Clearly the fiscal incentives are plenty for the IT-sector.
The Reserve Bank has also joined the Government to reinforce the role of the State in
development of the knowledge industry. In a bid to further a more liberalised regime for the
knowledge industry, the RBI has taken several steps. These include, (i) permission to Indian
software companies to offer ADR/GDR-linked Stock Option Scheme to their non-resident as
well as resident permanent employees (including Indian and overseas working Directors) that
allows remittance of up to US$50,000 in a quinquennium period related to the ADRs/GDRs,
(ii) provision for remittance towards import of software through Datacom Channels /
Internet, (iii) reproduction of software in India in agreement with overseas copyright holder
with provision for royalty payments without any specific approval, (iv) permission, without
limit, for remittance towards fee payable to accredited agency abroad for ISO certification,
(v) procedures for making remittance out of EEFC account towards participation by Indian
companies in a JV / WOS overseas under normal route, fast track window and in respect of
large investments, (vi) provision for IT software and services companies in India to acquire
companies overseas through ADR / GDR stock swaps without prior approval up to US$ 100
million, ten times the exports earnings of the previous year and for acquisition of values
above US$ 100 million with provision for easy and quick approvals (vii) simplified SOFTEX
form that needs to be filled by all non-physical exporters of software, (viii) allowance for use
of international credit cards for import of software through internet up to US$ 25,000 in
advance of even download of a software, and (ix) liberal allowance for individuals and firms
executing software service contracts abroad, with only a stipulation of repatriation to India of
an income equivalent of at least 30 percent of the contract value.
Apart from the regulatory steps to further knowledge revolution, the RBI has also taken a
proactive lead in promoting knowledge infrastructure and knowledge practices in the Indian
financial sector.  Operationalisation of the Indian Financial Network (INFINET) and
facilitation of the Computerised Cheque Clearance (CCC) and Electronic Funds Transfer
(EFT) has changed the face of financial system.  The INFINET now operates with Structured
Financial Messaging Solution (SFMS) as its part. SFMS is based on international message
standards (SWIFT) and ensures secured message transmission to support inter-bank
transactions. The Reserve Bank is making rapid progress towards setting-up the Real TimeGross Settlement (RTGS). The RTGS when operational would provide a new generation of
high value payments systems that would enable the core of the banking system across the
country to make secure inter-bank payments across the country. The transactions will cover
all the general transactions and central accounting of the RBI, including the bank’s general
ledger. It is expected to enable about 205 Indian banks and financial institutions to interface
directly. By underwriting all payments with collateral held at the Reserve Bank of India, the
RTGS system will reduce ‘systemic risk’ in the Indian banking system, thereby providing
increased integrity and security for all inter-bank transactions.  Improvements are also being
brought about in the payment system through Centralised Funds Management System
(CFMS), which enables funds managers of banks to obtain a national position of balances in
their accounts with the Reserve Bank. The CFMS covers the four major metropolitan centers
and would soon be extended to most other locations of RBI offices. The initiatives
exemplified above are expected to reduce all kinds of costs that exist in the financial
marketplace. These costs result in the widening the bid-ask spreads and form a kind of social
tax or a deadweight loss on savers and investors in the economy.  A favourable impact of the
IT initiatives is evident on the transaction costs, inventory-carrying costs and most
importantly on adverse information costs and the spreads, in general, are beginning to narrow
down in the Indian banking sector.
Education Policy
The role of state has been pronounced, inter-alia, due to the potential of knowledge
economy in bringing about social and economic development.  Education forms the
cornerstone of this process, both because of its knowledge enhancing and capacity building
characteristic that reflects in individual higher incomes and also because this knowledge
acquired as part of education makes a better society and a better economy with network
externalities, lower information costs, lower social losses due to corruption and better
benefits from information spillovers.  Education policy is, therefore, central to knowledge
revolution.
India spends 3.8 per cent of its GNP on education, higher than the 2.6 per cent that the
China spends. However, 46 per cent of India’s population above the age of 15 years is
illiterate as against only 22 percent of such population in China.  While India still spends less
than the world average of 4.9 per cent of GNP on education and there does appear to be
scope for increasing both public and private spending on education, the resources would need
to be used more carefully to improve benefits.  In addition, more balance would be needed
between competing uses for the earmarked funds.
Some attention also needs to be given to the regional balance in the spread of education
as it has an important bearing on the life of the citizens and the polity of the nation.  In India,
Kottyam district of Kerala has a literacy rate of 95.7 per cent, while the Jhabua district of
Madhya Pradesh has a literacy rate of only 19.0 per cent. In fact, 9 of the top 10 districts in
terms of literacy come from Kerala, with Mahe district of Pondicherry being the notable
other. Barmer and Jalor district of Rajasthan have female literacy rates of around 7.7 per
cent. In framing our planning process, we need to give more attention to how national
policies could be translated for those who are being left out from the social development.
Multilateral Initiatives
There is an urgent need for multilateral initiatives to strengthen the knowledge
revolution. Knowledge revolution is of relevance to all humanity and can specially be an
instrument for convergence, whereby the laggards in development from the third world
countries are able to catch-up with the developed countries in terms of levels of per capita
income. Present empirical evidence shows that per worker output differentials between rich
countries appear to converge only at a low rate of 2 per cent per annum. Calculations showthat at this rate it would take roughly 35 years to reduce the gap in two countries’ per capita
income to half of its present. Data for the developing countries show even slower
convergence possibilities. Odds are that absolute convergence is difficult. If possible at all it
has most probably to come from knowledge resources. Following the works of Mankiw,
Romer and Weil and the subsequent literature on endogenous growth or the new growth
iii
theory, we now know the importance of knowledge embodied in the human capital. 
In this context, I draw your attention to some important documents and initiatives that
testify to the growing recognition for use of knowledge to bring about social development.
First, the first ever summit of heads of States and Government on social development which
gathered under the UN auspices in 1995 recognised the vital role for knowledge in social
development. The Copenhagen Declaration on Social Development that it produced
explicitly stated that new information technologies and new approaches to and use of
technologies by people living in poverty can help in fulfilling social development goals and
therefore emphasise the need to facilitate access to such technologies.
Second, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) brought
out a document in 1996, very clearly recognising the interaction of knowledge and
iv
economics.  The document discussed the trends and implications of knowledge-based
economies, the role of science systems in such economies and the measurement issues related
to knowledge inputs and outputs and of stocks and flows of knowledge.  I find the document
important as it drew world-wide attention to the role of knowledge. It also recognised that
traditional national accounts frameworks do not offer convincing explanations of trends in
economic growth, productivity and employment.
Third, the World Development Report, 1998-99, published by the World Bank has
examined the role of knowledge in improving economic and social well-being. It emphasises
these technologies for acquiring and disseminating knowledge base of countries and what
countries need to do and do much faster to take advantage of new technologies for acquiring
and disseminating knowledge by investing in educating their people. Countries that postpone
this will fall behind those that move faster, and the adverse consequences for their
development will be hard to remedy.
The World Development Report suggested three lessons that are particularly important to
the welfare of the billion of people in developing countries. First, developing countries must
institute policies that enable them to narrow the knowledge gaps. In a sense the convergence
in knowledge precedes, convergence in growth or levels of income. Second, developing
country governments, multilateral institutions, non-governmental organisations, and the
private sector must work together to strengthen the institutions needed to address the
information problems that cause markets and governments to fail. Third, no matter how
effective these endeavours are, problems with knowledge flows will persist. But recognising
that knowledge is at core of all our development efforts will allow us to discover unexpected
solutions to seemingly intractable problems.
The Report is the first widely circulated international document that very clearly called
for access to financial, technical and medical knowledge for improving health and living
standards of the poor. It noted that the new communications technology and plummeting
computing costs are “shrinking distance and eroding borders and time”, so that ever remote
villages can tap into rapidly expanding global store of knowledge.
The United Nations is also laying stress on capacity building in its programme, especially
to address problems of poverty and environment. Capacity 21 is one such project which has a
good outreach. All these documents and initiatives are useful for policies, though there are
finer aspects of policies that we fine-tune to meet country-specific circumstances. I havementioned these multilateral initiatives, mainly for the benefit of the predominant student
audience that might like to improve their knowledge base.
What the Poor Can Do
Any policy on knowledge systems would be misplaced if it does not provide
emphasis on knowledge transmission and knowledge distribution. Knowledge should serve
to empower people and provide their entitlements.  The focus has to be on capacity building
and enabling them to do things themselves. The World Bank President, Mr. James D.
Wolfensohn has made this the focal point of the World Bank which he now describes as the
“Knowledge-bank”. He warns that, “in our enthusiasm for information super highway we
must not forget the villages and slums without telephones, electricity or safe water, the
primary schools without pencils, papers or books.” He adds that “for the poor, the promise of
the new information age – knowledge for all – can seem as remote as a distant star.” The
UNDP Human Development Report 2001 analyses the divides, be it digital, scientific or
technological. The measures and actions to enable access to new technologies are essential to
reducing world poverty and facilitating sustainable development.
While there is recognition in the multilateral forums over the need for using knowledge to
address poverty, commensurate effort is missing. The words are not translated into policies
with equal intensity and policies are not translated into actions with proportionate force. It is
imperative that we in developing countries make our voices heard. For instance, bio-
technology has the promise of precision tools to deal with soil toxicity, drought resistance,
water stress, and increasing nutritional content for sustainable agriculture, food security and
human health. The bio-technology research has, however, hardly begun and it would be
tragic if it were curtailed by often emotional debates in some parts of developed world.
Similarly, there is urgent need for governments to support  development of environmentally
sound energy technologies to mitigate potentially devastating impacts of climate change on
the world’s life supporting ecosystems and not just rely on market solutions for such
problems. As Stiglitz points out that government interventions for knowledge development
may be useful because fiscal incentives do not necessarily bias the relative prices, but may
instead address the problem of market failures amidst large externalities.
Knowledge transfers also depend on domestic policies.  Countries whose policies
encourage this stand to gain. Forty years ago, Ghana had the same per capita income as South
Korea. By early 1990s, Korea’s income was six time higher. Some development economists
claim that at least half of the disparity can be explained by Korea’s greater success in
acquiring knowledge. Costa Rica stands out in effective use of knowledge to improve social
conditions. In Costa Rica, life expectancy and infant mortality are on par with that of many
developed countries, even though incomes are only about a tenth of that in United States.
Experts believe that governmental efforts to provide people with information about sanitation
and health has helped.  Apart from government, internet could be a powerful media today to
disseminate information on health and education.
Competition Policy
Finally, let me make some more public policy suggestions that one could examine to
further knowledge revolution and social development. First, knowledge revolution has
enabled greater competition by enabling smaller firm sizes with low capital and labour
requirements to operate with telling effect. But there are ever-greater dangers that firms with
knowledge advantage could indulge in monopoly practices, backed by patents or other IPRs
or otherwise through perceived restrictive practices such as packaging of web browsers withoperating systems. We need stronger and ever more vigilant anti-trust institutions in India
that curb such practices, but not necessarily the business. The global institutions need to
consider a more effective IPR regime that strikes the right balance. A balance is needed
between incentive to demand knowledge reflected in firms’ desire to invent and innovate or
its spending on R&D and supply of new knowledge that needs inputs of past knowledge.
IPRs provide the former to the detriment of the latter.  For socio-economic development to
take place at an optimal pace, it is necessary to frame IPRs correctly in terms of their
coverage and time span. I am sure the presentation by the Union College of USA at this
Convention would afford the colloquium an opportunity to debate this further.
Second, in India we have perhaps paid more attention to codified knowledge than tacit
knowledge. We are low on skill formation than the potential provided by our education
structure. This is due to some flaws in education policy as also our poor work culture and
ethics. Low labour mobility between firms and regions has been an important causal factor.  I
see from my experience in public sector banks that single point entry and virtually negligible
exit options breed inertia in these entities. They miss out on tacit knowledge that is brought
by employees moving from one firm to another. The sub-theme for the National College may
enable us to reflect on the exit policy for firms as well as for labour.
Third, a logical extension to the argument above relates to knowledge that may be
obtained with increased openness of the Indian economy, specially with cross-border travel. I
am glad that multinational corporations as well as tourism find a place in the sub-themes of
this Convention.  We need to think out clearly over how far we should go on liberalisation of
capital account and the timing for the moves in this direction.
Conclusion
We live at a unique and defining moment in history. It is unique in relation to the progress in
science and technology that has been achieved in the last half a century. Beginning with men
on the moon in 1960s, the Green revolution of the 1970s, the information revolution of the
th
1980s and genetic revolution of the 1990s, the 20 century ended with mapping of the human
genome. And it is a defining time. As all this opens a new era of knowledge based actions
and decision-making that can put the world on a path of equity and sustainability.  It is
st
knowledge that is available, accessible and affordable that will drive progress in the 21
century, and even likely to be as important if not more so than capital endowment. The
Convention may wish to deliberate some of the issues that I have raised and some others that
would follow in course of the presentations. I wish the Convention all success.
Thank you.
* Inaugural address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, RBI at the IX Economic Convention
2001 at H.R. College of Commerce & Economics, Mumbai on December 6, 2001.
i. The term “Lemon” is an American slang for poor quality cars and Akerlof used the analogy
of the American used car market to explain how adverse selection may take place. See
Akerlof, G.A, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1970, 84(3): 488-500.
ii. The term was introduced by Michael Polanyi, who described it as that part of knowledge,
which is distinct from, but complementary to the knowledge explicit in conscious cognitive
processes. See Polanyi, Michael (1958), Personal Knowledge: Towards a Post-Critical Philosophy,
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.iii. See Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and David N. Weil (1992), “A Contribution to
Empirics of Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 107: 407-37.
iv. OECD(1996), The Knowledge-based Economy, Paris: Organisation of Economic Co-operation
and Development.