Indian Insurance : At The Crossroads *
I am grateful to the New India Assurance Company Limited for inviting me to
this special function organised on the occasion of launching a new financial product for
credit insurance by the Honourable Union Minister of Finance.  It is fitting that New
India Assurance, the first insurer fully set up by Indians in 1919 and the country's largest
non-life insurer today should lead the way in product innovation. All of us present here
are thankful to the Honourable Finance Minister for taking some time off from his
extremely busy schedule and making himself available for launching of this new
insurance product.
In an uncertain world, most of us would like to smoothen our lives (and
consumption patterns) by balancing the favourable and unfavourable events. Insurance
allows individuals to transfer risks by participating in risk pooling arrangements, in
which each one sets aside a bit for the rainy day when times are good and draws on the
fund in adversity. Thus, risk pooling advantages, by their very nature, increase when the
number of participants increase and the risks they face are uncorrelated. Insurers provide
a medium for risk pooling. Obviously, the price of insurance - the premium - is
intrinsically related to the probability of the adverse situation arising. If the number of
insurers increase, it is then more likely that the premium would be actuarially fair, as
competition preclude monopolistic rents that could be charged by the insurer.
The almost two century-old Indian insurance industry today stands at the
crossroads. The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 has paved
the way for liberalisation of the insurance sector, following recommendations of the
Committee on Insurance Sector Reforms  (Chairman: Shri R.N. Malhotra) in the
backdrop of financial sector reforms and in light of international commitments. The
Reserve Bank has allowed commercial banks (and non-banking financial companies) to
contract insurance business under Section 6 (1) (o) of the Banking Regulation Act. With
the entry of players after decades of the state monopoly, the insurance sector faces new
challenges.
The opening up of the insurance industry in less developed countries - and in
India - is the cumulation of a long debate. The proponents of liberalisation have argued
that a free market would ensure the benefits of competition. Those opposed to
liberalisation have pointed out that the very need for nationalisation arose in the Indian
insurance sector because of a string of failures. It is, therefore, necessary to recognise that
the present programme of liberalisation would be successful, if and only if, we are able to
build the proper safeguards for the functioning of the industry. Viewed in this light, the
on-going programme of insurance liberalisation has to be evaluated from two angles:
first, the benefits to the economy and second, the sustainability of the competitive
process, especially, given the past history of insolvencies before the nationalisation of the
insurance industry. In a sense, the liberalisation of the insurance sector is as much a
challenge to the insurers as to the supervisors, including the Reserve Bank of India,
especially in view of the emergence of the banc assurance market.
The scope for product innovation is underscored by the fact that the insurance
business is often classified in great detail in many developed countries, on the basis of
business specialisation and risk and claims characteristics, with niche insurers operating
in some of the segments. For instance, the European Directive on Life and Non-Life
Insurance classify the life business into 7 classes (including unit linked insurance and2
pensions) and non-life insurance into 17 classes (including credit insurance) for
independent authorisation. Of course, in India, although the insurance sector is bifurcated
into life and general by the Insurance Act, the insurance companies have already taken up
a number of businesses.
It will be appreciated that the benefits of liberalisation - in terms of coverage and
cheaper premium - are likely to flow with a gestation lag. The challenges of creating
demand by product innovation to suit consumer needs has already begun. A clear
example of this is the Business Credit Shield that is being launched by New India
Insurance in alliance with Indo European Credit Guarantee (P) Limited. The fact that an
existing insurer rather than a new entrant is introducing this new product is itself a
testimony to the compulsions of liberalization and competetion.
The credit insurance business - which offers protection to suppliers of goods and
services against the effects of debtor insolvency, in cases of domestic credit, export credit
and political risk, individually and increasingly comprehensively – has grown rapidly in
the past three decades - especially in Europe - with a worldwide premium of around US $
5 billion according to a recent study commissioned by the International Credit Insurance
Association. Bouts of economic crises have enlarged the scope of credit insurance from
the original role of protecting the capital at risk in accounts receivable to an essential part
of comprehensive credit and financial management. The credit insurance expansion has
been in terms of both new players in both the private and the public sectors and new
products. Credit insurance has also recently been used to enhance asset securitisation
deals.
In the UK, for example, the credit insurance business - which is now almost two
centuries old - offers covers for late payment and insolvency of debtors - with options for
insuring the whole or the partial turnover and in certain cases, for supplier default.
Besides, credit insurers also offer credit intelligence and credit management facilities,
including national and international debt collection. The Association of British Insurers
points out that credit insurance in the UK is a competitive market not only because of the
large number of insurers and the multinational competition but also because of the
competing types of domestic cover such as “self insurance” or provisioning (which is
limited to bigger companies) and factoring.
The Business Credit Shield is a commendable maiden venture by New India
Assurance in introducing domestic credit insurance in the Indian economy. If successful,
the product would also offer a competitive product to the exporters especially at the
shorter end of the market. The basic features of the product - coverage for insolvency and
protracted default (with discretionary credit limit facilities), political risk for exporters,
indemnity up to 90 per cent of the agreed loss - are, more or less, in line with
international practices. The minimum turnover limits, minimum DCL requirements and
the emphasis on strong credit management are equally necessary especially from the
angle of business security.
The prerequisite of risk management is, of course, information. In order to
develop an institutional mechanism for sharing of credit related information, the Credit
Information Bureau has been recently set up by the State Bank of India, in collaboration
with HDFC Limited and foreign technology partners. As the insurance business spreads
to newer activities, it would be a good idea to build up a co-operative database of their
particular risk and claim characteristics. For instance, in case of credit insurance, British
credit insurers do contribute to an international database through which commercial3
information is exchanged with others in the industry and also allows insurers to offer
credit intelligence to their clients at very little cost.
Such a database of activity-wise profiles could also have externalities if we do
finally move to a system in which minimum capital and other prudential requirements are
based on particular business profiles depending on the particular risk and claims
characteristics, as is the case in many countries rather than on an aggregate business. This
would allow stipulations (such as minimum capital levels) to be fixed more efficiently
(than the present across-the-board requirement) and encourage diversification.
As all of us present here do experience, the economic situation in the world is
becoming more and more uncertain with new complexities.  With increase in
uncertainties, the needs for reducing the economic burden of risk are increasingly felt.
Business firms are required to identify key risk issues, define the amount of risk that can
be taken, find out risk mitigation options and make an appropriate choice from such
options.  One of the key risk issues, which is common to any business, is risk of default
or non-payment by debtors.  Introduction of such credit insurance by New India
Assurance in the India market should, hopefully, turn out to be a landmark in this regard.
* Address delivered by Shri Vepa Kamesam, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the launch of
insurance product “Business Credit Shield” of The New India Assurance Co.Ltd. at Mumbai on 12/9/2001.