Globalisation and Challenges for South Asia *
At the outset, I would like to pay homage to the memory of late 
Prasad Koirala who dedicated his life to the cause of democracy, liberty, social justice
and human rights.  His distinguished contemporaries respectfully but affectionately
described him as “BP” and as Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao, one of our Prime Ministers
mentioned : “BP belonged, in the truest sense, to both our peoples of India as well as of
Nepal”.  Another Prime Minister of India, Mr. Gujral acknowledged his stature in the
Asian context while delivering a BPKF talk on “South Asia : The Coming Decade” in
December 1999, at Kathmandu.  I am honoured by your kind invitation to me to deliver
the BPKF lecture this year.  In fact, it is not often that central bankers are invited to
deliver such lectures involving intense diplomatic skills.  I am grateful to the Foundation,
and in particular my dear friend, H.E. Mr. Deb Mukherjee for giving me this opportunity
to focus on a complex subject of contemporary and mutual interest viz., 
It is possible to question the appropriateness of the subject of globalisation to
South Asia since it is admittedly one of the least globalised.  Precisely because it is not
globalised so far, there is a need to understand the implications of the process and explore
ways of continuing or otherwise with the current policies and meeting the challenges of
globalisation as they evolve.  The address is mainly oriented to analysing in detail,
economic aspects of globalisation and identifying challenges for public policy, essentially
While the term globalisation has been fashionable in the past two decades, the
process is neither new nor anywhere near being complete. It would, therefore, be useful
to appreciate, as a first step, the concept or features, the historical as well as the economic
context, and the current concerns regarding this complex process. The second part gives a
profile of South Asian Region in comparison with others, covering macroeconomic,
infrastructural, social and institutional indicators.  The third part focuses on the
characteristics of countries within South Asia with reference to similar indicators.
Detailed data along with sources will certainly be shared so that different inferences as
appropriate can be drawn by various analysts. The fourth part devotes itself to select
aspects of South Asia critical to the current process of globalisation.  In the light of the
above, the fifth and concluding part highlights some of the issues concerning actions at
globalisation.
The term ‘ globalisation’ is widely used but seldom defined in precise terms, and
in any case, there is no agreed definition.  At the same time, it has acquired considerable
emotive force, perhaps because different people use the word to mean different aspects or
causes or consequences of globalisation. In fact, antagonists of globalisation tend to
protest against different aspects viz., market integration, consumer culture, unfair trade,
environmental impact of modernisation, dehumanisation due to technology, effect of
mass-media, dominance of markets, etc.  In brief, globalisation is a process with several
dimensions such as social, political, economic, environmental, cultural and religious all
of which affect each of us in some way or the other.
1
Globalisation
national and regional levels to meet the challenges of 
at the national and to some extent the regional levels in South Asia.
challenges for South Asia. 
globalisation and
Bishweshwar
Mr. Chairman and friends,globalisation, in the sense in which it is used now, can be traced to
the phenomenon of nation-states.  In the distant past, there were just human communities.
For long, most people remained confined to their communities or villages or local areas.
With developments in communication and economic activity, it has gradually become
easier to move from local to regional and then regional to national, and finally across
nations also.  Conceptually, therefore, there are two extremes of connectivity among
people.  One is a small tribal unit where everyone knew everyone else for lifetime and it
did not aspire to interact with people in other units or groups.  Second is an integrated
globalised existence or a global village where everyone can aspire to interact with anyone
else in the globe.  Globalisation is a historical process of moving from the tribal unit but
it is a process that is palpably incomplete. Clearly, it is a phenomenon enabled by
developments in technology related to transport and communications among people as
well as over geographical distances. Of course, it will be inappropriate to ignore the
human element while considering the role of technology in the process.  For example,
technology opens the prospect of making available a commodity (say a meat burger or
chicken tikka or a healthy apple) in a remote corner but the spread of the commodity or
service (say classical music or Beatles  music) will depend on tastes of  people. Perhaps,
it is a process that has been, in some senses, constrained by the authority of nation-states,
It may be useful to elaborate the role of public policy in the context of the concept
of globalisation.  After the emergence of nation-states, citizens of each nation-state
perceived that it is in their collective self-interest to promote or restrict their involvement
with citizens of other nation-states.  In fact, till the early part of twentieth century, there
was no need for a passport or visa to move from one country to another, and there were
no restrictions on currency conversions since gold was the universally accepted medium.
Thus, while developments in technology enabled and accelerated movement of goods,
people and services, policies of many nations tended to impose restrictions.  Currently
there are some voluntary efforts among some countries to liberalise such restrictions
among select countries such as European Union or ASEAN or even SAARC.  In some
instances, as in Europe, referendum among the citizens of select countries enabled,
delayed or stopped greater integration with some other countries.  Similarly, there have
been multilateral initiatives to ease restrictions imposed on economic integration, while at
the same time, some initiatives are taken to enable technological cooperation, say in
broadcasting or telecommunications or air travel.  A serious problem arises when there is
a perception of persuasion or coercion by some nation-states on others to ease some
restrictions, either directly or through what are called multilateral initiatives.  In brief, at a
conceptual level, a distinction can be made between technology enabled or induced
As explained earlier, a nation-state is presumed to put restrictions on its citizens in
their involvement with other nation-states only in collective self-interest of its citizens.
However, it is not easy to define what is in collective self-interest of all its citizens.  For
example, restrictions on imports may benefit a few businessmen while prima facie
restricting the freedom of many consumers.  More important, there is an issue of value
for freedom of any citizen to interact with the rest of humanity in terms of exchange of
2
globalisation and public policy induced restrictions or easing of restrictions.
particularly in the twentieth century.
The concept of 
Globalisation Process and Policy of goods, services, ideas, or even physical movement.  No doubt, such freedom across the
borders of nation-states gets exercised only when the concerned citizens agree
voluntarily.  Yet, the basic freedom of a citizen to involve with others should perhaps be
constrained only, and only on grounds of overall collective self-interest of all concerned.
Hence, in the context of public policy relating to globalisation, a critical issue is the
trade-off between individual freedom and collective self-interest as also where the burden
It is obvious that the process of globalisation relates to connectivity among
individuals and such connectivity in cross-border terms is subject to public policy of
nation-states. Thus, globalisation has several dimensions arising out of what may be
called enhanced connectivity among people across the borders.  While such enhanced
connectivity is determined by three fundamental factors viz., technology, tastes and
public policy, the cross-border integration can have several aspects; cultural, social,
political and economic.  However, for purposes of this analysis, only economic
integration is considered.  Broadly speaking, economic integration occurs through three
channels viz., movement of people, movements of goods and services, and movements in
First, on movement of people, it is now widely accepted that all modern humans
are descendents of ancestors living in Africa roughly one million years ago.  Till a few
years ago, all movement of people from one place to another was predominantly by foot.
Later it must have been with the help of cattle or horses, or by boats and so on.  More
recently, travel by air has become quite affordable.  In other words, along with
opportunities for gainful economic activity, technology encompassing cost, time, comfort
etc ., plays a dominant part in the movement of people and connectivity among them.
Some people prefer movement more than others and different people have different
preferences.  Thus, a second factor is tastes or cultural preferences coupled with
economic opportunities.  The third factor relates to public policy, which may facilitate or
inhibit movement across the borders.  In understanding movement of people, a distinction
should be made between globalisation by means of slave trade or sword and voluntary
movement of people in search of better opportunities.  The most notable achievement of
recent globalisation is the freedom granted to many, if not all, from the tyranny of being
rooted to a place and opportunity to move and connect freely.  At the same time, in
reality, there are several non-economic but cultural or emotional reasons for people not
Secondly, in regard to trade in or movement of goods and services across the
borders of countries, there are two types of barriers, viz., what are described as natural
and artificial.  Natural barriers relate to various costs involved in transportation and
information over distances.  For instance, development of ocean-going vessels made of
steel, railways, automobile, telecommunication, internet etc., represent significant
milestones in enhancing connectivity and enabling cross-border trade in goods and
services.  Artificial barriers are those that are related to public policy, such as import
restrictions by way of tariff or non-tariff barriers, which are justified on grounds of
generating revenue or protecting domestic industry apart from national security,
environment, etc.  More recently, multilateral agreements are encouraging reduction in
3
globalising but being local or national.
capital and financial services.
Economic Integration
of proof lies, namely, with the individual or the national authorities.such artificial barriers, while developments in technology are making it difficult for
national authorities to enforce artificial barriers. In brief, in any debate relating to public
globalisation and public
policy induced globalisation that is either voluntary or perceived to have been under
outside pressure.  The pace and nature of globalisation will depend on the combined
The third set of factors relates to capital movements.  In regard to capital
movement also, the interplay between technology and public policy becomes relevant.
There are, however, some special characteristics of capital flows in recent years.  In the
past, a large part of capital flows were in the nature of direct investments, though debt
flows were not uncommon particularly in Europe and America.  In the post-second war
period of the 20 century, capital flows on government account played an important role.
However, technological, demographic and some economic factors led to changing the
nature of such flows by the 1980s and especially the 1990s.  New financial instruments
were developed and portfolio flows enlarged.  The linkages between different capital
flows have been strengthened, and they can now take place in large quantifies and with
great speed in view of enabling technology and huge drop in transaction costs. These
characteristics have highlighted the issue of what is described as contagion , namely, a
country is affected by developments totally outside of its policy though domestic policy
may to some extent influence the degree of vulnerability to the contagion. In any case,
the cross-border flows of capital have wider macro-economic implications, particularly in
terms of exchange rate that directly affects the costs of movement of people as well as
goods and services; of conduct of monetary policy and the efficiency as well as stability
of financial system. Further, capital flows by definition involve future liabilities or assets
It must be recognised that developments in technology and innovation in financial
services impact both domestic and cross border transactions.  The implications for public
policy of such developments in domestic area are different in as much as domestic
financial markets are in some ways subject to governmental regulation by national
authorities while cross border flows are not susceptible to governmental regulation.
Finally, in the context of cross-border capital flows, in the absence of procedures for
international bankruptcy and facilities of lender of last resort, the liabilities incurred on
private account can devolve on public account.  In brief, at this juncture, in respect of
global economic integration through movement of capital ,  several risks devolve on
For analytical purposes, it is possible to take a slightly more disaggregated view
of the nature of economic integration.  Thus, movement of people can be classified as
temporary and permanent. Similarly, movement of goods may be differentiated 
physical goods and services (though in some cases they are integrated). Movement of
money may take different forms, such as capital movements, or to meet transaction
needs, long or short-term movement of debt capital, and non-debt movement of finance
linked to goods and services as distinct from pure finance capitalism. There may also be
spread of technology or media with or without accompanying movement of goods or
capital.  Such a disaggregated approach to economic integration could be of use in
4
appreciating public policies.
between
domestic public authorities, especially in the case of developing countries.
and could involve intergenerational equity issues.
th
effect of technology and public policy, both at the national and the international levels.
policy, a distinction should be made between technology induced Current Context
It is necessary to appreciate the difference between economic integration as it
existed in the past, and more recently, say in the current context. It had been explained
that the globe was far more integrated at the beginning of the nineteenth century than it is
a century later, now, in the sense that people, goods and capital could move without
public policy restrictions i.e., those imposed by nation-states on economic integration.  In
reality, however, there is significantly more interaction now than a century ago, in the
sense that technological developments have made movement of people, goods and capital
Secondly, the trade across countries in the past was usually in generic products
viz., export wheat and import cloth or export steel and import spice.  Currently, there is
significant intra-industry trade.  Often, there are both export and import of a commodity,
say garments or computers.  Trade in what are called intermediate goods is significantly
higher than before.  This implies more intensive global competition now than earlier.  As
Michael Mussa, the well known economist said: “surprisingly, however, the extent of
global integration through international trade today, is by some key measures, not much
greater than it was a century ago”.
Thirdly, though the share of services in world output has increased noticeably, a
predominant part of the services sector still remains non- tradeable across the borders.
Information Technology has made some services more tradeable on a cross border basis
but it is still a very small part.
Fourthly, nineteenth century witnessed large mobility of capital, but it also
witnessed an equally large mobility of labour.  In other words, the international factor
mobility was much more symmetric a century ago when one did not even need a passport
to go from one country to another.
Finally, even today, citizens of most countries, and even in the most advanced
countries like the United States, invest overwhelming proportions of their savings within
their own country.  The qualitative difference, however, lies in the processes that govern
international capital flows or to put it differently the cross-border movement of what has
been described as pure finance capital in an international environment that is totally
unregulated in contrast with domestic financial markets generally subject to regulation.
The international portfolio capital flows are far larger in size now and infinitely mobile,
often governed by what has been described as animal spirits of the markets and highly
Several features of the current status of  as a process of economic
integration among countries must also be recognised.  First, though a large number of
countries are part of the process, they are at different stages or degrees of integration.
Second, economic integration may also vary as between some countries compared to the
rest.  In fact, there can be more of bilateral economic integration between two countries
compared with the rest.  Third, integration among countries also varies as between
different markets, namely, products, capital, labour etc.  Fourth, impact of 
varies as between countries depending on its geography, demography, stage of
development, size, etc.  In fact, impact of globalisation may vary significantly among
different parts of a country.  Thus, it is very clear that case for or against process of
5
globalisation
globalisation
susceptible to herd mentality.
far more widespread, frequent, deeper and speedier.globalisation is contextual and complex even in the limited arena of economic
There are several concerns regarding the process of globalisation and it is difficult
to capture all of them comprehensively in this presentation.  An attempt is made here to
highlight major ones related to economic integration, and merely for convenience of
explanation, these are divided into peoples’ concerns and policy concerns.  The peoples’
First, the benefits and burdens of globalisation are uneven.  For example, while
highly skilled persons like computer professionals may get better wages, others in
traditional occupations are likely to lose their livelihood.  Likewise, while women in
some countries may get better employment opportunities through garment factories for
export, women employed in subsistence agriculture may be adversely affected due to
commercialisation of agriculture.  Even in the developed countries, there is a perception
that inexpensive imports from developing countries are hurting wage levels and resulting
Second, there is also a perception that the overall levels of unemployment,
particularly among unskilled or blue-collar workers are increasing due to global
Third, empirical evidence shows that there is greater income inequality as a result
of globalisation, both in developed and developing countries. The evidence also indicates
that globally while the rich are getting far richer, the poor either remain poor or at best
become less poor.  The serious issue of growing inequalities due to 
brought to the fore recently by Robert Hunter Wade (The Economist, 28 April 2001) who
incidentally lived for sometime in Karimuddulla village of Rayalaseema region to which
Fourth, there is perceptible increase in job insecurity sin ce competition often
results in downsizing, closures, etc.  In most developing countries, there are 
or indeed no social welfare systems or income security, which result in human suffering.
Even where some unemployment benefits are provided, they are painful substitutes for
Fifth, the patent rights regime is resulting in exorbitant prices for some
commodities like medicinal drugs, particularly unaffordable in developing countries and
standardisation of values and culture resulting in loss of identity for
many communities.  This is a result of combined onslaught of market and media with
Seventh, global competition is driving enterp rises to be insensitive to
environmental concerns, which are intensely harmful to the poorer and more vulnerable
sections of the population. Such environmental deregulation is noticeable in developing
6
countries where public policies are either not very sensitive or not very effective.
global presence on local communities and traditional culture.
Sixth, there is 
among poorer sections.
job security.
inadequate,
I belong. I am not elaborating this aspect now since it is being currently debated widely.
globalisation has been
competition in many countries, and in some cases, for prolonged periods.
in unemployment of some people.
summarised as follows: concerns can be 
Current Concerns
integration.Many of the policy concerns are in many ways related to peoples’ concerns.
Policy makers do discharge several responsibilities in macroeconomic management and
especially maintaining social order. Sound public policies are perceived to be severely
constrained by the process of globalisation, and some of the specific concerns expressed
First, any process of globalisation introduces constraints on the conduct of
domestic policy and to this extent, there is a loss of national sovereignty.  Of operational
significance for policy makers is the fact that while gains of globalisation may be enjoyed
by some in any country, the adverse social consequences have to be managed by the
governments.  For example, trade liberalisation does threaten many domestic activities,
though some consumers and some more competitive activities may prosper.  The very
process of globalisation reduces fiscal, financial and some other discretions available to
government, thus reducing the effectiveness of governance in managing disruptive or
downside risks of 
Secondly, exchange rates or interest rates get influenced by volatile capital flows
and these are not conducive to long-term development in developing countries.
Furthermore, when such volatile capital flows on private account affect the economy
seriously, the governments in developing countries are forced to take actions with
implications for the public sector.
There are occasions when volatility is transmitted to a country for reasons that are
entirely outside the domain of domestic policy, and yet, the governments concerned have
to face the consequences.  In other words, the gains from perceived efficiency on account
of freer cross-border capital-flows often do not match the costs of increased volatility
coupled with erosion in autonomy in domestic economic policy making.  This is
Thirdly, the foreign direct investment often treats the recipient country concerned
as a base for exports thereby reducing the citizens to being mere employees, especially
when there are little spillover benefits to domestic firms or activity.  The spread of ideas,
technology, and management techniques may not always take place and there may even
be cases of outdated technology being used in developing countries.  Therefore, the
beneficial consequences of foreign direct investment should be demonstrable, especially
Fourthly, it is noticed that developed countries resort to protectionism, especially
in areas such as textiles, and subsidise agriculture, thus making the process of
globalisation one sided.  In reality, the poor in most parts of the globe are denied
opportunities to participate and benefit from the process of  trade precisely
because of these actions of developed countries which benefit a few - very few - of their
citizens at the expense of millions of poor citizens of other countries.  Similarly, some of
the provisions of Intellectual Property Rights tend to operate for the benefit of a few in
the richer nations at the expense of many in poorer countries with no demonstrable
Fifthly, the international arrangements and multilateral bodies are not adequately
representative of or reasonably accountable to or even sufficiently sensitive to the
problems of the poor and vulnerable people.  In other words, briefly stated, while nation-
7
overall gains at all.
liberalised
incentives or subsidies are extended by governments concerned. if 
particularly noticeable in regard to portfolio flows and to some extent debt flows.
liberalisation of trade and services.
predominantly though not solely by developing countries are summarized below.states have representative and accountable institutions in the concerned government,
there is no corresponding global institution or global government.  In the absence of a
global government and global governance, many nation-states argue that viable and
Finally, process of globalisation is inextricably linked with marketisation and
dominance of markets. In the ultimate analysis, markets, however efficient, are not
democratic institutions in the strictest sense, since customer’s vote is proportionate to
his/her purchasing power. Furthermore, 
capital can withhold if he/she thinks that the return is not adequate while labour cannot
withhold because it will then not be able to survive. She or he has to work to live. The
poor can give according to their ability but if such abilities cease to have markets, they
cannot get what they need even if the need is minimal. Pro-poor oriented growth is thus
possible when intellectual community and policy makers  view the markets with the
suspicion that they deserve and the poor with the respect that they need. The question is:
how to build arrangements that integrate state or governments, corporates or markets, and
voluntary organizations or concerned citizens in the fight against poverty while
recognizing contribution of globalisation, technological progress and marketisation to
In the light of the current context and concerns of the process of globalisation,
five important issues arise.  How genuine are the concerns?  Should public policy resist
the process?  To what extent can policy succeed in resisting it?  To what extent should it
be managed?  If so, how should the public policy attempt to manage the process to
maximise the gains and 
Undeniably, the peoples’ concerns expressed are in varying extents genuine.  It is,
however, possible to argue that almost all the concerns are valid with any intensification
of competition, technological progress and consequent rapid changes in economic as well
as institutional set up, irrespective of whether these are induced by intensely domestic
process or by global process.  The policy concerns, on the other hand, arise out of the
responsibilities imposed on the governments, especially though not exclusively of
developing countries in coping with peoples’ concerns. The policy autonomy available to
governments is getting eroded by the combined effects of technologically induced and
multilateral policy induced process of globalisation.  It is perhaps this inadequacy of
governments as institutional mechanisms to address peoples’ concerns in all the countries
that has led to widespread demonstrations in Seattle and justifiably increased the clout of
Yet, the case for policy intervention to significantly resist the process of
globalisation does not seem to be very persuasive.  For people, connectivity is by and
large a source of freedom and generally desired rather than spurred.  Again, the empirical
evidence available so far in regard to countries which had prospered as well as those
which have succeeded in reducing poverty does not favour isolationism.  Moreover, it is
true that inequality has increased during the recent bouts of globalisation but it has
increased most in rural parts of China, India and Africa where there is less of connectivity
of people to global developments.  It must be noted that these parts of the world suffer
8
non-governmental but global initiatives in highlighting peoples’ concerns.
minimise the costs?
Opportunities and Challenges
prosperity.
labour is different from capital since the owner of
globalisation is not feasible. universally beneficial process of from structural forms of acute poverty which is most challenging and enduring than
poverty due to business cycles or volatility or contagion as in the case of East Asian
crises or Latin America.  It is also instructive that countries which have been relatively
closed are seeking to join the mainstreams as illustrated by the case of China’s entry into
the World Trade 
Finally, the growth of output a ll over the world is occurring mainly in the services
sector and connectivity of people both in terms of physical and technological terms
appears critical for sharing in the output and employment in the services sector.  No
doubt, public policy could avoid downside risks involved in the process but resisting the
Even assuming that it is desirable for public policy to pursue a degree of
economic isolationism in preference to opening up the economies, the effectiveness of
such policy options need to be assessed in relation to the benefits.  For example, potential
for smuggling of goods, especially of high value but non-bulk items, limits the scope for
artificial barriers to trade. Capital flight through unaccounted channels is not an entirely
unknown phenomenon.  Above all, technological progress and ease of movement of
people across the borders makes for easy connectivity, at least for those who can afford.
It is technically possible to erect barriers on all channels of connectivity, but if the
are  out of alignment with global factors, be it taxes or
prices, it becomes difficult to enforce the barriers.  In brief ,  in the present day world,
there is only limited room for public policy to erect barriers  against connectivity of
people and goods.
To the extent a significant part of activity in a country tends to be affected by
globalisation, and increasingly so over a period, and to the extent limited room is
available for public policy to operate artificial  barriers to connectivity, it stands to reason
that the process should be so managed as to minimise the risks.
The process of management obviously has three participants, viz. citizens concerned,
national governments and supranational, but regional or global institutions as well as
Finally, it should be obvious that national governments cannot manage the
process without reference to actions of other governments, in view of the
interdependence.  At the same time, each country has some freedom to manage the
process in ways that it considers best.  A few examples may illustrate the point.  During
the Asian crisis, Malaysia decided to manage the crisis by opting out of the mainstream
International Monetary Fund’s prescriptions and has by and large succeeded.  China and
India have been managing capital flows in their own unique way.   Countries in Northern
Europe have a larger share of their national output from public sector thus illustrating
dominance of State over market relative to most other countries.  The cross border
movement of people is managed by different countries very differently, be it the United
States of America or Europe or the Gulf region.  It is reported that some countries are
importing English teachers on a large scale to equip their citizens for handling business in
information technology, thus illustrating methods by which public policy can strengthen
citizens capabilities to benefit from opportunities provided by globalisation.  In brief, the
challenges to globalisation have to be met on several fronts, managing the process is a
9
alliances.
maximise the benefits and 
domestic policies and environment 
process on a long-term basis does not seem advisable.
Organisation.critical responsibility of public policy of national governments; and the process has to be
South Asia as a 
It is not surprising to note that South Asia is defined differently by various
agencies. The South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC) defines
South Asia as Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. On
the other hand, the World Bank definition of South Asia includes the seven SAARC
countries and Afghanistan. The United Nations Development Progamme (UNDP)
definition of South Asia is even broader and includes Iran. In this analysis, the
composition of South Asia has to be interpreted depending on the source. Thus, in the
narrative of inter-regional comparison, there is some unscientific element involved, but
this gets explained in the details given in the Annexures and  tables where specific
For East Asia also, there is the some element of uncertainty due to its different
interpretations by the above agencies.  In the World Bank’s classification, East Asia and
Pacific, comprising of countries east of South Asia and the Pacific islands including
UNDP’s classification ,  East
For purposes of regional comparison with South Asia, among the various regional
groups, the East Asia, Latin America and Caribbean, the Sub-Saharan Africa and the
group of Low and Middle-income countries are of particular interest. However, 
Annexure 1, further details on regional classification such as, South Asia, excluding
India, East Asia excluding China, South Asia and the Pacific, the Arab States, Europe and
In Appendix 1 and  Annexures 1 and 3, a comparison of South Asia as a region
with others is made  in terms of economic indicators, infrastructure facilities, social
indicators and institutional factors.
In brief, the region translated itself from a position of slowest growing during the
‘sixties and the ‘seventies to one of the fastest growing regions in the world since the
‘eighties. Also, in terms of inflation, South Asia performed the best among all the
regional groupings within the developing countries. Yet, even at the end of the ‘nineties,
it remained one of the poorest in terms of per capita income, besides being the most
densely populated region. Exports of goods and services have been one of the fastest in
recent times, but the region’s reliance on external trade, a measure of degree of
integration to the global economy, continues to be the least. It must be recognised that
these low positions inspite of recent impressive performance are due to the very low base
from where the region began  its commendable achievement in economic growth since
In particular, the financial imbalances of the government in the region  were and
continue to be among the worst among all regions.  The additional problem besides the
large size of fiscal deficit was the revenue deficit that reduced the public sector savings.
That the region recorded one of the lowest rate of  saving is often a reflection of this
dissaving of the government revenue account. The banking presence in terms of bank
10
the ‘eighties.
CIS countries, the High Income countries are also given.
in
Asia  consists of only China, Hong Kong, South Korea and Mongolia.
Japan, Australia and New Zealand, form one group, while in 
definitions are given.
Region : A Profile
governed by the country context and to some extent the regional context.credit to GDP ratio in the region is also one of the lowest. The region is one of the least
indebted region in the world in terms of external debt, but in view of its low base of
export of goods and services the debt service ratio is not as comfortable. The official
development assistance in the region has been declining despite it already being one of
the least recipient regions. The long-term private capital and FDI inflows have been
Furthermore, the region has significantly lagged behind in the field of
infrastructure, social provisions and working of the institutional set-up. And this does not
augur well for  the medium and long-term growth prospects of the region. The provision
of infrastructure facilities, including access to information flows is one of the least, if not
the least. Similar is the situation in the literacy and education, health and nutrition of the
people. Compounding the above are the institutional problems of lower level of
governance. Thus, all the socio-economic indices place the region at the lower spectrum
of the rankings. The higher ranking in terms of current growth prospects than future
growth prospects appears to be reflective of shortcomings in infrastructure, social and
institutional set ups.
South Asian 
It would also be useful to compare some critical economic and social indicators
within the region. Although the World Bank definition of South Asia is adopted,
Afghanistan is excluded due to paucity of data, and only the performance of Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka is compared in this section.
These countries diverge significantly in terms of population and geographical size and
level of income. Population in 1998 ranged from 0.3 million (Maldives) to 982 million
(India), while land area for countries other than Bhutan and Maldives, ranged from 66
thousand sq. km. (Sri Lanka) to 3,288 thousand sq. km. (India).  Population density for
larger countries was much above the world average (46 people per sq. km.), Bangladesh
being the highest with 981 people per sq. km. in 1999 to Nepal having the lowest (164
persons). The per capita GNP in 1998 in US $ ranged from 210 (Nepal) to 1,130
(Maldives), and in PPP terms, from  US $ 1,157   (Nepal) to US $ 4,083 (Maldives).
Therefore, average characteristics of the region may not reflect individual countries,
except the large ones. Keeping these in view ,  Annexure II and Appendix II provide
It may be seen that the region is characterized by large diversity of the
constituting countries in terms of population size, income and in the 
provisions that are in general low. The most common elements are the higher growth
performance generally associated with growing external trade, a reasonable rate of
inflation and high fiscal imbalance of  the government. However, there are large
differences in the saving and investment capacity and on dependence on external trade of
the economy. The inflow of private capital in the region is mainly accounted for by few
larger countries. There is also significant heterogeneity even in the generally low level of
provision of infrastructure, health, education and nutrition facilities among these
countries. That the countries individually, and as a regional group, continue to lag behind
other regions reflect the enormity of challenges ahead of all the countries in the South
11
Asian region to catch up with most of the other regions.
socio-economic
detailed account of profiles of each country in South Asia.
Countries : A Profile
growing at a relatively slow rate and continue to be the least among the regions.Critical Aspects of Economic Integration in South Asia
It would be useful to compare the extent of economic integration of each country
in the South Asian region with the rest of the world as also a comparison of the extent of
intra-regional integration. The most common measures of economic integration comprise
three aspects: trade integration, financial integration and labour migration between
The simplest measure of trade integration uses the actual trade flows such as the
share of trade (exports plus imports) in GDP. In 1990, the trade to GDP ratio for South
Asia stood at 24.8 percent, which improved to 28.4 percent in 1998. In both the years,
however, South Asia recorded the lowest among all regional groups. In general, trade to
GDP ratio has an inverse relation with the size of an economy. Consequently, there are
large divergences in the extent of trade integration among the South Asian countries.
Smaller economies like Bhutan, Nepal and Sri Lanka had a much higher percentage,
ranging between 57.6 percent (Nepal) to 78.4 percent (Sri Lanka) in 1998. Sri Lanka had
a historically high ratio due to the importance of plantation crops such as tea, coffee and
rubber in its economy. The trade to GDP ratio of Maldives, another small  economy,  was
as high as 130.5 percent in 1990. Besides the overall trade, the share of technology
related exports in the total exports also indicates trade integration as it reflects on how
much a country is moving away from its traditional products. High technology exports as
percent of manufacturing exports in South Asia in 1998 was only 4.0 percent, by far the
lowest of all the regions. And, even this low percentage was significantly accounted for
Another aspect of the trade integration could be that of intra-regional trade flows.
The percentage of intra-regional exports to total exports of South Asia, which ranged
from 3.59 percent to 4.41 percent during 1991- 97 was the lowest among all the regions.
Middle east with a range from 5.4 percent to 7.7 percent had the second lowest 
regional exports. Africa had a range from 7.3 percent to 10.4 percent, as against 36.0
percent to 40.7 percent for Asia and 37.1 percent to 43.5 percent for developing
countries. In terms of intra-regional imports also, South Asia with a range of 2.57 percent
to 4.12 percent during 1991 to 1997 recorded the lowest share of all groups. In other
regions, it ranged from 6.3 percent to 8.3 percent (Middle East), 7.4 percent to 10.8
percent (Africa), 33.4 percent to 36.7 percent (Asia) and 35.9 percent to 42.0 percent
The second measure of economic integration, which is financial integration, is
often captured by the private capital flows. These include  foreign direct investment
(FDI) and equity and portfolio investment, and the extent of access to international
capital markets. First, the long-term private capital inflows in South Asia during the
‘eighties was on an average US $ 3 billion, the lowest among all the regions. This inflow
improved to an average of US $ 5 billion during the 1990-96, higher than only Arab
States and Sub-Saharan Africa region among the developing countries. As a percentage
to the total inflow to developing countries during 1990-96, it declined from 8.0 to 4.0
12
percent during the same period, higher than only the two regions mentioned above.
Financial Integration
(Developing Countries).
intra-
by India.
Trade Integration
countries.Second, FDI inflows increased from US $ 351 million during 1987-92 to US $
2873 million during 1993-98, again the lowest of all groups. Even the FDI inflows to
Sub-Saharan Africa during the corresponding periods were US $ 1,797 million and US $
3,638 million, while other regions were far ahead. Major chunk of the inflows during
1993-97 was accounted by India, followed by Pakistan and Sri Lanka in that order. As
already indicated earlier, FDI inflows as percentage of gross capital formation among the
South Asian countries ranged from a negligible level to 3.3 percent during 1987- 92  and
from 0.78 to 6.32 percent during 1993-97, also lower than all the regional groups. The
stock of FDI inflows as a ratio to GDP which ranged from negligible level to 8.5 percent
in 1985 and from 1.0 to 12.7 percent in 1997 among the South Asian countries was also
Third, FDI outflows are equally important as measures of financial integration,
though for developing countries with scarce resources, inflows are expected to be the
predominant form of FDI flows. The FDI outflows from South Asia, which was mostly
accounted for  by India, increased from an average of US $ 20 million during 1987-92 to
US $ 99 million during 1993-98. Even the outflows  from Sub-Saharan Africa during
1993-98 were US $ 496 million, while the same from other regions were far ahead. Thus,
FDI outflows from South Asia, whether as a percentage of gross fixed capital formation
Fourth, portfolio investment also measures the extent of financial integration.
Such flows increased manifold in South Asia between 1990 to 1998, from US $ 252
million to US $ 4,536 million. However, the flows were almost wholly accounted for by
Fifth, credit ratings suggest the access to international capital and thus indicate
financial integration. The composite International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) risk rating
which was alluded to earlier is an overall index of investment risk in a country. In this
South Asia had a score of 61.3 in 2000, with a range of 54.3 (Pakistan) to 64.3 (India).
This rating was  lower (signifying higher risk) than the average of Low and Middle
Income countries (62.9), and was only better than the rating of Sub-Saharan Africa of
58.9 among the regional groups. The second rating is the institutional investor credit
rating  which indicates the probability of a country’s default. Rating below 20 indicates
low integration, above 50 indicates high integration and between 20 and 50 indicates
medium integration. In 2000, South Asia  had a rating of 26.1, higher than only Sub-
Saharan Africa with rating of 18.7. Among the South Asian countries, the ratings ranged
from 18.8 (Pakistan) to 45.3 (India).
The third aspect of economic integration is the labour migration. Owing to
paucity of data, this aspect is proxied by the worker’s remittances flowing in the South
Asian region.  The worker’s remittances as ratios to exports of goods and services and  to
GDP for five South Asian countries viz., Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri
Lanka, is compared with Philippines which is known for her large share of migrants in
the labour force. During 1991 to 1998, the average ratios to export ranged from 5.4
percent (Nepal) to 31.0 percent (Bangladesh), and to GDP they ranged from 1.3 percent
13
Migration
India, and among the major regions were higher than Sub-Saharan Africa only.
or its stock as a ratio to GDP, were the lowest of all the regions.
significantly lower than the average of all the other regions.(Nepal) to 5.9 percent (Sri Lanka). Even Nepal, with the least in both the ratios, stood far
higher than Philippines. One must, however, take note of the special arrangement
between India and Nepal on the movement of labour from the latter to the former. Most
of the remittances with the possible exception of Nepal appear to be from the Gulf and
South-East Asia, indicating a weak intra-regional remittance flows in South Asia.
However, the data on worker’s remittances needs to be interpreted with some caution as
it may not fully capture 
According to International Monetary Fund’s (IMF) publication on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (2000) Bangladesh and Maldives peg their
currencies to a trade-weighted basket of currencies. In Maldives, however, the currency
has remained stable vis-à- vis   US dollar since October 1994. Pakistan pegs its currency
to the US dollar. On the other hand, Sri Lanka follows a system of crawling peg against
the US dollar within a band of 2.0 percent.  In respect of India, however, exchange rate is
determined by demand and supply conditions in the market. The currencies of Nepal and
It is useful to analyse the movement in the quarterly average exchange rates per
US dollar of these countries during 1991 to 2000. The movements in the exchange rates
are similar to a large extent, except perhaps Maldives that follows a relatively fixed rate
to US dollar (Graph). The correlation coefficients between the quarterly average
exchange rate per US dollar of Indian Rupee and the corresponding exchange rates of
other six South Asian countries for the period is estimated to range from 0.95
(Bangladesh) to 1.0 (Bhutan and Nepal), barring 0.79 with Maldives (See Table-1). In
other words, the movements in the exchange rates of South Asian countries vis-à-vis US
Graph : Quarterly Average Exchange Rates of SAARC Countries 
(per US Dollar)
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1991Q1 1992Q1 1993Q1 1994Q1 1995Q1 1996Q1 1997Q1 1998Q1 1999Q1 2000Q1
1991.Q1  to 2000.Q4
BANGLADESH BHUTAN INDIA MALDIVES
NEPAL PAKISTAN SRI LANKA
Currencies per US Dollar14
dollar are noticeably similar.
Bhutan are pegged to the Indian Rupee.
Exchange Rate Arrangements and Movements
intra-regional flows.In terms of current account, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka
have adopted Article VIII of the IMF while Bhutan and Maldives are still classified under
Article XIV. Basically, a member country embracing Article VIII undertakes to avoid
restrictions on current payments and discriminatory currency practices. Article XIV
facilitates countries to avail of transitional arrangements that permit them to impose
restrictions on the current account. Bangladesh and Bhutan, however, still have some
As regards receipts from exports as well as invisible transactions, Bangladesh,
Bhutan, India, Nepal and Pakistan have repatriation requirements (which refers to
obligation of exporters to bring back into the country export proceeds) while only
Bangladesh, Bhutan and India of these countries have imposed surrender requirements
(refers to regulation requiring recipient of repatriated export proceeds to sell the foreign
exchange proceeds to central bank or commercial bank or  Dealers as the case
may be).
The IMF publication also defines capital transactions as capital and money market
instruments, derivatives and other instruments, credit operations, direct investment,
personal capital movements, transactions specific to commercial banks and other credit
institutions, and transactions specific to institutional investors. According to the IMF, all
the South Asian countries have controls on the above categories  in some form or the
other.
Thus, it may be observed from the above analysis that South Asia as a region is
one of the least   in the world in terms of trade and  financial integration.  The
intra-regional integration is also very weak. In terms of worker’s remittances, the
substitute measure for labour migration, it is indicated that the region is perhaps well
integrated to the global economy.  Here too, the intra-regional integration appears to be
In trade, however, smaller economies (Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal and Sri Lanka)
are globally much more integrated than the larger economies. In fact, South Asia’s low
level of trade integration is a reflection of India’s relatively lower dependence on trade
flows. With regard to financial integration ,  Maldives, Pakistan and Sri Lanka are
globally more integrated as the FDI inflows in these three countries form quite a
significant proportion of their economies, though in volume terms India is the largest.
All the South Asian countries are characterised by large inflow of worker’s remittances
relative to the size of their economy. Though this remittance relative to exports is the
highest in Bangladesh, in terms of GDP, it is most significant in Sri Lanka. Thus, by all
the three aspects of economic integration, Sri Lanka, and perhaps Maldives as all the
information available for this country indicate, are the most globalised South Asian
countries. In the rest, some or most of the critical aspects of economic integration are not
15
strong enough.
lacking.
globalised
Overall  Assessment
Authorised
bilateral payments arrangements.
Current and Capital Account ConvertibilityThe World Bank has projected the growth in regional per capita GDP during
2000-10.  The projections indicate that while growth in per capita GDP of South Asia is
expected to be higher than all the regions except East Asia and Pacific, and Eastern
Europe and CIS, the low base of South Asia ensures that the difference in per capita GDP
in US dollar terms will widen in comparison with all the regions, except sub-Saharan
Africa.  South Asia’s per capita GDP would continue to be about one-tenth of the world
average and about one-third of the average of Low and Middle Income group countries
even at the end of this decade (Table 2).  Briefly stated, South Asia will have to perform
far better than what the world  currently expects if it has to make a significant dent on
large scale poverty prevalent in the region and try to catch up with the rest of the world.
The forces of globalisation provide both opportunities and challenges which have to be
South Asia has improved from being slowest growing till three decades ago to
one of the fastest growing economies and there is evidence of noticeable reduction in
incidence of poverty too.  By and large, the region has displayed economic stability and
no serious crisis visited the region during the turbulent nineties.  In this sense, the
globalisation pressures seem to have been met satisfactorily by the region.  Yet, to face
growing global competition, the major policy issues in most parts of the region relate to
improvements in physical infrastructure especially in the area of transport and
communications; social infrastructure in the area of education and health; and
institutional infrastructure.  All these are pre-requisites to improve the capacity of people
to connect with others productively and public policy has to focus on these aspects.  The
standards of public administration and economic creativity should help the process while
fiscal management appears to constrain the process.  These issues are almost entirely
within the ambit of national policy and need to be addressed as such keeping in view the
fact that trade integration is growing but is still in many parts low and capital flows as
The region is characterised by large diversity in terms of saving and investment
capacity, dependence on external trade, inflow of capital and social infrastructure.
Common factors are the high growth in recent years, growing external trade, reasonable
rate of inflation and high fiscal deficit.  Hence, public policies need to assess both
common features and unique features of each country to continue and intensify the
Trade integration shows a remarkable diversity, reflecting inter alia , the varying
size and degree of openness of different countries, but the region as a whole is one of the
least globalised in terms of trade integration.  Intra-regional trade has also been
Similarly, there is a large diversity in regard to financial integration but the region
as a whole is still one of the least integrated in financial terms.  No doubt, one could
justifiably attribute some degree of macroeconomic stability of the region to this low
The maximum economic integration with the rest of the world in respect of South
Asia is in terms of movement of people, i.e., workers remittances which is a substitute
16
level of financial integration.
conspicuous by its relatively low level.
minimising the risks. process of benefiting from global trends while 
well as external debt, by and large, are sustainable.
significantly managed by public policy.
Issuesmeasure for labour migration.  Undoubtedly this mode of global integration has benefited
the region and its people. By all accounts, the potential for greater benefits through this
mode exists.
Finally, an interesting fe ature observed relates to movements in foreign exchange
rates of the national currencies of the region.  Except Maldives, the movement in the
exchange rates of all the countries in South Asia seems to be synchronized to a large
extent.  This is an important pointer to the need for further study and policy coordination
in South Asia in the context of globalisation.  For a central banker, this is an important
area for exploring the depth and dimensions of economic integration among economies of
To conclude, globalisation is a complex phenomenon and a process that can
perhaps be managed by public policies.  In managing the process, developing countries
face challenges from a world order that is particularly burdensome on them.  Yet, as
many other developing countries demonstrated, it is possible for public policy to manage
the process with a view to maximising benefits to its citizens while minimising risks.
The nature of optimal integration, however, is highly country specific and contextual.  On
balance, there appears to be greater advantage in well managed and appropriate
integration into the global process, which would imply more effective interventions by
governments.  In fact, markets do not and cannot exist in a vacuum, i.e., without 
externally imposed rules and such order is a product of public policy.  The challenges of
globalisation, particularly for poorer countries like South Asia are in essence at national
e poor, the vulnerable and the underprivileged will continue to be the
responsibility of national governments and hence of public policy. Unfortunately,
globalisation does not appear to strengthen national governments in discharging this
worthy cause.  Yet, sound public policies at the national level in South Asia are very
critical in the current context of levels of development, extent of globalisation, and
degree of regional integration. There is a potential for benefit for all concerned, if the
global challenges are met primarily at national level without losing sight of benefits of
Thank you.
* B.P. Koirala India-Nepal Foundation lecture delivered by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy
Governor, Reserve Bank of India on May 19, 2001 at Kathmandu, Nepal. Dr. Reddy is
thankful to Jeevan   for his assistance.
17
Khundrakpam Shri 
bilateral as well as regional cooperation among the countries in South Asia.
Th
level, at the level of sound public policies by governments.
some
Conclusion
South Asia.