Mr. Chairman , Mr.  and friends.
I am happy to be here among bank economists to deliver the customary valedictory
address of the Bank Economists Conference.  I find that the subject chosen for this year is very
broad and relates to the whole of the banking sector.  I carefully read the papers presented at the
Conference and I find the coverage to be comprehensive and analysis insightful as usual.  The
current year's Conference also had the benefit of special presentations by eminent persons,
which added to the breadth of understanding.  Governor Dr. Bimal Jalan in his inaugural
address gave an outstanding overview of the problems and prospects and highlighted the role of
bank economists.  In this background, I am not sure whether there would be much that I can add
by way of value to the deliberations.  Hence, I will briefly respond to the rapporteur’s reports of
technical sessions and then speak on  "central banking in the new Millennium".  I am aware that
the commercial banks preceded central banks in the world.  In fact, commercial banking has a
hoary past in India while central banking, as we know now is essentially a product of 20th
century.  Yet, central banks are playing an important role in the economies and a discussion
about banking now may be complete in all respects if the subject of central banking is also
covered.
Bank Research in India:
Dr. Chakravarthi in his presentation displayed both his scholarship and conviction in
analysing the role of bank research in the new millennium.  In particular, the call for
synchronizing bank research with corporate goals is note worthy.  The research on business
prospects of clients, particularly large corporate clients with reference to sensitivity to industry
risks is also important.  Above all, the importance of managing change and approaches to
From the point of view of the Reserve Bank of India, there are three aspects of research
First, Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is reviewing the research programme of its own
research departments.  Reserve Bank has sought inputs from its operating departments to
that need to be noted by this gathering.
managing change have been very well articulated.
Narang Kohli
Banking in the New Millennium* Central suggest areas for research.  Effort is being made to attain greater interaction between research
and operating departments, particularly in ensuring inputs from research to operating
Secondly, we are also reviewing the working of financial support of Reserve Bank of
India to the research programmes including the financing of the endowment chairs.  The
intention is to ensure fee-based approach instead of cost based approach and the feasibility of
capital grant rather than incurring of recurring liabilities.  Furthermore, greater academic
freedom is sought to be ensured while effective contribution to the research efforts of the
Reserve Bank is necessary.  The concept of Memorandum of Understanding and time bound
support is yet another possible alternative.  The Reserve Bank has sought advice from select
experts on the issues of financial support from Reserve Bank of India to research and training.
A letter has been addressed to select eminent academics on January 8, 2001 and response is
Thirdly, there has been inadequate interaction or linkage between commercial bank
economists and professionals of the economic and statistical departments of Reserve Bank.  The
Reserve Bank would welcome suggestions from the economists assembled here so that there
Banking Operations:
Dr. Shetty has summed up the complex issues covered in the deliberations on banking
operations with his characteristic clarity and analytical rigor.   A number of issues on a very
wide range of subjects have been covered, and most of them are of contemporary significance.
In this address, the response will be confined only to those issues that are relevant to monetary
First, a suggestion has been made that the Cash Reserve Ratio should be reduced to 3
per cent.  As already mentioned on previous occasions, the Reserve Bank is committed to a
reduction in the reserve ratios.  But, the pace of reduction depends on the progress in fiscal
adjustment and development of financial markets.  The developments in international markets
would also be relevant.  In fact, Reserve Bank has proposed amendment to the existing
legislation which prescribes the minimum ratio of 3 per cent so that Cash Reserve Ratio can be
reduced even below that level.  Consequent upon Finance Minister's assurances in the last
Budget to accord greater flexibility to the Reserve Bank of India, we have proposed
2
awaited.
and credit policies.
can be greater interaction for mutual benefit.
departments and obtaining feedback from the latter on the relevance of the research findings.amendments to remove the statutory prescription of a Cash Reserve Ratio of 3 per cent and
Statutory Liquidity Ratio of 25 per cent.  This would give the Reserve Bank necessary
maneuverability and flexibility to change the ratios.  Significant reductions in reserve ratios
from the present levels would also be necessary to speed up the process of movement towards
universal banking.  The real issue, therefore, is not one of commitment of Reserve Bank, but
one of objective conditions that would facilitate such reductions in the reserve ratios as soon as
Second, there is a reference in the presentation to the open market operations and the
Bank Rate.  It may be appreciated that with the introduction of liquidity adjustment facility
(LAF), the role of Bank Rate changes.  Once the medium term objective of eliminating
refinance by the Reserve Bank is achieved, it would lead to greater reliance on open market
operations including the LAF.  This would take the Reserve Bank further towards the objective
Third, the presentation has suggested that tightening of prudential regulations should be
"slow" so that the banking system is in a position to cope up and comply.  The Reserve Bank
would prefer the prudential regulations to be introduced at an appropriate pace in order to reach
the objective of meeting the financial standards as soon as feasible and not at a slow pace.  It is
also recognized that the prudential regulations have a tendency to be pro-cyclical as mentioned
in my Valedictory address in the previous Bank Economists Conference at Bangalore.  Hence,
the timing and the extent of progress in tightening would take into account the cyclical factors
in the economy.  Further, adequate notice has been and will continue to be given to the market
participants to enable them to be fully prepared to meet the changing prescriptions in regard to
prudential regulations. Finally, there is a very intense consultation process in detailing the
application of prudential regulations.  This is also undertaken with a view to facilitating the
There are three more observations that need to be made to this gathering in the overall
context of the banking operations in the new millennium.  First, a number of suggestions have
been made to improve the borrowers' accountability in the banking operations.  There is,
however, little or no mention by way of lenders' liability that has been spelt out in various
discussions.  It has been argued by several borrowers’ associations that honest borrowers do not
get adequate notice or details of various monetary demands on them.  It has also been argued
3
market participants to effectively meet international standards.
of greater reliance on indirect instruments of monetary policy.
possible.that business values have not been adequately appreciated in the banking operations.  Thus, the
suggestion made by Dr. Mitra of National Institute of Law for a legislation prescribing lenders'
Secondly, while some suggestions have been made in the discussions relating to Debt
Recovery Tribunals, institution-specific recovery position may not be useful in the longer run as
financial markets develop, a variety of institutions participate in them and corporates take
recourse to multiple sources of funding.  It is essential to have comprehensive bankruptcy laws
and procedures. An Advisory Committee on Bankruptcy Procedures in India in the Context of
International Sandards has already given its views, which have been put on the RBI 
Comments are most welcome on the subject.
Thirdly, Reserve Bank has been seeking an interactive mode from the banking
community in regard to evolving systems, procedures and standards. For instance, Bank for
International Settlements (BIS) has issued new prudential guidelines a couple of days ago.
Reserve Bank has been involved in evolving these standards and the opinion of the banking
community in India has been sought on the subject.  Similarly, BIS had recently brought out a
draft document on Role of External Auditors in Regulation of Financial Sector.  More recently,
BIS has also forwarded a report on Payments Systems, while Reserve Bank on its website has
put up reports of its own advisory groups on Payments Systems and on Banking. There is need
for the Bank economists to respond with their suggestions whenever such consultation
advices.
The future vision strategies for better banking have been brought out in an outstanding
fashion by Dr.  Jain.  There are, however, some areas on which special focus would be
advisable.  These are - how will the banks be positioned in the future vis-à-vis non-banks? In
what way should the banks change their scope and operations in order to survive?  In other
words, what should be the type of mutation for survival in the fast changing evolution of the
financial sector?  Finally, what would be the type of considerations that determine the relative
emphasis between domestic and global presence for Indian banks?  The Committee on Financial
System (Chairman Shri.M.Narasimham) in its Report some years ago had touched on the
subject and indicated the need for regional, national and international banks in the Indian
4
banking system.
Jayantilal
Strategies for Better Banking
documents are put up and RBI would welcome and value their 
website.
liability is worth exploring.The Chairman Mr. Kohli had referred to two important aspects, namely, the role of
investments and the importance of long term paper in the bond market.  The Reserve Bank has
already recognized the importance of investment in the operations of commercial banks and is
trying to ensure that the valuation and regulatory regime are appropriate.  RBI is addressing
these issues comprehensively to include investments in Union Government Securities, State
Government Securities, Government guaranteed bonds, corporate bonds etc. As regards the
introduction of long term paper, recent operations in the Government securities market, clearly
show the distinct preference for elongation of maturity of government securities, but the search
As mentioned in the beginning of this address, compared to commercial banks, central
banking is a later phenomenon and is in fact essentially a 20th century phenomenon, though
Bank of England can trace its origin back to over 300 years, while Bank of France over 200
years.  In 1900, there were only 18 central banks whereas now there are 172.  No doubt, the
League of Nations in the inter-war period encouraged the establishment of central banks.  By
60s and 70s, however, central banks became national symbols like national airlines and evolved
In our country, the debate on central banking is considered to be one of the oldest in the
world traceable to Sir James Steuart in 18th century.  Lord Keynes was involved in the
recommendations relating to central banking in India, which ultimately led in the establishment
of Imperial Bank/State Bank of India.   RBI itself took a long time to come to fruition and
Contrary to popular impression, not all central banks were publicly owned.  Both Bank
of England and Reserve Bank of India were originally privately owned banks and both were
nationalized in the late 1940s.
In fact, in terms of ownership, scope, nature of functioning and their importance, central
banking has been changing from time to time.  Though there have been advocates of free
banking such as , and some others who felt that there was no need for a central bank but
expected a continued existence for central banks such as Milton Friedman, the fact remains that
5
Hayek
perhaps the longest incubation period for any central bank in the world!
at the rate of one and only one per country.
Central Banking
for optimal maturity is still continuing.
Chairman’s Commentsthe central banks continued to grow in importance in most parts of the world in the latter half of
By now, the central banks are considered as bastions of professionalism and centres of
stability in macro-economic policy.  They have projected a tradition of avoiding partisanship
with the ability to command public support.
Of course, there are detractors of central banks.  A former Prime Minister of a central
European country quipped  "when prices rise, governments are blamed; when prices are stable
By and large, there is a consensus that a central banker's dream is growth without
But quite often a question is asked : who is a central banker? It has been remarked in a
somewhat semi-serious fashion, that the central banker is “neither a fish nor fowl; neither
India has been no exception in terms of recognizing the importance of central banks as also
the criticality of price stability as one of the basic objectives of the functioning of central banks.
The credibility and reputation of RBI in public arena, intellectual circles, financial markets, and
multinational institutions are admittedly high.  Therefore, any discussion about the future of
banking in the new millennium will be incomplete without a discussion on the future of central
     
 
Information Technology (IT) has certainly introduced significant structural changes in
all economies though in varying degrees.  Information Technology affects productivity in
different sectors very rapidly and influences price levels also.  It becomes very difficult for
central banks to capture these rapid developments in terms of data.  There is also increased
6
Wil
uncertainty.  In this situation, the conduct of monetary policy becomes more complex.
What Happens to Central Banks in New Economy?
l there be central banks at all in future?
How central will a central bank be?
How national will a central bank be?
How much of banking will central banks deal with?
What happens to central banks in the new economy?
A useful way of approaching this issue would be to address five interrelated questions, viz.,
banking in general and a specific reference to India.
academic nor a banker”.
inflation, while the nightmare is inflation without growth.
central banks take credit.  How can central banks ever be wrong?"
twentieth century, attaining preponderant status since a couple of decades.It is argued that it is possible, just possible, in future, that the new economy can
introduce final settlements on real time basis by private sector without use of central bank
money, using digital or electronic money. All transactions including those of financial assets
can be "priced" in terms of that  unit of account. This can in a sense easily become international
through internet and if the creditworthiness of participants is verifiable straightaway, the final
settlement can occur in real time with finality. Money in any form is a unit of account. In
pricing, while relative prices will represent the reciprocal or economic value, the absolute level
of prices will still be influenced by total quantity of money in existence. Asset pricing has an
added dimension of interest rates and inflation rates. Pricing of foreign currencies has one more
dimension of cross country interest/inflation rates. Therefore, technology cannot change the
basic functions of money in an exchange economy, viz., unit of account, medium of exchange
At a more practical level, the question is whether the age of digital money has set in.
Digital money is generally defined as the monetary value of government or privately issued
currency units stored in electronic form in an electronic device.  Currently, the credit cards
utilising the unit of currency issued by government are used on Internet.  The credit card is,
however, inferior to cash in terms of cost, convenience and, most important anonymity.   The
digital money needs a device on the part of the two counterparties, while in the case of cash, it
is the cash itself that is the device and two hands are enough to complete the transactions.  Thus,
cash is unaccountable since it freely moves, while the digital money will have to be designed to
be unaccountable. In an accountable system, every transaction between a payee and payer is
accountable to a third party, irrespective of the timing of accountability and a tracing of the two
parties to the transaction.  Non-accountable systems should allow for use of free movement of
value, just like physical cash. In discussing the digital money, it is useful to make a distinction
between on-line digital money and off-line digital money.  On-line digital money requires
simultaneous verification, while off-line does not.   A distinction is also made between token
based money and ledger based money.  Token based systems exchange value through a
denominated electronic token, which is in the nature of note or coin consisting of serial number
and denomination of value in electronic form.  Ledger based systems involve a balance ledger
7
which can be increased or decreased as transactions are made.
and a store of value.Technology may be available for digital money and according to Research Study 24 of
World Gold Council (Nov.2000) , a beginning is already made by what is known as 
Payment System, Millicent and Mondex. For wider acceptance it may require an underwriter
There are also issues relating to problems of money laundering and intellectual property
rights, which complicates the large scale introduction of digital money which would replace
central bank money. The main problem would be one of widespread access to the devices that
would enable large-scale use of digital money for a long time to come.   It may also require a
trustee to hold the reserves. The IMF and Bank for International Settlements are working on
On the whole, it appears that the digital money off-shoot of Information Technology will
make the tasks of central banks more complex, but is unlikely to totally replace or supplant
central bank money. In brief, the digital money may be close to free banking but it may be wild
More generally, new economy can impact on the leverage of the central bank.  Central
banks’ main importance is as a supplier of base money, constituting cash and bank reserves.
Cash being the ultimate medium of exchange and commercial settlement, central banks have a
leverage hugely disproportionate to their balance sheets.  Even credit cards and smart cards
could operate as money substitutes, but as long as the ultimate settlement is through central
bank money, there may be some erosion, but no serious undermining of the  importance of
In India, digital money issues and even of money substitutes will have to be address ed in
due course.  In any case, complexities in conduct of monetary policy arising out of I.T.
economy will have to be addressed simultaneously with immediate challenges related to
structural transformation and reforms in financial sector.
Deal With?
There are several banking related aspects that a typical central bank deals with currently.
As issuer of currency, the central bank's role in future could be made complicated if not
8
redundant by evolution of money substitute or digital money.
It will be useful to review them to explore the possibilities of changes.
How Much of Banking will Central Banks 
central banks.
to suggest that it would totally supplant central bank over a period of time.
various aspects of digital money.
who issues digital money or a digital bearer certificate.
PaypalWhether the national currency itself will continue to be as important as it is now, is
another issue, which will be dealt with at greater length a little later.
As banker to government, the central bank usually operates more as a legal agent than
actually performing the functions.  To the extent a central bank provides overdrafts, or credit to
government, it is in a way going beyond the mere commercial banking functions.  The thrust of
reforms has been to distance the commercial banks from the government in terms of providing
what may be termed as accommodation finance.  In brief, the role of a central bank as a banker
to government may not change and in any case may diminish rather than increase with
The role as a banker to banks is admittedly an important role.  In this regard, there are
several aspects of the relationship between central bank and a commercial bank viz. the holding
of reserves, provision of liquidity facilities etc.   It is widely recognised that the role of banks in
financial intermediation is becoming less and less important.   To that extent, the role of central
banks would diminish but the management of overall liquidity in the system may have to
continue to be critical for the economy and hence the continued significance of central banks
As regards regulation of banks, there are divergent views.  While a case has been made
out that supervisory functions over banks should be removed from a central bank to ensure the
independence of central banks, it is argued that the intimate knowledge that is required of a
central bank to be the lender of last resort is lost.  Thus, it is argued that the central bank's
capacity to ensure financial stability may be undermined if regulation of banks is taken out of
The critical role of a central bank in payment system is well recognised. The Bank for
International Settlement has circulated a discussion paper a couple of days ago on the Payments
and Settlement systems which inter alia focuses on the importance of payments system and
need for coordination between securities regulators and regulators of payments system.
Whether payment system should be owned and operated by a central bank is a matter of dispute
but that banks are the backbone of payments system and that a central bank has a critical role in
In the area of maintaining price stability, the role of a central bank is undisputed though
several issues continue to remain unresolved viz., whether price stability should be the sole or
9
a reliable, efficient and safe payments system is undeniable. regulating and ensuring 
their jurisdiction.  There is no final view that has as yet emerged.
and its operations through banks.
redefined and somewhat reduced role of government in the economy.one of the objectives; what is appropriate rate/range of inflation; what is a dependable measure
of inflation and the role of asset prices; the relative importance of rules and discretion; trade off
between employment and output; increasing asymmetry between market perceptions of
economic fundamentals and that of public authorities, especially central banks; and above all
independence versus accountability of central banks.  What is strikingly new, however, is the
increasing preoccupation of central banks in recent years with maintenance of overall financial
globalisation of financial flows and threat of contagion.
On the issue of role of a central bank as manager of public debt, there is an increasing
recognition of the need to contain public debt.  Furthermore, there is a consensus on the need to
divest the central bank of such functions to avoid conflict with monetary policy objectives.  The
magnitude of public debt operations relative to the size of economic activity is progressively
coming down and even if the obsession with regard to reducing the fiscal deficit is contained,
the magnitudes of fiscal deficit may not increase in future.  In any case, central bank is unlikely
to continue to be vested with public debt functions in the long run.  Incidentally, it may be
worth noting that elimination of fiscal deficit and generation of fiscal surpluses is posing a
In brief, the traditional roles of banker to government, banker to banker, may continue
albeit with less significance while the role of regulator of banks could, in some cases be 
off.  The preoccupation with prices is the   of a central bank though more emphasis
may be warranted in future on growth objectives or anticyclical policies. What is new, in the
new millennium, would certainly be a shift in focus to maintenance of financial stability and a
corresponding concern with macro economic management.  A greater attention to global
dimension for a central bank seems to be inevitable, and thus dealings with banking will claim
In the Indian situation, it is clear that banks will continue to play a unique role, as in the
case of many large sized developing economies, and hence the continued role of the Reserve
Bank.  No doubt, with spread of universal banking, other regulators will also have significant
dealings with banks.  Moreover, in its relationship with commercial banks, the major role will
have to be in the context of the payments system.  As a regulator, it is well known that over the
last few years, the supervisory functions over banks have been brought under a separate Board
for Financial Supervision (BFS), a somewhat independent unit within the aegis of Reserve
10
proportionately less resources of a central bank.
d’être raison
hived
problem to central banks in regard to availability of instruments for open market operations.
stability – in the face of increasing Bank.   In fact, Dr. recognised the principle behind hiving
off.   As expressed by Dr. C.  (1994) in The Future of Central Banking – The
Tercentenary Symposium of Bank of England 1694-1994 - “therefore, I feel that the
responsibility of banking supervision being carried on to the central bank might make it more
It is not clear whether total separation of supervisory functions and its merger with a
mega-regulator is warranted at this stage but, greater autonomy to supervisory functions vis-à-
 monetary policy functions is clearly desirable in India also.  As regards the role as a debt
manager to government, there is an overwhelming view in favour of separating out, not in the
medium term but in the long run and the necessary enabling legislative amendments have been
proposed by the RBI.
The role of the RBI in the development of financial markets, especially overseeing
payments and related settlement systems, regulation of money markets, government securities
markets and forex markets etc. is gaining in importance.  Given the inexorable process of
integration of financial markets and linkages with global markets, RBI’s attention will be
increasingly towards financial markets and financial stability.  In brief, Reserve Bank’s focus,
relative to the past will have to be more on the stability in financial markets/system and price
stability, while emphasising credit delivery for financing growth and somewhat less on banking
per se .
How National Will a Central Bank Be?
There is currently a widespread respect for independent central banks and a strong
consensus in favour of granting of autonomy to central banks.  Clearly, the independence is
from government’s influence and case for autonomy is also in a similar context.  However, it is
interesting to observe that with increasing  of financial flows and prospects of
contagion threatening the financial stability of a country for actions or  of central banks
in other countries, there is increasing emphasis on coordination among central banks, in
particular in regard to standards relevant to financial sector such as regulation, accounting and
governance.  There is an issue that could justifiably be raised in this context.  Is it possible that
central banks would become more and more autonomous  other national authorities, but
at the same time more and more aligned with international standards?  In other words, as a
11
vis-a-vis
inactions
globalisation
operations 
vis
difficult in my opinion to gain the kind of independence that we are talking”.
Rangarajan
Rangarajan who spearheaded the BFS consequence of these developments, are central banks likely to become less national and more
Yet another question is : Will there be in future, a national currency for all the countries
that have one now?  Euro has certainly heralded the era of regional currencies.  There are
several reasons why regional currencies may become more common. Given the recent
experiences in volatility in exchange rates, there may be greater preference to avoid adverse
impact of such volatility through regional arrangements.  There is also the ease of undertaking
of e-commerce in any currency at any time with any counter-party that could add to the
attractiveness of a regional currency.  It is useful to recall what Prof. Goodhart (2000) said
Mumbai.
“A combination of continuing volatility in real exchange rates, combined with a growing
ease of undertaking e-commerce in any currency at any time with any counter-party, could lead
to a growing pressure for the greater use of a regional currency. South America, as well as
North, may become even more explicitly a dollar area, while Europe and Africa adopt the Euro.
Asia presents more of a problem in this respect.  One, super-power temporarily fallen on hard
times, and two emerging giants, can neither fall in behind a single hegemony, as in the
Americans, nor benefit from a rapprochement, such as achieved by France and Germany.  The
future of international monetary policy in Asia banks, looks at least from a distance, particularly
opaque”
Of course, one could move into realm of speculation and pose a question : Will China
and India follow the example of France and Germany and have a currency, in true 
Shanti’ or “ Asio”.  Is it conceivable that a large and continental economy like India
Often, being truly national is equated with being total ly owned by the national
government.  It is useful to note that many central banks were not government owned till they
were nationalised about a half a century ago. The  Bank of Canada, the Bank of France and
Bank of England were nationalised in 1938, 1945 and 1946, respectively while Reserve Bank of
India became totally government owned in 1949.  In fact, there are some central banks, which
even as of today, are not fully owned by the respective national governments.  There are a few
who have majority or controlling ownership of their respective governments, while there are a
few in which there is no ownership stake for the national government.  While in Japan and
12
 in terms of its national currency? status quo or China would opt for any change in the 
tradition of ‘
buddhist
about this in 
international or global?Mexico, Government owned 55 per cent and 51 per cent, respectively, in Austria and Belgium it
was just one-half.  In Italy, the central bank is owned by other public companies, in U.S.A. by
member Banks of the Reserve System and in Switzerland, cantons and private shareholders are
the owners.  Though the organisational form could be Joint Stock Company or under a special
statute, the latter is more prevalent. In almost all the cases, there are special restrictions on
payout.
It is possible to argue that in respect of developing countries there is a need for st
presence of public sector and that private ownership ought not to be considered.  However, Dr.
Anand Chandavarkar (1996), an eminent economist and a respected former RBI official has
expressed himself in favour of serious consideration of some diversification of ownership,
“A crucial but little discussed element in the professionalism of central banks in developing
countries is the weakness of hands-on market contacts and the tendency to equate expertise too
uncritically with academic credentials and analytic skills to the neglect of market-based
judgmental skills, insights, and on-the-job experience.  The market orientation and market
discipline of central banks in developing countries would only be enhanced if they were to be
partially privatized and listed on the stock exchange, an overlooked option which merits serious
How Central Will a Central Bank Be?
There is universal recognition of the central role played by a central bank in the
economies, and particularly economic policies, though as already mentioned it is a relatively
On the basis of conventional wisdom, one can say that it would depend on how
operationally independent it is from Government; how proficient it is in forecasting and
In terms of specifics, it would depend on several factors, many of which have been dealt
13
Thirdly, would a central bank still be a debt manager?
Secondly, what happens to the role of a central bank’s currency?
First, how much of ‘banking’ will it be involved in?
with in this address already.
judging; and how credible are its actions.
will it last? recent phenomenon.  How long 
consideration”
particularly in developing countries.
rong
eligibility for ownership and dividend Fourthly, what would be its role in the management of foreign exchange rate? –
especially, if there were acceptance of appropriateness of only corner solutions in the context of
Fifthly, what would be a central bank’s role in overall macro-economic management,
Sixthly, to what extent will it have formal or informal role in advocating and
maintaining overall financial stability?  If it were not to be that of the central bank, which other
 several additional factors would be relevant to a
First, what role should a central bank play in nurturing and influencing reform in the
financial sector in the interests of enhancing efficiency and promoting stability of financial
Second, what would be the developmental role in the context of development of
Third, who takes the responsibility for ensuring credit delivery if it were not the central
bank?  Such credit delivery may have a developmental dimension or cyclical dimension or
It is perhaps obvious that answers will depend upon the country and the evolving
circumstances, and clearly the centrality of a central bank is unlikely to be common to all
To illustrate it in the Indian context, the current focus of the central bank on
development and regulation of financial markets would not have been envisaged a decade ago.
Exchange control has yielded place to exchange management.  Initiatives have been taken by
the Reserve Bank to establish a Clearing Corporation in the context of infrastructure for 
markets, money markets and government securities market.  Regulation and supervision of not
only banks but non-bank financial companies and financial institutions have become major
The change that has recently occurred in Reserve Bank’s operational orientation
mentioned above is reflective of fundamental changes in policy, especially in monetary and
credit policy, involving a movement away from direct instruments and administered interest
14
preoccupations of the central bank.
forex
countries.
socio-economic dimension, such as linkages of formal finance with informal finance.
themselves? financial markets 
sector?
discussion on future role of central banks.
In the context of developing economies,
institution could play the role?
especially in terms of research, analysis, communication, opinion-making etc.?
possible emergence of three dominant currencies.rates to indirect instruments, appropriate incentive framework, transparency and 
But, the fundamental changes in policy are in many ways evolved and refined as much
out of RBI’s research and analysis as out of its experience and also of compulsions of
developments in the external sector.  Indeed, like close links between academic and knowledge
based industry which  the success of information technology, close interaction
between research and policy in RBI has, on all accounts, led to enhancement in quality of
decision making and hopefully to the need for caution and humility in approaching policy
changes or meeting crises or increasing uncertainties.  The policy makers do need theory since
indeed there are no facts without theory for even in noticing facts , there is an unstated or
unconscious theory.  There is evidence to show that academia also benefits from interaction
with policy makers since the institutional dynamics and social dimensions are more acutely felt
by hands-on experience of policy makers.  All these thoughts lead one to concede that central
banks may not be central in the way they used to be but they would still be very central for our
As mentioned before, the twentieth century saw really the birth of central banks, as they
are known today, and grew in numbers and in eminence by the beginning of the new
millennium.  However, explorations into the current developments in this address seem to
provide some pointers, albeit
First, it is not easy to rule out a reduction in number of central banks in future.
seignoreage revenue to governments.
Third, new economy will make the tasks of central banks far more complex than before.
If digital money really takes over, and this is a very distant possibility, central banks may have
to explore new role say, coordination among central banks or multilateral legal framework for
digital money etc. or even being a regulator of production and distribution of private money
instead of being supplier of money.  In the past twenty years, many of what were
unquestioningly accepted as public goods have been proven to be commercial goods.
Furthermore, what were considered public monopolies have been subjected to unbundling,
competition, privatisation and regulation on account of advances in technology . So is
15
Second, central banks will also be less of providers of 
 tentative to the survival or otherwise of central banks.
There be a Central Bank At All? Will 
lifetime, at least in countries like India.
characterised
approaches.
participativeproduction of ‘money’ necessarily immune from the impact of changes in public policies in
To conclude, the perennial question for central banks, which have always been
troublesome are what is money, how to measure it and does it really matter?  In the new
millennium, central banks face the same questions but the answers seem to be changing too
16
rapidly  for us to fully comprehend!
Conclusions
regard to production of other goods and services?1. Capie, F., C. Schnadt (1994): "
Banking - The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England
2. Chandavarkar, Anand (1996): " ", St.
Martin's Press, Inc., New York.
3. Deane, M. and R. ", Viking, New York.
4. A.E. (2000): " ", Eleventh C. D.
5. 
", Simon & Schuster Inc., New York.
6. 
, No. 97, 
7. 
, No. 89, October 19, 2000.
8. ", , No. 96,
October 31, 2000.
9. Jalan, Banking and Finance in the New Millennium
10. Mervyn (1999): "
11. Lastra, Rosa Maria (1996): " Central Banking and Banking Regulation
Markets Group, London School of Economics, London.
12. Marsh, David (1992): " The 
13. ) Indian , UBS
17
King, The Central Banks
Publishers, New Delhi.
Economy : Essays on Money and Finance Rangarajan C (1998 
London.
", Heinemann, Bundesbank - The Bank that Rules Europe 
", Financial 
bank of Kansas City at Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Symposium on 'New Challenges for Monetary Policy', sponsored by Federal Reserve
", the Challenges for Monetary policy: New and Old 
Economists' Conference, New Delhi.
", Fifteenth Bank Bimal (2001): "
BIS Review Otmar (2000): "Should we have Faith in Central Banks? Issing, 
BIS Review
Hessius, Kerstin (2000): "The New Economy seen from a Central Bank Perspective",
November 3, 2000. Review
", BIS Grenville, Stephen (2000): "Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Markets
Country
Secrets of the Temple - How the Federal reserve Runs the Greider, William (1987): "
Deshmukh Memorial Lecture, Reserve Bank of India.
? Whither Central Banking Goodhart, Charles 
Pringle (1994): "
Central Banking in Developing Countries
University Press, Cambridge.
", Cambridge
The Future of Central Goodhart, S. Fischer and N. 
References:14. Rahn, Richard W., B. R. 
", World Gold Council,
* Valedictory address by Dr. Y.V. Reddy at the Bank Economists’ Conference organised by Oriental Bank of
18
Commerce at New Delhi on January 17, 2001.
London.
impact on Gold: Technical, Legal and Economic Issues
Digital Money and its MacQueen and M. L. Rogers (2000): " 