April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Orderly Global Economic Recovery : Are Exchange Rate
*
Adjustments Effective Any More?
RAKESH MOHAN
When we last met in London in October, is significant to note that in both US and
I had talked about medium and long-term Japan there are distinct signs of acceleration
issues related to globalisation and possible in manufacturing activity. In the Euro area,
enduring imbalances in the medium- and long- there is also some evidence that activity has
term. I had talked in particular about the begun to pick-up although it is lagging behind
consequences of economic demographics and significantly in comparison with other regions.
ageing. So I am delighted that this is now a On the whole, the sentiment today appears
specific subject for discussion in this meeting. to be much better than it was a year ago when
Today, I will focus on possible short-term the outlook for the global economy was
issues that may arise as the current economic weighed down by various uncertainties and
imbalances are corrected. Recent data show risks.
that the global recovery has gained further
Although overall global growth prospects
momentum with various leading indicators
have improved markedly, considerable
showing a robust turnaround. Financial
uncertainties still remain. The main risk facing
markets have rallied on the back of higher
the global economy today continues to be the
corporate earnings. Emerging markets debt
persistence of the US external imbalances
spreads continue to decline. The latest
which, in turn, are reflected in external
available data suggest a strong acceleration
imbalances in several countries in Asia. The
1
in world merchandise exports.
current account deficit in the US at 5.1 per
Emerging Asia continues to be the cent of GDP could pose a serious risk to
fastest growing region in the world. While global growth. This, if not corrected in an
China is expected to grow by over 9 per cent, orderly manner, could seriously harm the
India is not far behind with its growth expected health of the global economy. There are
to be around 8 per cent in 2003-04. Economic different views on this. Most recently, Alan
activity in Japan has also picked up, led by Greenspan, in a lecture at the Bundesbank,
exports and business investment. Japan has expressed the view that economic flexibility
benefited significantly from expansion in world in the world is now such that unwinding of
trade, particularly that with China. In the US, this deficit will not cause serious disruption. I
economic activity has turned quite robust. It hope that he is right.
Intervention by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the G-20 Deputies Meeting held
*
at Leipzig, Germany on March 3-4, 2004.
1
In the first half of 2003 world merchandise exports rose by 15 per cent in US dollar terms over the
corresponding period in 2002. Average annual growth in 2002 was 4 per cent.
429April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Past experience suggests that the The question, therefore, which all of us
correction of such a high order of external need to address is whether we are landing
imbalance could be associated with high up in same situation as was faced last time.
inflation, rise in interest rates and fall in output. The trade-weighted exchange rate of the US
The US ran a current account deficit between dollar has depreciated by about 13 per cent
1982 and 1987 when the CAD widened to 3.4 since February 2002. However, this
per cent of GDP in 1987 from a surplus of depreciation of the US dollar is only about
0.2 per cent of GDP in 1981. A reversal in one-third of the sharp appreciation of 32.5 per
this trend set in in 1988 and the CAD-GDP cent in real terms between 1992 and 2001. It
ratio reached a near balance position in 1991 is, therefore, widely believed that the dollar
- the phase of correction spanning over four would have to depreciate further (by 15 per
years. The correction was facilitated by a cent in real terms) to make a significant dent
narrowing down of the saving-investment gap on the current account deficit, regardless of
from 4.2 per cent in 1986 to 1.0 per cent in structural factors. Over the medium-term,
1991 and an average annual rate of US dollar correction of CAD to the level of the mid-
deprecation of 6.5 per cent in nominal terms 1990s (i.e., 1.5 per cent of GDP) could
and 5.5 per cent in real terms. necessitate an annual average rate of
depreciation of about 6.5 per cent spanning
The depreciation of the US dollar fed into
over a period of six years. Will this happen
inflation in the following years. Nominal
and how will it impact the rest of the world ?
exchange rate depreciation passed through
We have to note that there has not been
into domestic inflation in about 22 months.
any adverse effect of the dollar’s decline on
Even after the exchange rate stopped
the US economy so far. Interest rates are at
depreciating, inflation continued to rise for
2
historically low levels. Inflation is still low due
another 12 months. The inflation rate which
to slack in the US economy, especially in the
was 1.8 per cent in 1986 moved up gradually
labour market where weak demand for labour
to 5.3 per cent by 1990 before sliding down
is holding down wage growth. However,
from 1991. This necessitated monetary
depreciation of the US dollar eventually is
tightening in 1988 and 1989 when interest
3
expected to feed through inflation. Commodity
rates had to be raised. GDP growth
and asset prices have already risen sharply.
decelerated sharply during 1989-90 and it
4
And going by the past experience, it would
turned negative in 1991.
2
The depreciation began in February 1985, i.e., after the second inflation episode was almost over and continued
till May 1988. Trade-weighted US dollar depreciated by 13.3 per cent over the period. Headline inflation which
was falling until December 1986 (trough of 1.2 per cent) began to rise from January 1987 to reach 4 per cent
by May 1988. Inflation continued to rise until May 1989 when it touched 5.3 per cent.
3
The Federal Fund Rate, which was 6.66 per cent in 1987, was raised to 7.57 per cent in 1988 and further to
9.22 per cent in 1989.
4
The growth rate of the US GDP decelerated from 3.9 per cent in 1988 to 2.5 per cent in 1989 and 0.8 per cent
in 1990. GDP registered a negative growth of 1.2 per cent in 1991.
430April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
not be long before the US dollar’s decline
exchange rate adjustments as a means of
starts impacting import prices in particular and correction of imbalances have become less
inflation in general. With little room to
potent, then the swing in exchange rates to
manoeuvre on the fiscal policy front, this may
correct emerging imbalances will have to be
require monetary tightening leading to a rise much larger than before, bringing in their wake
in interest rates. This would have serious
greater instability eventually.
implications for the sustainability of growth not
According to various commentators,
only in the US but in several developing
such as The Economist, Business Week, large
countries.
investment banks and others, the US dollar-
Correction through Exchange Rate
Euro rate will have to depreciate to levels
Adjustment
such as 1.7 to 1.9 for appropriate external
current account adjustments to take place. If
The very significant adjustment in the
such movements take place, and inflation
US dollar exchange rate does not seem to
eventually does rise along with interest rates,
have translated into changes in import prices
what will then happen to the world economy?
(excluding fuel), which rose by only about 1.4
How quickly will this take place? Will this now
per cent in 2003 in the US. Prices of imported
start happening over the next 12 months and
non-auto consumer goods rose by only 0.4
if so will the current world recovery stop in its
per cent. It is then not surprising that there
tracks before it takes off?
has been little palpable behavioural response
in the US to the recent exchange rate
Thus, we need to be vigilant of the new
adjustment through a lower demand for
risks that would be generated in the process
imports. The general expectation still seems
of correction of current macro economic
to be that a sliding US dollar will not cause
imbalances. To minimise the harmful effects,
inflation to surge. Similarly, in Europe,
there is a need for a coordinated and
currency movements appear to have less
cooperative approach. The current account
impact on inflation than in the past. There are
deficit in the US is, to a large extent, a
different explanations being given. One is
manifestation of its large saving-investment
related to globalisation and “Walmartisation”.
gap which widened to a high level of 5.3 per
The increased intensity of globalisation and
cent in 2003. The US, therefore, will have to
the commodification of many goods have
try to curb household and government
perhaps reduced the pricing power of
borrowings and strengthen national savings.
producers, particularly of low technology
The Euro Area continues to depend largely
goods in developing countries, whereas the
on external demand. It, therefore, will need
pricing power of large retailers like Walmart
to pursue some structural reforms, especially
has risen.
in the labour policies, to boost domestic
demand. Japan also needs to continue to take
The question that arises then is if the
some concrete measures to strengthen its
new globalised economy means that
431April Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
financial system and reduce huge fiscal
to ask whether the access limits are sufficient
imbalances. We in India have followed a
to deal with the kind of crises countries will
relatively flexible exchange rate policy to
face. Or are we assuming that the catalytic
ensure smooth adjustment along with
role of the international financial institutions
corrections in the world economy. Such
is more effective than it really is? The recent
flexibility has served us well and we can
experience has amply shown that while large
commend it to other countries.
and assured financing ( e.g., Mexican bailout)
has been successful to keep the markets
The world leadership also needs to take
quiet, limited financing ( e.g., Argentina) has
appropriate steps to guard against the
not produced good results. It is this ground
prospective risks. There are two areas that
reality which has led to excessive caution on
are particularly important at present and where
the part of developing countries in building
G-20 leadership can play an important role.
large reserves.
One relates to developments on the trade
front. Current trends from Cancun onwards
It is difficult to predict what kind of crises
are deeply disturbing with industrialised
will take place in the near or medium term
countries slipping into a protectionist posture.
future. What we know with near certainty is
This is uncalled for especially because
that crises will take place in the future too.
developing countries have at last started to
Where, how and when they will take place
get out of their protectionist mindsets. The
cannot be predicted. As I have indicated, as
industrialised countries (US, Europe and
these exchange rate adjustments in the
Japan) have a major role to play in reviving
world’s major currencies take place, and
the trade talks which involve serious
inflation and interest rates do rise, they will
departures from their present positions on
bring in their wake economic debris in
agriculture.
different places. We need to be vigilant on
Another area relates to international this point and recognise that the magnitude
financial architecture, the deficiencies of of financing needs that typically arises now
which were exposed in recent East Asian and is much larger than before. The question I
subsequent crises. We, therefore, need to will leave you with is: whether the existing
ask ourselves whether we have really made financial architecture is competent for tackling
progress in developing a sound international such future crises and, if not, what do we
financial architecture. In particular, we need need to do?
432