C M Y K
December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Corporate Governance: Towards Best Practices*
SHYAMALA GOPINATH
  Corporate governance is increasingly demanding our transformation and hence create maturity mismatches
attention and has moved centrestage. The Enron and between their assets and liabilities and rely on the
WorldCom scandals in the U.S have amply demonstrated confidence of their creditors. There is also the
the necessity of having a system of corporate governance contagion impact and the issue of maintaining the
even in the developed world. In a liberalising and integrity of the payments system in which banks play
deregulating country like India, corporate governance is a significant role. Corporate governance therefore
all the more important. In this context, it is indeed affects the interests of a larger cross-section of
heartening to note that Bankers’ conference is devoting stakeholders also has implications for financial stability
a full session on “corporate governance”. In this address and is one of the key factors that determines the health
let me touch upon the basic cornerstones of corporate of the system and its ability to survive economic
governance in Indian banking sector. shocks.
Corporate governance practices differ widely across
the world. In a highly dispersed shareholding system
THE B ASIC ISSUE
normally it is the board of directors who are granted
the responsibility of monitoring executives (e.g., U.S).
Modern day corporations are known for the
On the other hand, allowing for concentrated and cross
separation of ownership and control. After all, the
shareholding, countries like Germany or Japan adopted
managers are merely paid employees and the agency
‘internal’ corporate governance systems. Corporate
theory taught us that the independent managers can
governance for an emerging market economy (EME) has
operate in a way that could be detrimental to the interests
an added dimension. After all, since the late 1980s /
of the shareholder. It is, thus necessary, to have a
early 1990s, the financial sector of a number of EMEs
mechanism by which the shareholders’ interest are
has seen a wave of liberalisation and deregulation.
protected by the managers. It is here that corporate
Greater deregulation in markets and in banks operations
governance can play a crucial role. What is corporate
requires better governance as more responsibility rests
governance then? I can do no better than to quote from
with the Board and the management.
Professors Shleifer and Vishney, who defined corporate
It is because banks are a critical component of the
governance as dealing with “the ways that suppliers of
economy that it is universally a regulated industry and
finance to corporations assure themselves of getting a
1
banks have access to safety nets. It would, however, be
return on their investment”.
erroneous to conclude that regulatory oversight is a
Corporate governance is however conceptually
substitute to corporate governance. There exists
different for banks. The business model of financial
complementarity between regulation and corporate
intermediaries especially of banks envisages dealing in
governance in banking. Perhaps it is in this spirit that
the financial resources of others and most of their
the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) in discussing
liabilities constitute debt which are in the form of
enhancing corporate governance for banking organisation
deposits. Since depositors are the main suppliers of
observed that, “banking supervision cannot function as
finance to a bank, their interest is paramount and
well if sound corporate governance is not in place and
therefore directors and officers of a bank should be
consequently, banking supervisors have a strong interest
charged with a heightened duty to ensure the safety
in ensuring that there is effective corporate governance
and soundness of these enterprises. Banks are highly
in every banking organisation”.
leveraged organisations, they undertake maturity
Address by Smt Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Bankers’ Conference on November 10,
*
2004  at New Delhi.
1
Shleifer, A and R. Vishney (1997): “A Survey of Corporate Governance”, Journal of Finance, Vol.52.
1105
C M Y KC M Y K
December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
GLOBAL BEST PRACTICES (a) the role of supervisors, and (b) the paramount interest
of depositors.
A number of supranational organisations have drawn
Apart from such supranational organisations or
codes/principles of corporate governance. The most well
regional organisation like EU, all the G-7 countries as
known is perhaps the OECD principles of corporate
well as other developed economies have codified some
governance of 1999. It is instructive to summarise the
kind of ‘best practices’ on corporate governance, or some
five basic pillars of OECD code, viz.,
specific aspects of it. While a comprehensive survey of
(i) Protecting the rights of shareholders;
the country-specific principles of corporate governance
(ii) Ensuring equitable treatment of all shareholders is beyond the scope of the present address, one is
including having an effective grievance redressal tempted to cite the recently enacted Sarbenes-Oxley Act
of 2002 in US, aiming to protect investors by improving
system;
the accuracy and reliability of corporate disclosures.
(iii)Recognising the rights of stakeholders as
established by law; It is against this background of global best practices
let me now turn to the Indian experience on corporate
(iv) Ensuring the timely and accurate disclosure
governance.
regarding the corporation including the financial
situation, performance, ownership and
governance of the company; and
CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND INDIAN BANKS
(v) Ensuring the strategic guidance of the company,
effective monitoring arrangement by the board
The initial formal moves towards corporate
and the board’s responsibility to the company
governance in India can be traced in 1997 with the
and the shareholder.
voluntary code framed by the Confederation of Indian
While the OECD principles went a long way in
Industry (CII). A number of companies over the next
emphasising the basic tenets of corporate governance,
three years (nearly 30 large listed companies accounting
it is the 1999 BIS paper that went specifically to the
for over 25 per cent of India’s market capitalisation)
2
issue of enhancing corporate governance for banking
voluntarily adopted the CII code. The next major
organisation. From banking industry perspective, BIS
cornerstone in the Indian case has been the SEBI
proposed the following seven principles:
Committee chaired by Shri Kumar Mangalam Birla
(1999), as the first formal and comprehensive attempt
i) Establishing strategic objectives;
to evolve a Code of Corporate Governance, in the
ii) Setting and enforcing clear lines of responsibility
context of prevailing conditions of governance in Indian
and accountability;
companies and the state of capital markets. The
iii) Ensuring that the board members are qualified
Committee recommended that the fundamental objective
for their position and are not subject to undue
of corporate governance is the “enhancement of
influence from the management or outside
shareholder value, keeping in view the interests of other
concerns;
stakeholder”. The Committee made recommendations of
iv) Ensuring that there is appropriate oversight by
far-reaching implications for several issues, such as, the
senior management;
independence of board, accounting standards and
v) Effectively utilising the work conducted by
financial reporting, share-holders’ rights and
internal and external auditors;
responsibilities, and formation of audit and remuneration
vi) Ensuring that compensation approaches are committee.
consistent with the bank’s ethical values; and
The initial move towards corporate governance in
vii) Conducting corporate governance in a
banks can be traced in the Advisory Group on Corporate
transparent manner.
Governance for the RBI Standing Committee on
Again, from a banking sector perspective, the BIS
International Financial Standards and Codes, chaired by
principles noted categorically two specific things, viz., Dr. R.H. Patil, which submitted its Report in 2001. The
2
Omkar Goswami (2001): “The Tide Rises: Corporate Governance in India”, OECD Development Centre Discussion Paper.
1106
C M Y KC M Y K
December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
special emphasis on enhanced transparency in the
Advisory Group has noted that the predominant form
constitution and structure of the board and senior
of corporate governance in India is much closer to the
management and in public disclosures.
East Asian ‘insider’ model where the promoters
dominate governance in every possible way. Among the
Taking this move towards corporate governance
various recommendations, strengthening of the
further, the Reserve Bank constituted a Consultative
Companies Act and the role of Independent Directors
Group of Directors of Banks and Financial Institutions
deserve special mention. The Group looked into public
(Chairman: Dr. A.S. Ganguly) to review the supervisory
sectors banks and noted that the first important step to
role of Boards of banks and FIs. The Ganguly
improve governance mechanism in these units is to
Consultative Group looked into the functioning of the
transfer the actual governance functions from the
Boards vis-à-vis compliance, transparency, disclosures,
concerned administrative ministries to the boards and
audit committees and suggested measures for making
also strengthen them by streamlining the appointment
the role of the Board of Directors more effective. The
process of directors. Furthermore, as a part of
Group submitted its recommendations in April 2002. The
strengthening the functioning of their boards, banks
major recommendations of the Group are the following:
should appoint a risk management committee of the
i) Government while nominating directors on the
board in addition to the three other board committees
Boards of PSBs should be guided by certain
viz., audit, remuneration and appointment committees.
broad “fit and proper” norms for the Directors,
The Advisory Group on Banking Supervision for the
based on the lines of those suggested by BIS.
Standing Committee on International Financial Standards
ii) The appointment / nomination of independent /
and Codes, while looking into several areas in which
non-executive directors to the Board of banks
internationally accepted best practices are already in
(both public sector and private sector) should be
place, probed into corporate governance as well. The
from a pool of professional and talented people
noteworthy minimum benchmarks noted by the Group
to be prepared and maintained by RBI.
relate to the following:
iii) It would be desirable to take an undertaking from
(i) strategies and techniques basic to sound
every director to the effect that they have gone
corporate governance;
through the guidelines defining the role and
(ii) organisational structure to ensure oversight by
responsibilities of directors, and understood what
board of directors and individuals not involved
is expected of them.
in day-to-day running of business;
iv) In order to ensure strategic focus it would be
(iii) ensuring that the direct line of supervision of
desirable to separate the office of Chairman and
different business areas are different;
Managing Director in respect of large-sized PSBs.
(iv) ensuring independent risk management and audit
v) The information furnished to the Board should
functions;
be wholesome, complete and adequate to take
meaningful decisions. The Board’s focus should
(v) ensuring an environment supportive of sound
be devoted more on strategy issues, risk profile,
corporate governance; and
internal control systems, overall performance, etc.
(vi) role of supervisors.
vi) It would be desirable if the exposures of a bank
Interestingly, with reference to public sector banks,
to stockbrokers and market-makers as a group,
the Group noted that the nature of a bank’s ownership
as also exposures to other sensitive sectors, viz.,
is not a critical factor in establishing sound corporate
real estate etc. are reported to the Board regularly.
governance practices and concluded that, “the quality
vii) The disclosures of progress made towards
of corporate governance should be the same in all types
establishing progressive risk management
of banking organisations irrespective of the nature of
system, the risk management policy, strategy,
their ownership”. The Group, however, felt that there
exposures to related entities, the asset
are some areas where practices in the Indian banking
classification of such lending / investments etc.
sector fell short of international best practices, viz., a)
should be in conformity with corporate
constitutions of boards, b) their accountability, and c) their
governance standards, etc.
involvement in risk management. The Group gave
1107
C M Y KC M Y K
December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
viii)Finally, the banks could be asked to come up Financial distress episodes in a number of countries
with a strategy and plan for implementation of were caused in part by excessive exposure concentration,
the governance standards recommended and lending to connected parties, poor credit policy and
submit progress of implementation. inadequate management of risk mainly foreign exchange
risk. To a large extent, such basic risk management
The Ganguly Committee recommendations have been
failures reflects a failure of corporate governance.
benchmarked with international best practices as
Besides laying down prudential guidelines, RBI has been
enunciated in the Basel Paper as well as of other
emphasising the need for better understanding and
Committees and advisory bodies to the extent applicable
oversight at the Board level of key banking risks. Boards
to the Indian environment. RBI has also implemented
of the banks will have to take solvency and other risk
most of the recommendations. In general these
systematically into account while making decisions. The
regulations have created an enabling framework for
Basel II proposals too underscore the interaction between
improving corporate governance in financial institutions.
sound risk management and corporate governance. For
Subsequently, the circular issued on June 25, 2004 on
example, the IRB approach to credit risk sets out
‘fit and proper’ criteria for directors of banks enumerated
requirements for sound risk assessment processes, robust
a number of principles; the following among them
controls and transparency. In turn, the board and senior
deserve special mention, viz.,
management are expected to understand and guide a
i) undertaking a process of due diligence on the part
bank’s overall risk management and performance.
of the banks in private sector to determine the
Supervisors are required to ensure that all banks institute
suitability of the person for appointment /
good governance practices irrespective of the capital
continuing to hold appointment as a director on
approach adopted.
the Board, based upon qualification, expertise, track
  Second, issue relates to Board strategies to ensure
record, integrity and other ‘fit and proper’ criteria;
strong internal control systems including internal and
ii) the process of due diligence should be
external audit functions and other checks and balances.
undertaken by the banks in private sector at the
Independent audit committees can help in translating
time of appointment / renewal of appointment;
audit reports into meaningful action, both corrective and
preventive.
iii) the boards of the banks in private sector should
constitute Nomination Committees to scrutinise
Third, further steps to be taken to improve
the declarations;
transparency through more disclosures of information
related to corporate governance. It is worthwhile
iv) banks should obtain annually, as on March 31,
a simple declaration that the information already examining the efforts of some companies to pivot their
annual reports on corporate governance issues while
provided has not undergone change and where
making appropriate disclosures on each.
there is any change, requisite details are
furnished by the directors forthwith.
  Fourth, increasingly concerns are raised about the
conflict of interest in financial sector. Four areas of the
  These principles, I believe would go a long way to
financial service industry have a high potential for
ensure corporate governance in banks in India.
conflicts of interest: underwriting and research in
investment banking, auditing and consulting in
SOME EMERGING ISSUES
accounting firms, credit assessment and consulting in
rating agencies and universal banking. A combination
I have, in the present address, tried to give a flavour
of market discipline supplemented by mandatory
of the various attempts towards ensuring and improving
disclosure of conflicts and supervisory oversight are
corporate governance in India and noted that the path
generally considered necessary to contain the
has been one of progressive disclosures and increasing
exploitation of conflicts of interest. These measures are
convergence to international standards. Nevertheless, the
intended to have positive impact on investor confidence,
task is far from over, and, therefore in conclusion, let
efficacy of the regulatory framework and, above all, the
me raise some of the emerging issues for further
credibility of those associated with the financial services.
consideration and deliberation at this august gathering.
Accordingly, in consultation with Chairman, SEBI and
1108
C M Y KC M Y K
December Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Chairman, IRDA, in the Mid-Term Review of Monetary Sixth, there is perhaps a need for consultative process
and Credit Policy for 2003-04, it has been proposed to to harmonise the approaches suggested by the Ganguly
constitute a Working Group on avoidance of conflicts Committee of RBI and the Narayana Murthy Committee
of interest. The Working Group will identify the sources of SEBI. In the recently announced Mid-Term Review of
and nature of potential conflicts of interest, the Annual Policy for 2004-05, it was proposed to harmonise
international practices to mitigate this problem, the these approaches suggested by the Ganguly Committee
existing mechanisms in India in this regard and make and the SEBI Committee in regard to banks through a
recommendations for avoidance of such conflicts of consultative process. It will be useful to know the areas
interest. for further harmonisation.
Fifth, there is a need for a strong culture of Lastly, corporate governance does not end with
compliance at the top of the organisation and it will be commercial banks. It is imperative to extend the above
necessary to consider how management can respond principles of good corporate governance practices to
appropriately to ethical or reputational concerns that cooperatives, PDs, NBFCs and other financial
come to their knowledge. institutions.
1109
C M Y K