November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
Indian Banking and e-Security*
RAKESH MOHAN
I. INTRODUCTION results. Doing economic research was impossible without
proximity to a large library and a large computer. Now
Thank you very much for inviting me to this inaugural
information is available off the internet and all the
session of the Conference on e-security. With the
computing power you want is in the economist's own
expansion of IT applications in the Indian banking
home.
system, there is a concomitant increase in concerns
The banking sector is no exception to this changing
relating to e-security. It is, therefore, very appropriate
scenario which is sweeping across the world. Most of
and timely that the Indian Banks' Association (IBA) and
the banks have already started to feel the impact of the
Manufacturers Association of Information Technology
operations of the new banks in the country. The single
(MAIT) have come together to organize this conference.
biggest advantage of these banks is the large scale
The banking sector is one of the leading users of deployment of IT in their business environment. Their
information technology worldwide. The introduction of
business processes have been architectured around IT
information technology has transformed banking almost
Solutions that solve problems as they emerge so that IT
beyond belief in the last decade and a half. Most of all,
has become an integral part of their regular operations.
customers have benefited, as have the banks themselves.
The changes staring in the face of bankers relate to
There have been very significant gains in the efficiency
the fundamental way of banking - which is undergoing
of banks leading to greater potential for higher profitability
a rapid transformation in the world of today. It is widely
and consequent benefit to the economy as a whole.
recognised that the core banking functions alone do not
The Indian software industry is among the leaders
add to the bottom line of banks - value added services
in providing software to the leading banks of the world.
are slowly but steadily emerging as a substantial
I think it is correct to say that the new millennium has
opportunity for banks to exploit. Prime factors
brought in a much greater pace of absorption of IT in
necessitating these changes relate to the forces of
our banks, and in the Reserve Bank of India. What is competition, productivity and efficiency of operations,
important is that we must recognise our own strength
reduced operating margins and the need for better asset
in IT and leverage it to make it a source of comparative
- liability management. With hair-thin profit margins being
advantage for the financial system as a whole.
the order of the day, the solution to this would lie in
increasing volumes so as to result in better operating
It is therefore entirely apposite that these two basic
results for banks. This is best achieved by exploiting
stakeholders in this symbiosis of banking and information
the benefits of technology which facilitates handling of
technology (IT) have come together to deliberate on an
increased volumes at higher levels of efficiency. It is in
issue of critical significance.
this context that there is an imperative need for not mere
It is now trite to say how the world has changed
technology upgradation but also integration of technology
with IT in the last decade and a half. In my own
with the general way of functioning of banks.
profession our mode of work has got completely
With this backdrop, today I will delve into two related
transformed. I remember the time, in the mid 1970s,
issues - one general and the other specific. The general
when I had to stay up nights in the Princeton University
issue relates to the progress of IT in Indian banking,
Computer Centre to run econometric regressions or to
while the specific issue is the theme of today's lecture,
simulate models which I programmed myself in
viz., IT in banking in e-security.
FORTRAN and then wait till the next day to get the
Keynote address by Dr. Rakesh Mohan, the then Deputy Governor, RBI at the Conference on e-Security organised jointly
*
by IBA and MAIT on July 30, 2004 at Mumbai. Dr. Mohan is grateful to Dr. R.B. Barman, R. Gandhi, Dr. A.M. Pedgaonkar,
S. Ganesh Kumar and Partha Ray of the Reserve Bank of India for their assistance.
1029November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
II. PROGRESS OF I NFORMATION T ECHNOLOGY IN
All these have been aimed at exploiting the benefits
BANKING IN INDIA
of IT to provide products and information conduits to
banks that would enable them in turn to offer better
What have been the major strides in IT initiatives in
service to their customers. It may also be observed that
banking? Taking a broad brush of history, the initiation
the recent past has witnessed new concepts such as
of the process can be traced to the mid-1980s with the
'Anywhere Banking' and 'Any Time Banking' being
introduction of mechanised cheque processing using
adopted by banks, which are but offshoots of technology
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR) technology
implementation by banks. With the introduction of ATMs
and the efforts towards introduction of networks of
customers can even go to any networked branch or
computers in bank. These measures have resulted in all
networked ATMs, and carry out many banking
banks, including the public sector banks, embracing
transactions. With e-banking, many activities can be
technology in a large way.
carried out from within the customer's home. Such
The Reserve Bank of India, as both a supervisor of
innovations have had a positive impact on customer
the banking system as well as a custodian of the payment
service - besides the benefit that is derived by banks in
system, has played a major role in the innovation process
terms of reduced costs of operation.
of assimilating IT in banking. While a detailed account
IT has also resulted in a major attitudinal change
of this process could be seen as self-congratulatory, in
revolutionising the concept relating to treatment of
order to put the issues in perspective, let me enumerate
customers of banks; with the death of geographical
a quick run down of the various initiatives that have
distances, banks need to treat the customer as a customer
been taken in this regard.
of the bank and not as a customer of any particular
l Introduction of MICR based cheque clearing and
branch. This is now possible thanks to the usage of IT
its proliferation to 39 centres as on date, which has
on a large scale whereby centralised data bases are
resulted in reduced time for realisation of cheques;
possible in a bank with decentralised access. Another
Implementation of safe, secure and quick modes
l
option to achieve this objective is to have clustered
of electronic funds movement for both corporate
solutions in a bank with data of customers residing in
and retail segments, in the form of Electronic
these systems. Banks need to constantly look for
Clearing Service (ECS-Credit and Debit Clearing)
innovative services which offer customers the
and Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT), and the
convenience of transacting from anywhere, at any time,
Special Electronic Funds Transfer (SEFT), all of
and using delivery channels that are suitable for them.
which now cover about 10,000 branches of banks
These are frontiers which would add value to the services
spread across about 200 cities and towns of the
offered to customers and at the same time act as a
country;
means for increasing the profits for banks too.
l The introduction of the Negotiated Dealing System
One of the most significant areas where IT has
for screen based trading in Government Securities
had a positive impact is on substitutes for traditional
by RBI regulated institutions;
funds movement services. With the advent of electronic
l The introduction of the Real Time Gross
banking, electronic funds transfer and other similar
Settlement (RTGS) System for online settlement
products, funds transfers across different constituents
of inter-bank funds transfers on a transaction-
is now easily possible - within time frames which would
by-transaction basis has been a significant
have appeared impossible a few years ago. With
achievement. This has resulted in risk free credit
networking and inter connection, new challenges are
mode of funds settlement. The RTGS system
arising related to security, privacy and confidentiality
witnesses inter bank transactions amounting to
of transactions. Many new players are entering into
an average of Rs. 5000 crore on a normal
the arena of funds transfer services and the pride of
working day in Mumbai;
place enjoyed by bankers is under severe threat. The
l Introduction of the Online Tax Accounting System
competition is not just from organisations performing
(OLTAS), which has facilitated electronic
funds transfer services but from other seemingly
transmission of tax related information from
unrelated channels such as service providers for message
banks to the Tax Information Network (TIN) of
transfer, quick delivery of instruments and the like who
the Income Tax Department
1030November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
detect unusual usage patterns and deficiencies. It is here
all facilitate the movement of funds based messages at
that e-Security gains significance.
speeds faster than before.
Yet another factor which is the driving force behind
III. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN B ANKING AND the use of technology in banking relates to the ever
E-SECURITY increasing expectations of the customers. Today's
customers are more demanding and are also more techno-
No innovation is without challenges - IT is no savvy compared to their counterparts of the yester years.
exception to this rule. The most prominent challenge
They demand instant, anytime and anywhere banking
arising from these innovations relates to the concept
facilities. Unless the banks recognize this and reorient
of security. With the delivery channels relating to funds
themselves, they will have no future. It is information
based services - such as movement of funds
technology which enables banks in meeting such high
electronically between different accounts of customers
expectations of the customers.
- taking place with the use of technology, the
We are at the threshold of a significant change in
requirements relating to security also need to undergo
the way banking in the country is poised to be in the
metamorphosis at a rapid pace. Various concepts such
days to come. The future lies not in mere use of
as digital signatures, certification, storage of information
technology by banks in the form of computers and
in a secure and tamper-proof manner all assume
related equipment but in the use of networked
significance and have to be part of the practices and
computing resources.
procedures in the day-to-day functioning of banks of
Both these factors require the usage of Information
tomorrow. I must hasten to add at this stage that all
Systems which not only perform their assigned
these would be added requirements and the well
functions, but also provide for seamless interaction
established practices of today may also have to not
across different segments between the customer of a
only continue but also co-exist along with the new
bank and the banker, after passing through many layers
requirements.
of network based communication and countless number
The Reserve Bank of India has taken upon itself
of systems. It is here that the integrity of the message
the setting up of a safe, secure and efficient
and its safe delivery - without any distortion or change
communications network for the exclusive use of the
- becomes of paramount significance. E-Security has a
banking sector. Named the INFINET (for the Indian
definitive and substantive role to play here and all large
Financial Network), this network is already being used
IT users are now actively and seriously addressing such
by a large number of banks for funds and non-funds
security concerns.
based message transfers, and is made available by the
Traditionally, IT has been providing solutions to
Institute for Development and Research in Banking
banks to take care of their accounting and back office
Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad. INFINET is perhaps
requirements. This has, however, now given way to
among the few networks in the world which uses the
large scale usage in services aimed at the customer of
latest in technology and security called Public Key
the banks. IT also facilitates the introduction of new
Infrastructure - PKI, which is not only state-of-the-art
delivery channels - in the form of Automated Teller
and robust but also well within the legal requirements
Machines, Net Banking, Mobile Banking and the like.
of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
Further, IT deployment has assumed such high levels
For all these systems to be effective, there is a need
that it is no longer possible for banks to manage their
for an effective security policy which would offer a
IT implementations on a stand alone basis. To leverage
shared vision of how the controls in the workplace should
the benefit of the IT revolution, banks are increasingly
be implemented with the objective of protecting data,
interconnecting their computer systems not only across
information and eventually, the economic value of the
branches in a city but also to other geographic locations
organisation. This has to be supplemented by education
with high-speed network infrastructure, and setting up
and training in these areas and reinforced by the actions
local area and wide area networks and connecting them
and concerns of the top management so that a culture
to the Internet. As a result, information systems and
of security can be created. These controls have to be
networks are now exposed to a growing number and a
supported by surveillance, monitoring and auditing to
wider variety of threats and vulnerabilities.
1031November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
The Reserve Bank of India constituted a 'Working few shared ATM networks have already been
Group for Information System Security for the Banking commissioned by banks), offering payment services
and Financial Sector' in 2001. The Group's beyond the existing time zones. The Reserve Bank is
recommendations have been the basis for the Information also facilitating new projects such as the Multi Application
Systems Audit Policy for many banks and other financial smart card project which, when implemented, would
entities. facilitate transfer of funds using electronic means and in
a safe and secure manner across the length and breadth
As increasing dependence on information systems
of the country, with reduced dependence on paper
develops, the need for such systems to be reliable and
currency. The opportunities of e-banking or e-power in
secure also becomes more essential. As growing numbers
general need to be harnessed so that banking is available
of ordinary citizens use computer networks for banking,
to all customers in such a manner that they would feel
shopping, etc., network security is potentially a massive
most convenient and if required, without having to visit
problem. Over the last few years, the need for computer
a branch of a bank. All these will have to be accompanied
and information system security has become increasingly
with a high level of comfort, which again boils down to
evident, as web sites are being defaced with greater
the issue of e-security.
frequency, more and more denial-of-service attacks are
being reported, credit card information is being stolen, One of the biggest advantages accruing to banks in
there is increased sophistication of hacking tools that the future would be the benefits that arise from the
are openly available to the public on the Internet, and introduction of RTGS. Funds management by treasuries
there is increasing damage being caused by viruses and of banks would be helped greatly by RTGS. With almost
worms to critical information system resources. 70 banks having joined the RTGS system, more large
value funds transfers are taking place through this
At the organisational level, institutional mechanisms
1
system . The implementation of Core Banking solutions
have to be designed in order to review policies, practices,
measures, and procedures to review e-security regularly by banks is closely related to RTGS too. Core Banking
will make anywhere banking a reality for customers of
and assess whether these are appropriate to their
each bank, while RTGS bridges the need for inter-bank
environment. It would be helpful if organisations share
funds movement. Thus, the days of depositing a cheque
information about threats and vulnerabilities, and
for collection and a long wait for its realisation would
implement procedures for rapid and effective co-operation
soon be a thing of the past for those customers who
to prevent, detect and respond to security incidents. As
new threats and vulnerabilities are continuously discovered would opt for electronic movement of funds, using the
RTGS system, where the settlement would be on an
there is a strong need for co-operation among
almost instantaneous basis. Core Banking is already in
organisations and, if necessary, we could also consider
vogue in many private sector and foreign banks; while
cross-border information sharing. We need to understand
its implementation is at different stages amongst the public
threats and dangers that could be vulnerable to and the
sector banks.
steps that need to be taken to mitigate these
vulnerabilities. We need to understand access control IT would also facilitate better and more scientific
systems and methodology, telecommunication and decision making within banks. Information systems now
network security, and security management practice. We provide decision makers in banks with a great deal of
should be well versed in the area of application and information which, along with historical data and trend
systems development security, cryptography, operations analysis, help in the building up of efficient Management
security and physical security. Information Systems. This, in turn, would help in better
Asset-Liability Management (ALM) which, in today's
The banking sector is poised for more challenges in
world of hairline margins is a key requirement for the
the near future. Customers of banks can now look
success of banks in their operational activities. Another
forward to a large array of new offerings by banks.
benefit which e-banking could provide for relates to
From an era of mere competition, banks are now co-
Customer Relationship Management (CRM). CRM helps
operating among themselves so that the synergistic
in stratification of customers and evaluating customer
benefits are shared among all the players. This would
needs on a holistic basis which could be paving the way
result in the formation of shared payment networks (a
1
 As of October 2004 (i.e., around the time the address was going to the Press), 92 banks had joined the RTGS system.
1032November Reserve Bank of India Bulletin 2004
for competitive edge for banks and complete customer I am also told that there will be increasing inter-
care for customers of banks. linking between internet and intranets of banks. As this
connectivity expands there will be greater need for
security features that guard against e-contagions
V. THE FUTURE
spreading, should such unfortunate events take place.
Regulators have so far been concerned with contagion
How do we see the future? Not being trained in
in the financial sector resulting from adverse developments
astrology let me try to track the future in terms of the
in the overall economic environment. We will also now
recent initiatives.
need to be concerned with e-contagion resulting from
Recognising that paper based cheques would continue technology developments. In fact, we will have to make
to be in use in the country, the RBI has begun to look
sure that the probability of such events is only an epsilon
into ways and means to reduce the time taken for away from zero.
realisation of these cheques. As an effective and
I have already mentioned the initiation of the OLTAS
implementable model, truncation of cheques is being
project. This is related to online transmission of both
introduced by the RBI This would facilitate quick
tax revenue and the connected information. It goes
realisation of cheques without the actual physical
without saying that security in such transactions is of
movement of such collection instruments. A pilot project
the utmost importance. The electronic data interchange
in this regard, has been launched covering the National
system connected with trade activities facilitating just in
Capital region of Delhi and its nearby places in the first
time processing is another system that has to be fully
instance.
secure. Moreover, the success of state level of VAT will
Electronic mode of payments are increasingly
also be related to electronic payment system, accounting
replacing the traditional paper cheque. It is almost
and related security system.
impossible to imagine now how payment settlements were
Other new products such as smart cards and other
done physically before the electronic age. ECS is now
cards with embedded money will need to be introduced
more than 10 years old. The per transaction limit for
carefully with full security for customer and payment
ECS (Credit) is Rs.5 lakh and for ECS debit it is Rs.1
and settlement system alike.
lakh. The Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) System was
We need to give greater thought to all the issues
introduced by RBI in 1997. There is currently a
connected with actual implementation of e-Security.
maximum limit of Rs.2 crore for individual transactions.
The Special EFT system was introduced just a year ago. Security is actually not built over any existing block;
in today's world it has to be an integral part of the
Each of these systems of electronic transfer of funds is
block itself. This is where the need for implementation
growing at a very rapid pace. These various maximum
of e-security from the stage of manufacture - of the
limits were fixed considering the levels of comfort of
hardware, software, during its integration and final
banks and for greater acceptability in the initial stages
implementation - assumes significance. It is heartening
and also because of security considerations.
to see the confluence of manufacturers and users in
There is now an increasing demand for expanding
this seminar and I am sure that there will be many
the scope of EFT facilities and to provide solutions for
lessons which we will all carry back home to implement
faster movement of funds for the capital markets to take
and practice on a regular basis. I request you all to
care of the requirements of the T+1 settlements. The ECS
find solutions to the vexing problem of e-security to
and EFT systems are now PKI enabled and message
the best possible extent so that we could prove to the
transfers take place in a secure environment. This issue
rest of the world that the collective efforts of the
is therefore under our active consideration and I am
suppliers and the users would be the best and the most
hopeful that we can enhance these limits or eliminate them
2 effective barrier to such security violations. I am very
entirely . As such decisions are taken, the need for a
optimistic that this can be an achievable reality.
constant upgradation of their security features is obvious.
2
The per transaction limits have been removed with effect from November 1, 2004
1033