*
Role of State in Developing Debt Markets
Presentation 
 
Mr. Robert Sheehy, Mr. Coskun Cangoz, Mr Jin Myung Kim, Mr Otavio Ladeira de 
Medeiros, Mr. Thordur Jonasson and distinguished participants. It is a great pleasure 
to be in the city of Doha and share my thoughts with such a distinguished gathering in 
the Conference jointly organized by the Qatar Central Bank and the International 
Monetary Fund. I am particularly thankful to Mr Abdulla Bin Saud Al-Thani, Governor, 
Qatar Central Bank and Mr. Ananthakrishnan Prasad of the International Monetary 
Fund, for having invited me in the Conference. The importance of debt markets in 
catalyzing the growth of economy is well recognized and accepted. Therefore, State, 
and by State I mean both the government and central bank, has an interest in 
developing debt markets. In pursuit of this interest, the state has a critical role to play 
in fostering a sound and diversified debt market, which efficiently performs the function 
of financial intermediation. The increased role of the State in the financial markets 
and, particularly, in the debt markets was evident across several countries during the 
recent global financial crisis and European sovereign debt crisis. For example, in the 
backdrop of heightened volatility and dysfunctional of collateral markets, the central 
banks bought large scale assets (government bonds, corporate bonds, securitized 
bonds, etc) to calm down the markets and bring back normalcy. 
 
Historical perspective 
1. . 
2. A survey of the world's major developed bond markets reveals diverse paths of 
development.  Therefore, I would start by briefly discussing the state’s role in the debt 
markets from a historical perspective. State’s involvement in debt markets has a long 
history. The State started borrowing in the Middle Ages in Europe. The earliest loans 
of medieval times were either forced loans or personal borrowing by the sovereign, 
usually to finance wars. It is interesting to note that lending to the sovereign entailed 
significant credit risk in those times. The extensive use of loans by governments 
became possible only after the ruler had become differentiated from the state and 
after the fact of the continuity of the state had been separated from the persons of the 
rulers. Other factors which facilitated borrowings were: the development of a regular 
revenue source to provide funds for repayment of loans, a monetary system, and an 
organized money market.  
 
3. Since the late Middle Ages, governments began to raise money through long- 
and short-term loans. Initially, indebtedness was intended to finance war budgets, but 
gradually money was channelled towards civil purposes such as public works or food 
                                                            
*
 Based on the presentation made by Harun R Khan, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India at the Capital 
Market Conference organized by the Qatar Central Bank & the International Monetary Fund on September 18, 
2012 in Doha, Qatar. The contributions of Shri. N.R.V.V.M.K. Rajendra Kumar and Shri. Sunil Kumar of the 
Reserve Bank are acknowledged. 
 
Page 1 of 21 
 supply. Public debt became a trusted tool of political economy and financed 
expenditure in place of levying unpopular taxes. In the main European cities, 
government bonds became freely marketable. Trading procedures, guarantees and 
techniques became well known to investors at a national and international level. The 
increasing efficiency of financial markets allowed governments to raise money at 
decreasing costs whilst savers could use long term public loans as a an assured 
alternative to traditional investments in land. State has  recognized the efficacy of a 
developed debt market and modern governments continue to borrow because of 
inevitable mismatches in revenue and spending. Other reasons include supporting 
inter-generational fairness, stabilizing tax rates, implementing macroeconomic 
management, and finally, for political expediency in running the desired programmes 
for achieving socio-economic and political objectives. 
 
Objectives of debt market development 
 
4. The objective of debt market development in a broad sense is to aid economic 
growth and development. The principle role of debt markets is to transfer capital from 
savers to borrowers / investors, and allocate them in an efficient manner among 
competing uses in the economy, thereby contributing to growth both through 
increased investment and through enhanced efficiency in resource use. As debt 
markets link issuers having long-term financing needs with investors willing to place 
funds in long-term, interest-bearing securities, a developed domestic bond market 
offers a wide range of opportunities for funding the government and the private sector. 
The debt markets also specialize in transferring, pooling as well as sharing risks. The 
debt market, especially Government securities market serves, as a benchmark for 
pricing other financial assets and thereby helps the monetary policy transmission. In 
the Indian context, the transmission from shorter to longer end of the yield curve is a 
function of, inter alia, changes in monetary policy rates, inflation levels, international 
interest rates and, liquidity conditions including the SLR stipulation. 
 
Bond market in India and Asia 
 
5. Indian bond market has made rapid strides in the last few years due to several 
initiatives undertaken by the state, central bank and other stake holders. Although 
activities in corporate bonds market have picked up, the Indian bonds market 
continues to be dominated by Government bonds market. One of the landmark 
initiatives in this regard was phasing out of automatic monetization of fiscal deficit 
through issue of ad hoc Treasury Bills with effect from April 1, 1997 through a 
supplemental agreement signed between Government of India (GoI) and RBI on 
March 26, 1997. This agreement paved the way for funding the fiscal deficit of GoI 
through market loans and thereby, need to develop the Government bonds market.   
Another landmark initiative was Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management 
(FRBM) Act, 2003 prohibiting RBI’s subscription to the Government bonds in the 
primary auction with effect from April 1, 2006. This initiative resulted in issuance of all 
 
Page 2 of 21 
 Government bonds in the market and improved the depth of both primary and 
secondary segments of the Government bonds market.  
 
6. Some of the other important initiatives taken with respect to the Government 
bonds market were (i) State governments’ fund raising shifting to market through an 
auction system; (ii) introduction of primary dealers (PDs) network; (iii) introduction of 
When Issued market; (iv) issuance of half-yearly auction calendars covering quantum, 
timing & tenor of securities for providing transparency and certainty to the market 
participants; (v) setting up electronic platforms for primary auctions, namely, the 
Negotiated Dealing System Auction (NDS-Auction); and (vi) setting up electronic 
Order Matching (OM) platform for secondary market trade, namely, the NDS-OM. 
Consequently, the volume in Government bonds market increased significantly (Table 
1). 
Table 1: Volume in Government Bonds Market 
(` billion) 
Year Primary  Secondary  
Issuances* Market 
Trade$ 
2005-06 1,527 8,648
2006-07 1,668 10,215
2007-08 2,238 16,539
2008-09 3,911 21,602
2009-10 5,821 29,139
2010-11 5,410 28,710
2011-12 6,686 34,882
*Gross for Central and State Governments. $Single-side volume. 
 
7. The bond markets across the Asian region have witnessed substantial progress 
after the Asian crisis in the second half of 1990s. The Asian Bonds Funds (ABF) 
structured by the Bank for International Settlement (BIS) in response to a proposal by 
the East Asia and Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP) group in June 2003 has also played 
a role in the development of the Government bonds market in the Asian region. ABF 
allows its members to invest in bonds issued by Asian sovereign issuers in EMEAP 
economies. The progress made by the Indian Government bonds market is 
comparable to its peers in the Asian region. The turnover ratio (in terms of total 
volume divide by average outstanding of Govt securities) of the Indian Government 
bonds market during the quarter ending March 2012 was close to the Government 
bonds market of several Asian countries (Chart 1).       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 21 
 Chart 1: Turnover ratio in Government Bonds Market  
(quarter ending March 2012 ) 
2.23
2.4
2.2
2
1.8
1.6
1.28
1.4
1.2
0.96
0.85
1 0.78
0.6
0.8 0.58
0.52
0.44
0.6 0.39
0.4
0.2
0
Source: AsianBondsOnline and Clearding Corporation of India Limited (CCIL)
 
 
Attributes of a developed bond market  
 
8. The main features of a well developed debt market are depth, breadth, 
resilience and wide choice of instruments to cater to the requirements of market 
participants. "Depth" connotes the extent to which it can handle large transactions 
without causing sharp changes in price. "Breadth" connotes the diversity of 
participants and the heterogeneity of their responses to new information while the 
“resilience” determines the speed with which price fluctuations due to some shocks 
finally dissipate. The developed markets also have a bouquet of instruments (bonds 
and derivatives) to cater to requirements of market participants. Large set of domestic 
institutional investors and active interest from foreign investors can create a large and 
heterogeneous group that is necessary for an efficient bond market. For example, the 
traditional investor base for G-Sec in India comprised banks, provident funds, and 
insurance companies. With the entry of co-operative banks, regional rural banks, 
pension funds, mutual funds and non-banking finance companies and foreign 
institutional investors including foreign central banks; the institutional investor base 
has been diversified (Chart 2). Deep, broad markets are generally more resilient and 
tend to display greater stability in responding to financial and economic disturbances.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 21 
 
(Ratio)
India
China
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Japan
Korea
Malaysia
Phillipines
Singapore
ThailandChart 2: Share of market participants in Government securities in India 
(end-June 2012) 
Banking Sector
3.6
Non?Bank PDs
Insurance Companies
17.6
Mutual Funds
47.3
Financial Institutions
7.3
Corporates
0.9
FIIs
1.4
Provident Funds
0.3
21.2
RBI
0.3
Others
0.1
 
 
Role of State/Central Bank 
 
9. The continued integration and deepening of financial markets is a significant 
issue for the policy-makers, and, particularly for the central banks, entrusted with the 
formulation and implementation of monetary policy, since well-integrated and efficient 
financial markets are crucial in ensuring a smooth transmission of monetary impulses 
to the economy. Besides the state (government) having a ‘market-completion’ role, its 
role in the development of the debt market stems from the fact that well developed 
debt market is essential for providing stable and cost effective funding to the various 
sectors, including public sector, of the economy. The Reserve Bank of India, like many 
other Central Banks has taken a proactive role in the development of debt markets. In 
performing this function, the RBI played multifarious roles as central bank, debt 
manager to the government and regulator of debt markets.  In the above backdrop, 
the role of state in developing the debt market can be analysed through following three 
channels: 
 
 Issuer of debt  
o Debt management strategy and framework 
 Developer of bond markets  
o Institutional framework- market infrastructure- investor and 
instrument universe 
 Regulator of bond markets 
o Systemic stability- market integrity- consumer protection 
 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 21 
 
      Issuer of debt 
 
10. The first major bond market to develop is usually the market in government 
obligations. In many countries, the government has the largest stock of issues 
outstanding in its name. Government bond prices serve as a basis for pricing the 
issues of other borrowers who are subject to credit risk. In most countries, 
governments issue debt to fund the gap between tax receipts and current 
expenditures, and sometimes to finance some extraordinary current expenditure. The 
US bond market, for example, took flight after the issuance of Liberty Bonds to finance 
US participation in World War I. The favorable experience investors had with these 
bonds left them willing to invest in securities issued by corporations. This gave fillip to 
the corporate bond market and made possible the significant expansion of these 
markets. 
 
11. This does not mean that fiscally conservative governments that do not run 
deficits cannot nurture a robust debt market. Hong Kong and Singapore have issued 
bonds despite running surplus budgets. Hong Kong developed a benchmark yield 
curve in Hong Kong dollars through issues of Exchange Fund Bills and Notes, the 
proceeds of which are used primarily to invest in international markets, not to fund 
government spending. Australia and Norway are other countries which issued debt 
even though they ran surplus / balanced budgets.  
 
Debt management strategy & framework 
 
12. Investors’ confidence in the quality, safety and integrity of the public debt 
management is the pre-condition for the development of the Government bonds 
market and credible debt management strategy (DMS) is one of the factors that create 
this confidence. DMS, comprising of objectives, various benchmarks and portfolio 
indicators and yearly issuance plan (external and domestic funding, instruments, 
maturity structure, etc.) provides requisite information and transparency, certainty and 
enables market participants (investors) to chalk out their investment strategy in 
Government bonds market. Further, DMS, which ensure that both level and rate of 
growth in public debt is fundamentally sustainable over time and can be serviced 
under a wide range of scenarios while meeting cost and risk objectives, gives fillip to 
the confidence of the investors and, thereby, help in development of the Government 
bonds market. In essence, DMS revolves around three broad pillars viz., cost 
minimization, risk mitigation (e.g. roll-over risk, cash flows risk, etc.), and market 
development. 
 
13. A well developed bond market will ensure a stable and sustainable source of 
financing for governments to meet their investment needs while preserving debt 
sustainability. On the other hand, a shallow domestic market is often the most 
important constraint limiting the access to local currency funding at long maturities and 
fixed interest rates. In India, DMS is reviewed on half-yearly basis in the joint 
 
Page 6 of 21 
 Monitoring Group on Cash & Debt Management of the Government of India and the 
Reserve Bank of India and it is disseminated to public through release of half yearly 
indicative calendar for issuances of Central Government dated securities. This half 
yearly calendar provides comprehensive information on issuance strategy, viz. date of 
auction, total amount, maturity bucket-wise amount, nature of instruments (floating 
or/and fixed instruments). Further, a week prior to the auction, individual securities 
along with their issuance size is notified to the public. This strategy of sharing 
information about debt management has enhanced transparency of debt management 
operations and greatly helped the development of the Government bonds market. The 
formulation of the DMS should follow some intuitive guidelines, especially in order to 
improve depth and breadth of the government bonds market and these guidelines 
should favor cost minimization over medium term subject to prudent degree of risk, 
achieving a stable mix of borrowings in domestic and foreign currency, issuance of 
variety of instruments (fixed rate bonds, floating rate bonds, inflation indexed bonds, 
bonds with call and put options, etc.) to cater to investors’ interest, buyback and 
switching operations of the issuers, etc.  
 
14. The cost minimization attempted over short-term by the debt managers may 
create sub-optimal debt structures, which may create stress for issuer as well as 
market during uncertain and volatile times and thereby hamper the sustainable 
development of the bonds market. Otherwise also, exploiting the evolving market 
conditions in an effort to minimize the cost over the short-term could distort the shape 
of the yield curve and create demand for bonds only at certain points. Hence, DMS 
pursuing cost minimization over medium-term and issuing bonds across the maturity 
points is considered to be a better option for the development of the bonds market. 
DMS in India has stressed on elongation of maturity whenever possible and, in turn, 
cost minimization over the medium term (Table 2).  
 
Table 2: Central Government Market Borrowing through Dated Securities 
Borrowings Outstanding Stocks 
Weighted  Weighted  Weighted  Weighted  
Year 
average  average  average  average  
maturity yield  maturity coupon 
(Years) (%) (Years) (%) 
2001-02 14.30 9.44 8.20 10.84 
2002-03 13.80 7.34 8.90 10.44 
2003-04 14.94 5.71 9.78 9.30 
2004-05 14.13 6.11 9.63 8.79 
2005-06 16.90 7.34 9.92 8.75 
2006-07 14.72 7.89 9.97 8.55 
2007-08 14.90 8.12 10.59 8.50 
2008-09 13.80 7.69 10.45 8.23 
2009-10 11.16 7.23 9.82 7.89 
2010-11 11.62 7.92 9.78 7.81 
2011-12 12.66 8.52 9.60 7.88 
 
Page 7 of 21 
  
15. Next, achieving appropriate and stable mix of domestic –foreign currency debt 
in portfolio is essential. Raising debt in foreign currency could bring down interest 
costs and provide a wide and varied investor base. A country with largely foreign-
currency denominated liabilities is, however, exposed to “sudden stops” of capital 
inflows and may not be able to accommodate balance of payment shocks. Moreover, 
cost of carry (interest rate parity) needs to be taken into account rather than interest 
rate, while deciding the extent of foreign funding.  There could be increase in debt 
servicing costs on foreign currency which could create macro economic imbalances. 
DMS needs to factor these risks. Sizeable share of funding in domestic currency is 
necessary to ensure ample supply of Government bonds in the domestic bonds 
market which is a very critical ingredient for development of the domestic bonds 
market. Incidentally, funding fiscal deficit through external debt has been very low in 
India and external debt as percentage of Central Government’s public debt has come 
down from 6.4 per cent in 2005-06 to 5.2 per cent during 2011-12 (Chart 3). The 
external debt in Indian context is entirely bilateral and multilateral loans. In Internal 
debt, large share is raised through market loans which constituted almost entire 
internal debt of the Central Government (Chart 4) and all the market loans have been 
raised from the domestic bond markets. This demonstrates that Government bond 
markets have become instrumental for funding a large part of the Central Government 
fiscal deficit over the last few years and, in turn, this large dependence on the 
domestic bonds markets helped in further improving the breadth and width of the later.  
          
 
 
 
16. DMS involving issuance of variety of instruments of varying maturities add to 
the diversity of the Government bonds markets as well as expand the investors’ base. 
For example, some investors (banks and financial institutions) like to invest in floating 
rate bonds (FRBs) for their duration management. Similarly, institutional investors, 
such as, insurance companies, provident funds, pension funds, etc. would prefer to 
buy zero coupon bonds and inflation indexed bonds (IIBs) for their liability 
 
Page 8 of 21 
 management. Governments in most of the advanced countries and emerging market 
economies (EMEs) have issued a significant portion of domestic bonds through 
instruments other than conventional fixed rate bonds (Table 3).   
 
Table 3: Composition of Domestic Bonds issued by Central Government in 2011:  
Cross Country  
(as percentage of outstanding) 
Country Floating  Fixed Inflation Exchange Others 
Rate Rate Indexed Rate linked 
Argentina 14.8 0.8 49.2 34.6 0.7 
Brazil 31.9 37.5 30.0 0.6 0.0 
Chile 0.0 19.2 80.8 0.0 0.0 
India 2.4 97.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Indonesia 22.2 77.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Canada 0.0 92.5 7.5 0.0 0.0 
Germany 10.9 85.8 2.9 0.4 0.0 
United Kingdom 0.0 77.6 22.4 0.0 0.0 
United States 0.0 91.2 8.8 0.0 0.0 
Source: Bank for International Settlement (BIS) 
 
17. In India, although funds for the Central Government have been raised through 
issuing variety of instruments (such as, fixed rate conventional bonds, FRBs, Zero 
Coupon Bonds, CIBs), the contribution of linkers (FRBs, IIBs, etc.) has remained small 
except for the year 2003-04 and 2004-05 (Chart 5).Therefore, DMS for India also 
needs to increase the share of linkers in gross issuance of dated securities to further 
improve the breadth and width of the Government bonds market. Towards this end, 
new version of the IIBs, on the pattern of Canadian model, has been designed and it is 
expected to be launched in the near future.   
 
 
Page 9 of 21 
 Chart 5: Composition of Central Governments' market borrowings  
through dated Securities 
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Fixed Floating
 
 
18. A policy of passive consolidation through reissuance/ re-openings is being 
followed to improve liquidity and to facilitate consolidation of debt. The larger stock 
size of securities has significantly improved market liquidity and helped the emergence 
of benchmark securities in the market. Active consolidation has not been resorted to 
(except a few buy-backs) in view of fiscal considerations. However, to promote 
liquidity, process of active consolidation consisting of issuance of securities at various 
maturity points in conjunction with further steps like buyback and switches is needed.  
 
Market determined pricing 
 
19. For market development, it is crucial that the interest rate on government bonds 
be market-determined. If the government attempts to manipulate the bond market to 
reduce the cost of government borrowing, important information will be lost which may 
lead to distortions in the allocation of capital. In India, The RBI had undertaken a 
phased programme of reforms to make a transition to market determined interest rates 
based on auctions. This has significantly improved price discovery process. 
 
Benchmark yield curve 
 
20. The absence of a risk-free term structure of interest rates makes it difficult to 
price credit risk of instruments issued by the private sector and other issuers. 
Inefficiencies caused by mispricing credit risk result in distortions in the economy. 
Without a government bond market that establishes benchmark risk free rates at 
critical maturities, it will be very difficult to establish a corporate bond market, much 
less a market for high yield debt or securitized assets. If the government’s objective is 
to nurture a robust bond market, then it should aim at establishing a benchmark yield 
 
Page 10 of 21 
 
(% of Total)
2001?02
2002?03
2003?04
2004?05
2005?06
2006?07
2007?08
2008?09
2009?10
2010?11
2011?12curve that can serve as the risk-free rate for the pricing of other securities. This means 
committing to a programme of regular issues at the appropriate maturities. Over the 
last two decades, sustained budget deficits have necessitated large issuance of 
government securities in India. The increasing share of market borrowings in financing 
fiscal deficits of the Central government, from 21 per cent in 1991-92 to nearly 100 per 
cent in 2011-12 ensured steady supply of securities to the market. The issuance 
volumes have increased, thereby attaining critical mass to enable robust trading. 
Taking advantage of this, we were able to develop a reasonably deep and liquid 
government securities market. We could extend the risk-free yield curve up to thirty 
years with regular auctions of securities. The bench mark is being used by other 
markets for pricing and valuation purposes The Indian yield curve today compares 
well with peers in emerging economies as well as the developed world. 
 
Institutional arrangements for debt management 
 
21. Institutional arrangements for sovereign debt management play an important 
role in the debt market. With regard to the location of sovereign debt management 
functions, multiplicity of arrangements exists around the world: in the ministry of 
finance, central bank or autonomous debt management agency. Cross country 
experience shows that there is no international best practice and the adoption of any 
particular model could depend on country specific circumstances.  
 
22. In the nineties, several OECD countries entrusted debt management to 
separate agencies with the objective of providing monetary policy independence to 
central banks in order to enable them to concentrate on inflation management. It was 
also perceived that independent DMOs would improve operations of debt 
management through improved accountability and professional debt management. 
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has been entrusted with public debt management by 
statute, especially debt denominated in the domestic currency. In line with the global 
trends in early years of this century, the Government of India has announced that a 
separate debt management agency would be statutorily created to take over debt 
management from the Central Bank.  
 
23. There is a strong view that the issue of separation of debt management from 
Central Bank needs to be revisited, especially in the wake of global financial crisis and 
taking into account the Indian context. In India, the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management (FRBM) Act 2003, which has precluded RBI from participating in the 
primary auction of the Government bonds, has resolved the perceived conflict of 
interest with the monetary policy. Further, monetary signaling in India is currently done 
by the repo rate (i.e. the policy rate) under the Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) and 
not through the bond yields which are market driven. In India, the Reserve Bank of 
India has recognized the paramount importance of inflation management and has 
taken all the steps necessary in this regard. The Reserve Bank of India has increased 
policy rate on several occasions in the past couple of years in spite of substantial 
 
Page 11 of 21 
 increase in government’s market borrowings. In spite of heightened uncertainty and 
volatility in financial markets, the Reserve Bank was able to complete the significantly 
increased size of the Government’s borrowing programme in a non-disruptive manner 
during the recent global financial crisis period.  
 
24. Debt management is much more than a mere resource raising exercise 
especially in a developing country context like ours. The size and dynamics of 
government market borrowing has a much wider influence on interest rate 
movements, systemic liquidity and credit growth through crowding out and an 
autonomous DMO, driven by specific objectives exclusively focusing on debt 
management alone, may not be able to manage this complex task involving various 
trade-offs. Internationally, the experience of coordination mechanisms between DMO 
and central bank, which are vital for economic management, are far from satisfactory 
and impacted debt management. There has been instances of failed auctions, e.g., in 
UK (March 2009), causing reputation risk for both the authorities. Mandatory policy 
coordination by way of statute may not be operationally effective as management of 
debt and money/liquidity requires seamless, continuous and ongoing coordination. In 
the above backdrop, particularly given the large size of the market borrowings in India 
due to persistence of high fiscal deficit, there is infact a confluence of interest between 
monetary policy and debt management in India.  Internationally, there is rethinking on 
the issue of debt management by central banks, with scholars like Charles Goodhart 
articulating that debt management being a critical element in the overall conduct of 
macroeconomic policy, central banks should be encouraged to revert to their role of 
managing the national debt. There is, thus, a compelling need for wider debate on this 
issue of governance structure for public debt management, particularly in countries 
with high fiscal deficit instead of unbridled faith in the pre-crisis theology of 
“independent” debt management office (DMO). 
 
Fiscal prudence 
 
25. Fiscal prudence is a virtue that needs to be cultivated for effectively managing 
public finances. It is also an attribute that facilitates state to borrow at reasonable cost. 
Recent experiences of some Euro zone sovereigns underscore this fact. In India, the 
importance of fiscal consolidation is recognized and legally enshrined in FRBM 
legislation. Though there have been slippages with regard to targets in wake of global 
financial crisis and its aftermath, the Government has reaffirmed its commitment to 
fiscal consolidation. The medium-term fiscal policy statement of the Central 
Government has given the rolling targets for fiscal consolidation (Table 4). 
 
Page 12 of 21 
  
Table 4: Rolling Targets for Fiscal Indicators of the Central Government 
(percentage of GDP) 
Indicator 2012-13  2013-14 2014-15 
(BE*) (Target) (Target) 
Revenue Deficit 3.4 2.8 2.0 
Fiscal Deficit 5.1 4.5 3.9 
Gross Tax Revenue 10.6 11.1 11.7 
Outstanding Liabilities 45.5 44.0 41.9 
*BE: Budget Estimates 
Source: Union Budget 2012-13. 
 
26. The state as an issuer must be sensitive to the requirements of the other 
sectors of the economy while raising resources from the matter. Due to its status as 
issuer with highest credit quality and ability to find captive investors, there is always a 
possibility of crowding out private investment. In, India; the government’s issuance is 
planned in a manner so as to take care of the credit needs of the private sector. This 
is, for example, achieved by frontloading the borrowing in first half of the fiscal year 
when credit demand from private sector is lower.  
 
Provider of high quality collateral  
 
27. State, through its issue of debt securities, provides safe and liquid assets 
which, from the perspective of conservative investors, act as a store of value or type of 
insurance during financial distress. For institutions like banks, these safe assets are 
useful for asset-liability management and as collateral to raise resources for funding 
need. This function of debt securities is also essential for development of debt 
markets. 
 
Developer of debt market 
 
28. In an emerging market economy like India, market development also needs to 
be consistent with the objective of maintaining financial stability. The prerequisites for 
establishing an efficient debt market include sound fiscal and monetary policies, 
effective legal and tax systems, and a vibrant financial system with competing 
intermediaries and adequate infrastructure. Against the above backdrop, the 
development process of bonds market has to take into account the legal structure, 
institutional framework, and market infrastructure.   
 
Legal framework 
 
29. The legal framework is one of the major or one could say, the most important 
prerequisite for orderly development of debt markets. In fact, putting in place the legal 
framework for empowering government to borrow, role of central bank as agent for the 
government, the debt management framework for enforcement of creditor's rights, 
 
Page 13 of 21 
 enforcement of contracts, rules governing issuance of government securities, and 
rules pertaining to the secondary market, creation of appropriate regulatory framework 
for debt securities is essential for bonds markets. In case of India, a well developed 
bouquet of laws such as RBI Act, Law of Contract, Securities Contracts (Regulation) 
(SCRA) Act, Government Securities (GS) Act, Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 
Depositories Act, etc. define the legal framework for debt markets. The RBI Act has 
made it incumbent upon RBI to manage the public debt and also on Government to 
entrust public debt management to RBI.  SCRA Act governs all the contracts 
(transactions) in securities including Government securities.  The GS Act applies to 
Government securities created and issued, whether before or after the 
commencement of the Act, by the Central or a State Government. This Act is aimed at 
facilitating widening and deepening of the Government securities market and its more 
effective regulation by the Reserve Bank in various ways. 
 
Institutional framework 
 
30. Institutional framework includes building up of various institutions viz., regulator, 
primary dealers and market makers, central counter parties (CCPs), etc. The primary 
dealers (PDs)’ network is paramount for the development of the primary segment of 
the Government bonds markets wherein Government issues the bonds to finance its 
gross fiscal deficit (GFD). The PDs are financial intermediaries, which agree to 
perform certain obligations or responsibilities in the Government bonds market subject 
to availability of some privileges (such as payment of underwriting commission, 
availability of liquidity from the Central Bank, etc.). PDs also perform the role of market 
maker in Government bonds market, which is essential part of the chain for 
development of any financial market as they provide liquidity through giving quotes for 
both buy and sell of the financial assets. Against the above backdrop, PDs’ role in the 
Government bonds market could be categorized as (i) a financial intermediary 
between debt manager and investors in the primary market through participating in the 
auction; (ii) to provide liquidity both in primary and secondary markets; (iii) to provide 
market making  services by willing to hold inventories of Government bonds; (iv) to 
promote efficient price discovery through aggressively participating both in primary 
and secondary market; and (v) to create awareness and educate investors about 
Government bonds. Most of the advanced countries have primary dealers network, 
though the model varies from country to country.  
 
31. In India, PDs network was set up in 1996 with the objectives of supporting the 
market borrowing programme of the Government, strengthening the securities market 
infrastructure and improving the secondary market liquidity in government securities. 
Thus, PDs, besides discharging the role of financial intermediary and market maker, 
have to compulsorily underwrite the Central Government’ bond issuances in the 
primary market. Presently, we have 21 PDs, out of which 8 are companies (called 
stand alone PDs) and 13 are commercial banks. To discharge their obligations 
effectively, PDs have been given privileges in terms of provision of current account 
 
Page 14 of 21 
 and SGL facilities with the Reserve Bank. They also have access to the liquidity 
adjustment facility (LAF) of the Reserve Bank. In order to ensure that primary dealers 
bid aggressively and to discourage defensive bidding, the stipulation of a success ratio 
of 40 per cent of bidding commitments is mandated. The PD system was revamped to 
ensure a more dynamic and active participation of PDs in view of the provisions of the 
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 whereby the 
Reserve Bank was prohibited from participating in the primary market effective April 1, 
2006. A new incentive structure in the underwriting auctions has been put in place to 
ensure 100 per cent underwriting and to elicit competitive bidding from PDs.  
 
Market infrastructure 
 
32. Establishing infrastructure to facilitate clearing and settlement of Government 
securities and corporate bonds including central depository and a safe and sound 
payment system is an important pre-requisite. The market infrastructure essential for 
development of the bonds market, inter alia, include trading/ auction platform, 
payments and settlement system, and depository. As these facilities require huge 
investments, state plays a ‘trail blazer’ role in establishing the same. Trading platform 
could be in the form of over-the-counter (OTC) or exchange. To improve the facilities 
for trading and settlement in the Government securities market, an electronic Order 
Matching trading module for Government securities has been provided by Reserve 
Bank of India on its Negotiated Dealing System (NDS-OM). The platform is an 
anonymous order matching system  with straight-through processing (STP) ensuring 
participant anonymity, price transparency and transaction efficiency. This facility has 
enhanced trading volumes. In order to improve retail participation, web-based platform 
both for primary and secondary markets have launched recently and trade volume on 
secondary market web-based platform has been significant.   
 
33. A fast, transparent and efficient clearing and settlement system constitutes the 
basic foundation of a well-developed Government bonds market, while depository 
enables holding of in dematerialized form catalyzing the payments and settlement 
process. In India, CCIL was established with regulator’s initiative to act as the clearing 
house and as a central counterparty through novation for transactions in government 
bonds. The establishment of CCIL has ensured guaranteed settlement of trades in 
government securities, thereby imparting considerable stability to the markets. 
Through the multilateral netting arrangement, this mechanism has reduced funding 
requirements from gross to net basis, thereby reducing liquidity risk and greatly 
mitigating counterparty credit risk. All transactions in government securities concluded 
or reported on NDS as well as transactions on the NDS-OM have to be necessarily 
settled through the CCIL.  
 
34. Recognizing the  importance of the financial market infrastructure and our 
commitment to adhere to the international best practice, we endeavor to benchmark 
our institutions and practices. The CCP in India has been evaluated for governance 
 
Page 15 of 21 
 and risk management by domestic and international auditors. Further, FSAP has also 
evaluated the CCP and found the system to be robust.  In this regard, it is pertinent to 
note that CPSS-IOSCO has published the "Principles for Financial Market 
Infrastructures" (PFMI) in April 2012 which updated and reviewed the earlier principles 
covering (i) core principles for systemically important payment systems, (ii) 
recommendations for the securities settlement systems and (iii) recommendations for 
the central counterparties, and laid emphasis on credit risk and liquidity risk 
management. In view of the critical nature of PFMI, it is essential to do a SWOT 
analysis of the FMI risk management, rule and regulations.  We have asked the CCP 
to undertake self assessment of compliance of the “Principles for Financial Market 
Infrastructures" (PFMI) finalized by CPSS-IOSCO in April 2012. The self assessment 
is being evaluated by us. It is essential that periodic assessments may be conducted 
in view of importance of these institutions for systemic stability.   
 
35. In India, the central bank acts as registrar and depository of government 
securities. Dematerialized holding of government securities in the form of Subsidiary 
General Ledger (SGL) was introduced to enable holding of securities in an electronic 
book entry form by participants. The Delivery versus Payments (DvP) system in India 
was operationalised in 1995 to synchronise transfer of securities with cash payments, 
thereby eliminating settlement risk in securities transactions. The DvP system, which 
was initially on the basis of gross settlement for both securities and funds (DvP–I 
method), shifted to DvP-II method where settlement for securities was on a gross 
basis but settlement of funds was on a net basis. Both funds and securities are settled 
on a net basis (DvP-III method) since 2004. Each security is deliverable/ receivable on 
a net basis for a particular settlement cycle and securities are netted separately for 
SGL and CSGL transactions. Netting of funds is done on a multilateral basis.  
 
Other financial products 
 
36. Although all the institutions have critical role to play in the development of the 
bond market, regulator has got unique responsibility of regulation as well as 
introduction of various interest rate products which are catalyst for improving liquidity 
and depth the bonds market. New instruments like Floating Rate Bonds (FRBs), Cash 
Management Bills (CMB) and Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principal of 
Securities (STRIPs) have been introduced in the debt market to provide investors 
choice to manage their portfolios. In India, Reserve Bank of India, the Central Bank 
regulates the fixed interest rate markets including Government bonds market and it 
has enabled introduction of interest rate products viz., interest rate swaps (IRS), and  
interest rate futures (IRF) which gave fillip to the development of the underlying 
Government bonds market.  
 
37. The corporate bonds market in India has made some progress in the recent 
past but activities as compared to the Government bonds markets continue to be 
benign. However, the government, RBI and the securities market regulator (Securities 
 
Page 16 of 21 
 Exchange Board of India) have taken several measures to improve the activities in the 
corporate bonds markets. These measures, inter alia, included launching reporting 
platform for post-trade transparency; DvP in settlement of OTC trades to eliminate 
settlement risk; transitory pooling of accounts for settlement of corporate bonds in the 
books of the Reserve Bank of India allowing repo in corporate bonds to provide 
avenue for funding; introduction of Credit Default Swaps to facilitate hedging of credit 
risk by the holders of corporate bonds; and increasing limit of foreign institutional 
investors (FIIs) to USD 25 billion. As a consequence of these measures, net issuance 
of corporate bonds amounted to Rs. 1,621 billion during 2011-12, raising the 
outstanding corporate bonds to Rs. 10,516 billion on end-March 2012. The secondary 
market trading volumes in the corporate bonds market increased from Rs. 959 billion 
in 2007-08 to Rs. 5,938 billion during 2011-12.   
 
Market access 
 
38. There is merit in the fact that improved access to debt markets will facilitate 
financial inclusion. For the issuer, it provides opportunity to tap a wider investor base 
and for investors, it would provide additional avenues of investment. Notwithstanding 
the predominantly institutional character of the G-Sec market, Reserve Bank of India 
has recognized merit in promoting retail participation and has initiated certain policy 
measures such as “Scheme of Non-competitive Bidding” for participation in auctions, 
improving access to the market for mid-segment investors by permitting well-managed 
and financially sound Urban Cooperative Banks (UCBs) to become members of NDS-
OM and revision of authorization guidelines for the Primary Dealers (PDs) mandating 
achievement of minimum retailing targets. To ease the process of investment by 
retail/mid-segment investors, a web-enabled platform which would seamlessly 
integrate their funds and securities accounts has also been provided. 
 
Enhancing liquidity  
 
39. Liquidity in debt markets is essential as it offers the comfort to the investors in 
terms of ease of transaction, helps issuers as liquidity makes financial instruments 
attractive investments and is also critical for the effectiveness of the monetary policy 
transmission. The state can improve liquidity by accessing the market regularly, 
building up volumes in benchmark issuances and pursuing an active buy-back 
programme. The market liquidity is also impacted by the risk preferences of the 
market participants, their ability to run short positions and the development of funding 
markets (such as repo markets) allowing them to take positions in the debt markets.   
 
40. The Reserve Bank had recently constituted a Working Group on “Enhancing 
Liquidity in G-Sec and Interest Rate Derivatives Market” (Chairman: R. Gandhi). The 
major recommendations made by the Group, which submitted its report recently,  with 
regard to improving liquidity in G-Sec are:  
 
Page 17 of 21 
  To consolidate the outstanding G-sec, for which a framework may be 
prepared for the next 3-4 years, beginning with the issuance of securities at 
various maturity points in conjunction with steps like issuance of benchmark 
securities over a longer term horizon, buybacks and switches, etc;  
 To come up with a roadmap to gradually bring down the upper-limit on the 
Held to Maturity (HTM) portfolio. While doing so, the possible impact of 
reduction in the limit on HTM classification on the balance sheet of 
banks/PDs and any measure aimed to address this issue should be 
calibrated appropriately to make it non-disruptive to the entities and other 
stakeholders;  
 To enable market making, allocation of specific securities to each PD and if 
required, rotation of the stock of securities among the PDs, by turn, at 
periodic intervals may be considered;  
 To encourage alternate investors, investment limit for FIIs in g-sec may be 
increased in gradual steps. The increase in the investment limit can be 
reviewed on a yearly basis keeping in view the country’s overall external debt 
position, current account deficit, size of GoI borrowing programme, etc. 
Measures to simplify access for investors like trusts, corporates etc. to the g-
sec market may be examined and long-term gilt funds may be encouraged 
through appropriate incentives (like tax-breaks, liquidity support, etc.);  
 To improve repo markets, the restrictions on selling/repo of securities 
acquired under market repo may be reviewed to promote the term-repo 
market with suitable restrictions on ‘leverage’ and consider introducing an 
appropriate tripartite repo in g-sec.  
 
Related markets 
 
41. Debt market development is also dependent on development of related markets 
viz. money markets, repo markets and derivatives markets as these markets provide 
funding avenues and risk management tools. Reserve Bank made conscious efforts to 
develop an efficient, stable and liquid money market by creating a favourable policy 
environment through appropriate institutional changes, instruments, technologies and 
market practices. Call money market was developed into primarily an inter-bank 
market, and other market participants were encouraged to migrate towards 
collateralized segments of the market, thereby increasing overall market integrity. 
Necessary market infrastructure in form of safe trading and settlement system was 
developed. These measures enhanced the efficacy of funding markets and in turn 
improved trading in debt markets. 
 
Widening the investor base 
 
42. The countries that aim to widen investor-base and promote debt market liquidity 
look to encourage foreign investors’ participation in domestic securities markets.  FIIs, 
by being global players, can provide much needed diversity of views in the market. 
 
Page 18 of 21 
 
          However, the uncertainty and volatility attached to these investments, as seen in 
different countries during various crisis leads to concerns on capital flows. 
Accordingly, in India, FII investment in debt securities is restricted (subject to an 
overall cap) and the same is reviewed from time to time. The policy is oriented 
towards providing calibrated access keeping in view the potential benefits as well as 
possible effects of sudden exit of investors on capital flow and on market volatility. 
 
Regulator of debt markets 
 
43. The role of the regulator in is to address systemic stability issues and also 
support market development through regulation and supervision. Asymmetries in 
information (and also expertise, resources and power) between market participants, 
and the externalities stemming from the failure of financial agents to live up to their 
contractual obligations create a need for public regulation and supervision of markets 
and financial institutions. The issue of information asymmetry can be addressed 
through stipulating accounting and disclosure standards as well as regulatory 
reporting system. Emphasis of regulatory intervention lies in correcting market failures 
and dealing with externalities and distortions that prevent financial markets from 
developing. The key tasks for the regulator are development of an early warning 
system to detect systemic weakness and creation of a robust regulatory/supervisory 
framework. While it is desirable to allow market participants to trade and express their 
views, it is imperative to remain focused on financial stability needs.  
 
44. In India, the Reserve Bank of India, as regulator of government bond market, 
has followed a calibrated approach. Leverage in repo markets is managed by not 
allowing resale of repoed security by the lender of funds. Intraday short selling in G-
Sec, which was permitted in 2006, was extended to five days in 2007 and upto three 
months in 2011. Activity in short selling is restricted to banks and PDs. Further, 
participant-level quantitative limits have also been prescribed on the amounts that can 
be short sold to obviate risk of ‘squeeze’ in the securities and to cap the overall risk in 
the market. Short-sale positions are reported and monitored to ensure that the risk is 
limited. The Reserve Bank follows a dynamic approach to regulation and review the 
limits based on the development of the markets and risk management capabilities of 
the market participants. 
 
45. There is a need to ensure that disclosure standards embody the right incentives 
for all concerned and there is coordinated adoption of such standards. For instance, 
Reserve Bank of India has amended the repo accounting guidelines to reflect 
economic essence of the transaction, i.e., borrowing and lending of funds and avoid 
pitfalls like ‘Repo 105’ of Lehman Brothers.  
 
46. The rationale for the regulatory framework for debt market is to have oversight 
over the securities markets and its professional participants so as to promote public 
confidence in securities and debt markets, provide basic investor protection (protect 
 
Page 19 of 21 
 investors from fraud and manipulation) essential for creation of fair, efficient and 
orderly markets, protect the stability of the financial system by preventing failures in 
the market. The focus needs to be on market integrity and transparency. The need of 
the hour therefore is “right” regulation and not “less” or “more” regulation. In the 
context of recent developments following the global financial crisis, it is imperative that 
the regulator strikes a balance between financial innovation and systemic stability. 
Complex financial products need to be evaluated in relation to their usefulness to 
sustainable market development. For example, in Indian context, the innovation in 
government bond trading through a screen-based anonymous order matching system 
(NDS-OM) has been dovetailed under a Straight Through Process (STP) to the CCP 
(i.e. the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd) for mandated guaranteed settlement. 
 
47. Reserve Bank has enabled a regulatory reporting structure which enhances 
transparency and improves disclosure. Nearly all the transactions in debt and 
derivatives in fixed income markets and money markets are reported. The market 
participants are regulated entities and this imposes market discipline. It has entrusted 
the market body, the Fixed Income Money Market and Derivatives Association of India 
(FIMMDA), with quasi-SRO responsibilities relating to formulation of model code of 
conduct for market participants, accreditation of brokers in the OTC interest rate 
derivatives market and also in arbitration between the market participants. 
 
 
Concluding remarks 
 
48. Importance of debt markets to the economy and the critical role state, meaning 
both the government and the central bank, plays in developing these markets are now 
well appreciated. In its three roles: as issuer, developer and regulator, state could 
influence the trajectory of progress of the debt markets. Investors’ confidence in the 
quality, safety and integrity of the public debt management is the pre-condition for the 
development of the Government bonds market and credible DMS is one of the 
important factors that create this confidence. DMS, however, should follow some 
intuitive guidelines, especially in order to improve depth and breadth of the 
government bonds market and these guidelines should favour cost minimization over 
medium term subject to prudent degree of risk, a stable mix of borrowings in domestic 
and foreign currency, issuance of variety of instruments (fixed rate bonds, floating rate 
bonds, inflation indexed bonds, bonds with call and put options, etc.) to cater to 
investors’ interest and active consolidation of outstanding securities through buybacks 
and switching operations for enhancing liquidity in the market. Benchmark yield curve 
which serves as the risk-free rate for the pricing of other securities needs to be 
developed. For developing a credible yield curve, a programme of regular issues at 
the appropriate maturities needs to be devised.  
 
49. Institutional arrangements for sovereign debt management play an important 
role in the debt market. Cross country experience in this regard shows that there is no 
 
Page 20 of 21 
 international best practice and the adoption of any particular model could depend on 
country specific circumstances. Debt management is much more than a mere 
resource raising exercise, especially in a developing or emerging country. As the size 
and dynamics of government market borrowing has a much wider influence financial 
markets, an autonomous DMO, driven by narrow mandate of exclusive focus on cost 
effective debt management alone, may not be able to manage this complex task. 
Given the large size of the market borrowings in many countries, there may be a 
confluence of interest between monetary policy and debt management, as is the case 
in India.   
 
50. The prerequisites for a developed and efficient debt market would include 
effective legal and tax systems, institutional framework and a free & fair financial 
system with competing intermediaries and adequate infrastructure. Legal framework 
for empowering government to borrow, the debt management framework for 
enforcement of creditor's rights, rules governing issuance of government securities 
and secondary market trading are essential for safe and sound bond markets. 
Institutional framework would include building up of various institutions viz., regulator, 
primary dealers (PDs) and other market makers, central counter parties (CCPs), etc. 
Establishing efficient and safe market infrastructure to facilitate issuance and trading 
of government securities, clearing and settlement of Government securities and 
corporate bonds including central depository is equally critical for development of the 
bonds market.  
 
51. State as the regulator has to address systemic stability issues and also support 
market development through regulation and supervision. Regulation needs to focus on 
correcting market failures and dealing with externalities and distortions that prevent 
financial markets from developing by striking a balance between financial innovation 
and systemic stability. The regulator’s role assumes importance in developing an early 
warning system to detect any weakness in financial system and creation of a robust 
regulatory/supervisory framework to deal with such weaknesses. 
 
52. I hope the above exposition  primarily based on Indian experience on role of 
state in developing debt market, particularly the government bond market, would 
provide some useful learning points for emerging countries like Qatar. I once again 
thank the Qatar Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund for giving me this 
opportunity of sharing our experience with such a distinguished audience. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Page 21 of 21 
 