Fiscal Reforms at State-
I must compliment the organisers of this conclave for choosing a subject of
vital importance to our economy and society and, making excellent arrangements for
a comprehensive but focussed discussion. This is a good opportunity to present
Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) perspectives on fiscal reforms at State level.  The
presentation is divided into five parts, viz. role of RBI in the State finances; review of
fiscal reform effort; changing role of State Governments; impact of financial sector
reform on State finance; and prospects for and issues in fiscal improvement.
RBI has been the only authentic source of regular information and analysis of
State finances on a consolidated and annual basis. These  reports are published by
RBI and are widely circulated.
Since 1997, RBI had convened seven conferences of State Finance Secretaries,
which was also attended by senior officials of central government and Planning
Commission.  The Conferences have provided a forum for several initiatives by State
Finance Secretaries for which RBI provided professional inputs.  A report on 
Level Guarantees was generated which enabled several States to bring about
legislation imposing a ceiling on State level guarantees while some other States are
considering such a legislation.  A Core Group on Disclosure Norms for State Budgets
helped improve the design and coverage of budget related documents in several
States.  Many States recently adopted economic and functional classification of
budgets with the assistance of RBI.  A study on Public Account was sponsored by
RBI at the request of State Finance Secretaries which was discussed in the latest
Conference.  State Governments interactions with credit rating agencies and with
Transparency  were also facilitated by RBI.  In fact, several
initiatives with State Governments were made possible with the  RBI’s role as banker,
debt-manager and adviser.
Thus, as banker, RBI has been assisting States in improved cash management
to maximise returns on deployment of temporary surpluses. The Ways and Means
Arrangement was reviewed and a new system was introduced in 1998 in consultation
with States. Arrangements have been made for electronic exchange of information
between Central Accounts Section, Nagpur and individual States on daily
As debt-manager, RBI had devised a scheme for Consolidated Sinking Fund.
Seven States have since set up such a Fund while several others have expressed
interest.  Flexibility has been provided to State Governments, since 1998-99 to
directly access the market for borrowings between 5 to 35 per cent of their gross
borrowing programme.  Seven States have already raised funds through this route and
As adviser on a variety of issues, RBI has been active in matters impinging on
fiscal matters relevant to States.  Thus, RBI participated in formulating a scheme for
management of the Calamity Relief Fund .  Help on technical issues was rendered on
the proposed Legislation on Fiscal Responsibility by .  RBI’s analysis of State
finances has been used extensively by the Eleventh Finance Commission, which has
State
Centre
these States appear to have obtained finer terms than otherwise.
transactions.
Advisory Group on Fiscal 
Role of RBI in State Finances
Mr. Chairman and friends,
Review and Prospects *
level :acknowledged the RBI’s contribution.  In fact, RBI is represented in the Advisory
Panel on Fiscal- Monetary Policies set up by the National Commission to Review the
A reading of St ate budgets and speeches of Finance Ministers for the year
2000-01 helps in understanding the broad directions of the reform effort, though the
measures announced do vary from State to State.
The budgets of the States for 2000-01 contain proposals relatin g to new tax
and non-tax measures aimed at strengthening the revenue base, and expenditure
management measures to arrest the growth in current expenditures. The finances of
States during 2000-01 are budgeted to record an improvement over the deterioration
experienced during 1999-2000.  The Gross Fiscal Deficit (GFD) of the 26 States as a
ratio to GDP is budgeted at 4.1 per cent in 2000-01, as compared to 3.9 per cent
budgeted in 1999-2000 and the revised estimates of 4.9 per cent. The States’ own
taxes are budgeted to record a buoyant rise of 18.9 per cent, with sales tax receipts
expected to record a 19.6 per cent increase.  Consequently, the States’ own resources
are expected to finance 54.1 per cent of the revenue expenditure, as compared with
49.8 per cent in 1999-2000.
Complementing the efforts of States’ to augment their own resources, the
Centre in the form of devolution of taxes is anticipated to be of
a higher  order.  The shareable  taxes  are  estimated to show a rise of 4.3 per cent as
The expenditure control measures initiated by the State Governments are
reflected in the deceleration in both revenue and capital expenditures.  However, the
imbalance in the composition of expenditures would continue, with non-
developmental components recording a growth of 13.9 per cent in 2000-01 on top of
the growth of 27. 4 per cent in 1999-2000.  The rise in the non-developmental
component is predominantly due to committed expenditures viz., interest payments,
The important policy initiatives towards reform as culled out from the Budget
Speeches of the State Government Budgets for 2000-01 may be classified broadly into
Fiscal consolidation measures proposed in the State budgets explore ways of
moderation of expenditure and revenue augmentation.  Some States have proposed the
setting up of Expenditure Reforms Committees.  A few States have identified
performance indicators to assess the quality of expenditure restructuring.  States have
also initiated measures for reduction in non-merit subsidies, better targeting of
subsidies and reduction of non-productive expenditures as part of expenditure
management.  Fiscal restructuring measures through downsizing the Government,
have also been proposed.  With regard to revenue augmentation, the budget proposals
include enhancement and restructuring of sales tax, land revenue rates, vehicle tax,
betting tax, introduction of professional tax, etc.  The State Governments have
through a landmark agreement, decided to implement a harmonized floor rate of sales
The institut ional reforms proposed in the State budgets also support the fiscal
consolidation process.  Many States have announced ways of reducing the cost of
administration by proposing a freeze on fresh recruitment as well as reviewing
manpower requirements.  Some States have adopted decentralisation as the main
sectoral reforms.2
tax, as a prelude to the introduction of a uniform Value Added Tax (VAT).
fiscal consolidation, institutional, and 
administrative services, and pensions.
compared with the growth of 12.8 per cent in the previous year.
resource flow from the 
Review of Efforts towards Fiscal Reform
Working of the Constitution.policy plank through which expenditure moderation is sought while a few are
attempting contract-employment.  In order to strengthen the administrative
machinery, States have also proposed the computerization of their
The financial health and management of State level public sector undertakings
have been a cause for concern in the last few years.  To address this issue, proposals
for financial and managerial restructuring include setting up of Board and a
comprehensive review of the functioning of the State Public Sector Undertakings,
which includes closing down of non-viable undertakings, after providing suitable
safety nets to the employees and offering voluntary retirement schemes (VRS).  Some
Sectoral reforms are varied and include commissioning Software Technology
Parks or setting up Hi-Tech City, or Export Promotion Industrial Parks.  In the
agricultural sector, initiatives include strengthening horticulture, floriculture, animal
husbandry, farm mechanization, expanding irrigation and wasteland development.
Industry status is proposed for agriculture.  Environmental protection is another
important agenda for action proposed by the State Budgets consisting of “Green Goa
Fund” and a ‘plastic containment fund’ through a cess on industries using plastic
Power sector reforms receive a major thrust in the reform agenda of the State
Budgets.  Some States have outlined initiatives aimed at restructuring of the power
sector through measures relating to private sector entry into power generation;
reorganization of power monoliths into separate corporations for generation,
transmission and distribution; privatization of assets; and most importantly, statutory
To sum up, there is a widespread realisation about the need for fiscal
stabilisation and reform.  Each State has devised its own measures but most of these
have a common thread of reform of public enterprises, reduction in subsidies,
expenditure containment and revenue augmentation.  There are, however, severe
limitations in regard to the adjustment effort in view of the large magnitudes of
The changing role of State Governments on account of the reform may be
analysed in terms of the vertical balance between Centre and States, horizontal inter-
As the reforms progress, it appears that the relative balance between Centre
and States tends to tilt in 
First, the most important areas for the Central Government’s responsibilities
are in international trade, financial sector, telecommunications, aviation, and
especially banking and corporate law/practices.  In most of these areas, factors such as
multilateral agreements (say, WTO), globalisation, and recommended best practices
of the world, tend to circumscribe, over a period, the discretionary power available in
normal times to Central Government.
Second, the capacity of the Centre to reach tax levels as well as tax regimes,
very different from international practices (customs, excise, corporate or income tax)
also tends to get constrained, over a period, since the free and rapid flow of
commodities, skills and finances among the countries would require us to be not too
much out of alignment.
records/departments.3
favour of States for a number of reasons.
State imbalances and balance within State Governments.
Changing Role of State Governments
committed expenditures viz. salaries, pensions and interest charges.
steps for establishment of regulatory/tariff authorities.
packing material and plastic mineral water bottles.
of the States propose to set up Infrastructure Development/Investment Funds.Third, major thrust-areas needing expansion of Government are in physical
infrastructure such as road, waterworks, power, antisocial infrastructure, such as,
schools and hospitals. Whether it is direct or indirect intervention, the regime that
governs funding and provision in these areas is to be determined by State
Governments. Thus, relative to the Centre, States are currently in the expansionary
module in the State-market optimal mix. State Governments currently have more
freedom to access resources for financing economic growth from the market both
from domestic and in some ways, global sources. Hence, the proportion of net official
flows from Centre to State as a proportion of total capital flows to States tend to get
reduced.
Fourth, States could also seek advice on growth strategies not only from
Planning Commission as in the past, but also from institutions like Asian
The balance, especially, economic balance among States is also likely to be
affected to the extent the overall Governments’ role in allocation of resources tilts in
favour of markets.  Thus, first States will be competing more intensely than before, in
market place for resources in future and, States may find it somewhat difficult to
Second, with growth in communications, especially on economic and financial
issues, people will tend to benchmark economic performance of States.  There may be
a slow beginning but the momentum could pick up, as evidenced by varying
capacities (both in terms of amounts and interest rates) to raise financial resources for
Third, there are a variet y of options for managing change, which are adopted
by different States.  For example, a single Electricity Board for each State was an
earlier model for all States, while now each State is looking at its own model of
combination of institutional arrangements as well as transition path.  There are plenty
of opportunities to learn from each other’s experiences and make modifications.
Thus, inter-State interaction tends to be more intensive, by themselves or through
institutional consultants, who may be interacting with several States.
Fourth, there is in this decentralised scenario, a potential for increasing the
divergence in levels of income among States or even intra-State.  To this extent, there
may be pressure from less developed States on the Centre to play a more active role in
countering market’s possible neglect of less developed States.
Fifth, there could be competition among States to benchmark, perform and
The balance between t he Ministries representing the combination of political
executive and Government bureaucracies vis-à-vis exercise of ownership functions as
well as regulatory functions may also change somewhat adverse to Ministries.  The
process of privatisation, diversified ownership and autonomy of public enterprises
may erode the discretionary element of the Ministries.  Once separate regulatory
bodies on statutory basis are established and strengthened, they are meant to be semi-
autonomous.  Often, their membership need not coincide with political cycles and
thus may impart greater stability to regulatory regime.  Increasing role of semi-
autonomous regulatory bodies tilt the balance away from the Ministries and in favour
Furthermore, experience at State level in some areas has shown that the
preferred route to enlarging the role of, and efficiency in functioning of Government
is decentralisation in Government.  For example, in primary schools or water
management, the approach in some State seems to be through decentralisation or
excel 4
of more stable policies.
but, the new balance will have to ensure healthy competition.
State level public enterprises, on the basis of their guarantees.
Centre for their relative performance. place a significant responsibility on the 
Development Bank or the World Bank.localised water management users’ committees or village panchayats.  This may also
involve emerging new balances between Ministries or departments at State
headquarters and local bodies, in 
While re gulatory framework would be critical for development of physical
infrastructure, social infrastructure would require significant Government funding.
No doubt, the traditional water tight division between Government or public and
private sector each combining within itself funding and provision may get blurred and
larger scope realised for intermingling of the two.  Such intermingling may involve
non-Governmental organisation as well as local initiatives.  These are in a nascent
stage but evolution of new balances between public and private sectors is on the
horizon.  Funding and provision of social infrastructure will, however, remain the
In brief, the major focus of economic reform in India has to be State s.  Second,
the inter-State issue will have to be the major concern of Governments.  Third, the
focus of economic-management may shift from Ministries to regulatory bodies.
Fourth, the major thrust of reform is to expand what may be called social
infrastructure especially drinking water, health and sanitation, elementary schools,
roads etc. all of which require large public funding and scope for private funding is
extremely limited in the short run – especially among poorer regions.  Fifth, the
objectives of reform can be attained by fiscal reorientation towards larger
responsibilities for States to provide public goods and social services, including anti-
poverty programmes, with concomitant rollback of fiscal activism in commercial
The financial sector reforms encompassing RBI’s funding of fiscal deficit,
deregulation of interest rates, regulation of banks and credit delivery through banks
 The introduction in 1997 of Ways and Means Advance system in respect of
the Government of India also implies that the RBI now considers the extent of
monetisation at its discretion, taking into account internal debt management
policy objectives.  In a sense this imposes limitations, if not a precise limit, on
 Combined with automatic monetisation of budget deficits, RBI’s contributions
to financial institutions also caused significant increases in primary or reserve
money.  This practice has been gradually discontinued in recent years on the
ground that in a liberalised environment, financial institutions should expand
the avenues of raising resources from the market and to the extent certain
activities require cross- subsidisation, it should rightfully be the primary
responsibility of the Government of India. Thus, while discontinuing RBI’s
support to financial institutions, net transfer of profits of the RBI as dividend
 Interest rates have been deregulated to a significant degree not only to
facilitate more effective monetary policy, but also because the administered
interest rate regime proved to be inefficient and costly, without necessarily
ensuring flow of credit to the deprived.  The RBI’s recommended approach,
however, does not preclude subsidisation by the Government but, it 
in-principle excessive use of banking system to cross subsidise especially as
credit seepages are not controllable. RBI favours a financial system that
favour of the latter.5
disfavours
(iii)
has increased.
(ii)
expansionary fiscal policy to fund expenditures.
(i)
have a bearing on the fiscal management at the State level.
Impact of Financial Sector Reform
activities.
primary responsibility of States for a long time.provides incentives to encourage flow of credit and at the same time ensuring
servicing of interest and principal, i.e., bankability of schemes.  Thus, the RBI
has introduced modified interest rate prescriptions, providing  
in the case of small borrowers to size of credit limits, rather than to specified
sectors or groups of borrowers.
 There are two issues relating to credit delivery on which the RBI’s initiative is
sought, namely, regional dimension and rural-urban divide.  The regional
variations or inter-State disparities in credit-deposit ratio existed in the past
and continue to persist in the post-reform period also.  The variations may be
less pronounced in some cases if ratio of credit plus investments to deposits is
taken into consideration.  RBI has been sensitising banks to ensure flow of
credit to all States, while at the same time, urging State Governments to create
enabling environment for flow of credit. Progressively, the instruments
available with the RBI to ‘direct’ credit are less in a deregulated environment,
especially since financial intermediation through non-banks including mutual
funds and NBFCs, is justifiably expanding.  In fact, unequal distribution of
burden of social obligations between banks and non-banks could undermine
Similarly, on the rural-urban divide in flow of bank resources, there are
some constraints, as mentioned above, on the policy instruments available.
The RBI, therefore, encourages local level financial intermediaries to address
this issue.  These include expanding the network of urban cooperative banks
which are also local, revitalising the Regional Rural Banks (whose banking
business in recent years is growing faster than scheduled commercial banking
activity), promoting local area banks, apart from efforts to improving the
As part of reform in the financial sector, there have been significant reductions
in statutory preemptions, under the Statutory Liquidity Ratio in respect of
banks.  The share of market of non-public sector banks in the banking system
is increasing.   There has been diversification of ownership of several large
banks.  Insurance companies are also coming under competitive pressure, and
hence there are limits to what may be termed as involuntary subscriptions to
public debt.  Under these circumstances, full subscriptions to borrowing
programme approved by Government of India in respect of some of the States
may not be possible if the banks and other market participants do not
volunteer to subscribe.  At the same time, some States which are 
perceived by financial markets do get subscriptions at more favourable rates
 Monetary and credit policy in India thus focusses increasingly on what 
and Sen call “growth mediated security” while “support-led security”, often
consisting of direct anti-poverty interventions are to be addressed mainly by
In brief, as a result of financial sector reform, there are more stringent overall limits to
fiscal expansion, impinging on both Central and State finances.  Second, the non-
bankable components of developmental activities are required to be increasingly met
by fiscal policies.  Third, the commercial components or bankable components of
development could be squarely shifted by State Government to financial sector
provided they are made commercially viable.  Fourth, the administrative, social and
economic infrastructure and overall perception of governance influences flow of
6
fiscal and other governmental activities.
Dreaze (vi)
when they exercise the limited option of approaching the market directly.
favourably
(v)
cooperative credit system as a whole.
the health of the banking system, which is vital to our economy.
(iv)
concessionalitycredit due to diversification of means of financial intermediation, deregulation and
competition.  Fifth, the perceptions of financial markets including credit rating
agencies is relevant in ensuring full subscription to approved market borrowing
programme incorporated in the State budgets.  In sum, State budgets may have to
differentiate between bankable and non-bankable segments, enable, expand and hive
off the former while focussing on efficient use of resources for non-bankable
Reserve Bank has been in close interactive mode with State Governments in
regard to fiscal matters in the recent past and has been of  mutual benefit.  There is a
clear recognition among all concerned that focus of further reform would increasingly
be at the State level.  The reforms in financial sector have implications for fiscal
management at State level and this has been fully appreciated by State Governments.
The State Governments are making valiant efforts to meet the fiscal challenges before
The overall strategy for fiscal improvement consistent with the reform agenda
three-fold.
First, commercial activities such as power, transport, water for irrigation will
have to be fully funded and operated commercially to reduce fiscal burden and also to
attract financial resources from financial sector especially banks.  To the extent 
 is deemed necessary, it should be self balancing with no burden on
either the fisc or banks. This is a valid strategy irrespective of public or mixed or
private ownership of the concerned commercial and financial entities.  This approach
Second, State Governments will have to concentrate their efforts on
institutional infrastructure especially relating to law and order and provision or
delivery of essential services such as drinking water, sanitation, primary schools and
dispensaries, etc. not only to serve the needs of the poor and the underprivileged but
also to attract resources from the financial sector for investments in physical
infrastructure and also productive activities.  Improving the delivery of services
should be the priority. Again, this approach is feasible in the current fiscal situation if
and only if the cost recovery for commercial activities is total, with self-balancing
cross- subsidisation. A word of caution is, however, necessary. To avoid seepage and
misuse of concessions, the extent of cross-
Third, in the light of the above, public investments will have to be enhanced i
There is a broad consensus on the overall strategy but, in terms of managing
the fiscal adjustment, the State Finance Secretaries have articulated several issues.
The main consensus expressed in the latest (Seventh) Conference can be 
The main fiscal problem is structural and, solutions attempted are incremental and
consequently their major pre-occupation is how to pay the each day’s bills. They
argued, that whenever fiscal adjustment is attempted, there is a cut, in non-committed
expenditure but not in non-essential one. A predominant part of the budget is
committed expenditure, especially interest, pensions, and salaries, which has no
flexibility.  As a consequence, there is often an atrophy of delivery of services in as
much as there may be hospitals manned by doctors and nurses but no medicines,
electricity or water supply. Grants to several institutions performing vital services are
often postponed or reduced on account of fiscal adjustment.  They apprehend that cuts
n7
summarised.
agriculture to accelerate gainful employment generation and poverty reduction.
subsidisation should be limited.
would also be a precondition to adopt other more compelling strategies.
subsidisation
cross
in general and financial sector reform in particular is 
them.
Prospects and Issues
programmes, and social services. components such as anti-poverty in output tend to be highly disproportional to cuts in expenditure making expenditure
cuts of non-committed items highly unproductive, thus undermining the reform
process.  Some of the Secretaries also questioned the efficacy of increasing social
expenditures on the ground that opening of new schools often meant only
appointment of new teachers who do not turn up in schools in any case.  A few felt
that efficacy of social expenditures can be improved by decentralisation while a few
others advocated contract employment of teachers instead of life-time employment.
There was virtual unanimity among the State Finance Secretaries that the structural
problems underlying fiscal situation in the States cannot be solved unless the issue of
high committed expenditures is resolved.  There was also a consensus that the fiscal
problem is not State specific but an all-India phenomenon, often a result of policies of
the Central Government such as in pay hikes and, solutions would warrant initiatives
From RBI’s point of view, there are a few issues that are being addressed in
First, the Ways and Means Arrangements and O verdraft Scheme is being
reviewed by a group of State Finance Secretaries in the light of settled
recommendations of the Vithal Committee and those which are yet to be
implemented.  The Group will finalise its report by the end of December 2000.  No
doubt, the review will address only temporary mismatches between receipts and
Second, recognising the need to ensure full subscription to approved
borrowing programme of all States , it has been decided that RBI would prepare a
technical paper on the subject, taking into account the needs of special category
States.  The role of Primary Dealers in Government Securities would also be
addressed in the paper. The paper could also consider some institutional arrangement
in the form of a State Funding Corporation as suggested in the RBI Annual Report of
1993-94, which could assist the States that happen to be reluctant, under certain
Third, there are a few States whose cash and budgetary positions have some
linkage with consortium arrangements for food credit. Such State Finance Securities
are being associated with the Committee being constituted for such as review, as
announced in Governor Jalan’s Mid-Term Review of Monetary and Credit Policy for
the year 2000-2001.
Let me conclude with an appropriate quote from the latest book from Mr. A.
Control of Public Money ) :
“Experience shows conclusively that a policy deficit, together with a vigilance
deficit, has contributed, over the years to a situation, where the fiscal
machinery has not been successful in addressing the concerns of the public.
Despite repeated efforts at improving the machinery, the institutional
recidivism has become quite common.  This, in turn, was partly due to the fact
that the reforms did not fully address the major concerns, and partly because
they were not fully implemented.  Moreover, the solutions of one era became
the problems of another era.  Measures sought to be implemented within the
executive wing of the governments were not always matched by
corresponding efforts in the external agencies, such as the audit and the
legislature.  There is a continuing need for a balanced approach towards
improvement in the operations of the executive, audit, and the legislature.
8
This is the task of future managers.”
 (Oxford University Press Premchand 
circumstances, to approach the markets individually and directly.
expenditures in State budgets, but not structural issues.
the context of fiscal reforms at State level.
by and setting an example by the Union Government.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at India States Reform Forum
9
organised by The World Bank, at New Delhi, on November 24, 2000.
* Address by Dr. Y.V. 