Recent Developments in India*
I am thankful to the organisers, especially Dr. Ramakrishnan for persuading me to
join you and share my thoughts and experiences on fiscal and monetary developments in
India.  Clearly, the main focus of the workshop is on fiscal management, and the
participants are drawn from several countries with divergent sizes, structures and stages
of development of their economies.  Therefore, in this presentation, a judicious mix is
made of general observations, experience of India and some issues on the interface
between fiscal and monetary policies.  Of course, the subject is viewed essentially from
the perspective of a central banker.  The first part provides a broad framework for
appreciating the interface between monetary and fiscal policies.  The second part relates
to India and describes the pre-reform status, the consequences, the reform measures, a
critique and the current status, concluding with outlook and features.  The third part poses
several issues that appear to be of general interest to policy makers, especially in
Framework
At the outset, it must be recognised that both fiscal and monetary policies are
essential components of overall macro-economic policy and thus cannot but share the
implying equity considerations also, a reasonable degree of price stability and a viable
balance of payments situation.  However, all these objectives may not always be in
harmony, and major concerns of each component may be different apart from the
differences in time horizon of the concerned policy focus.  For policy makers, one of the
challenges is the coordination between the fiscal and monetary policies and undoubtedly
the nature of interaction between them depends on country- specific situation.  Yet, there
are a range of issues involved in monetary and fiscal coordination which can be
addressed within a broad common framework.
In c onsidering the issues of coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, it
would be useful to clarify what constitutes fiscal policy and what monetary policy is
about.  A clear statement on this, useful for policy makers, is available in the IMF
basic objectives such as high economic growth on a sustainable basis
developing and transition economies.
Friends,
Interface : Fiscal and Monetary Policy publication “Government Budgeting and Expenditure Controls : Theory and Practice”, by
Mr. Premchand.  Thus, fiscal policy consists “of the use of taxes, government spending,
and public debt operations to influence the economic activities of the community in
desired ways and is concerned with the allocation of resources between the public and
private sectors and their use for the attainment of stability and growth”.  The use of the
term fiscal policy here is limited because, as mentioned by Mr. Premchand, it excludes
debt management which has been viewed as part of monetary policy.  The point is further
elaborated when it is stated that “Government action can be considered to be purely a
fiscal policy matter only when the effect of borrowing is neutral in terms of the
availability of money to the private sector.  Pure fiscal policy is, however, rare, because
any change in revenues and expenditures involves changes in the financing of the budget
surplus or deficit and, hence, always has an interface with monetary policy.  Management
of the debt – particularly, the composition of the instruments, the timing of their issue,
Very briefly stated, for policy purposes, the most critical link or even overlap
between the two policies relates to public debt operations and debt management.
In the academic literature, the optimal mix of monetary and fiscal policies has
been analysed with respect to different exchange rate regimes.  In the abstract academic
world of perfect capital mobility and no non-traded goods for a country with a small
share of world output, apparently the issue of an optimal mix between monetary and
fiscal policies simply does not exist. In this academic approach, fiscal policy is effective
if the exchange rate is fixed while monetary policy is effective when exchange rate is
flexible.  However, in the real world, choices are not clear for the policy makers though
At an applied level, the relationship between fiscal and monetary policies may be
analysed in the context of public debt, especially in terms of choice between bond
financing and money financing of fiscal deficit.  There has been a theoretical debate on
the subject and there is a view point that under certain specific conditions, monetisation
of government deficit may not have an adverse effect.  At the same time, it is clear that
monetisation beyond a certain level could have adverse consequences over a period. A
2
theory does provide some clues to practice.
and their duration – are aspects more closely associated with monetary policy”.distinction also needs to be made between direct monetisation and monetisation through
operations in the secondary market.
Fiscal deficit, defined to be on cash basis for this discussion, can be financed
either through bond issuance or money creation.  Bond financing entails  net placement
of government debt in financial markets, either in domestic or in foreign markets.  Money
financing, on the other hand, involves change in the monetary base arising out of changes
in net central bank credit to government and thus is a combined effect of central bank’s
Furthermore, such financing of the fiscal deficit may be non-voluntary or
voluntary.  Thus, a central bank may be obligated to extend credit to government through
what has been described as “automatic monetisation”.  Similarly Government securities
may be placed in captive market by legal stipulations, say on Provident Funds, insurance
and  banking.  Moreover, the financing of fiscal deficit may be at market determined or
market related rates or at highly concessional rates, the latter being a byproduct of non-
It should be obvious that each form of financing of fiscal deficit has its own
consequences, and does impact on monetary policy.  While reliance on domestic credit
has implications for credit availability for commercial sector, interest rates and monetary
base, reliance on foreign borrowing additionally impinges on management of external
sector.  Non-voluntary financing may also result in crowding out of the private sector.
The analytics of fiscal-monetary policy interface is thus not confined only to the quantum
of monetisation of fiscal deficit, but extends to optimal financing mix for the fiscal deficit
that stabilises inflation, interest rates and exchange rates at  levels conducive for
While monetisation of government deficit could provide primary liquidity to the
market, liquidity creation could take place through other channels also, namely; the
central bank enlarging its holding of foreign currency assets; expanding its lending to the
commercial sector; and conducting open market operations divested from the
3
government’s budgetary considerations.
macroeconomic stability.
voluntary financing.
contribution to primary issues, open market operations and clean advances.Pre-reform Status
After independence, a nd as part of planned development, the macro-economic
policy in India, as was the case in many other developing countries moved from fiscal
neutrality to fiscal activism.  Such activism meant large developmental expenditures,
much of it to finance long-gestation projects requiring long term finance.  The sovereign
was also expected to raise funds at fine rates, and understandably at below the market
rates for private sector.  A large borrowing programme with a strong preference for  low
interest rates added to the demand for increasing monetisation of fiscal deficits. 
Reserve Bank of India had to manage the effects of large scale monetisation through
preemption of commercial bank’s resources by hiking Statutory Liquidity Ratios and
Cash Reserve Ratios well beyond the limits warranted by genuine prudential
requirements, while Government also preempted resources from other captive institutions
such as provident funds, and nationalised insurance.  At one stage, well over one-half of
the total resources raised by the banking system was preempted and as much as 15-16 per
cent was impounded under the cash reserve ratio at extremely low rates of remuneration.
Under these circumstances, it became necessary to allocate credit and fix interest rates for
both deposits and credit, leading to a complex administered interest rate regime with
At the same time, as part of developmental initiatives, Reserve Bank provided
funds for development of industry, agriculture, housing, etc. through development
financial institutions.  Reserve Bank also had to ensure successful borrowing of mandated
amounts at mandated uniform interest rates, by States and Public enterprises as part of the
national planning effort.
Fiscal activism descr ibed above was expected to result in a virtuous cycle of
development.  No doubt, it served many useful purposes. However, the financial returns
to government out of its investments, either directly or through its enterprises turned out
to be far lower than the cost of debt.  Hence, while liabilities in terms of public debt were
expanding, assets created out of such borrowings failed to yield commensurate results.
Such a gap between the cost of borrowing and the return continued to widen over time. It
is this imbalance between returns and cost of borrowing that resulted in gradual
4
Consequences
complicated cross-subsidisation.
Thedeterioration into a ‘soft budget–constraint’, particularly on account of easy monetisation
and artificially low cost of debt.  Many efforts to improve financial returns of investments
made by government did not yield adequate results.  Hence, while assessing the
consequences of pre-reform status, it is essential to recognise that in all likelihood, it was
not the fiscal activism per se but the soft-budget constraint enabled by the pattern of
financing of debt coupled with persistent inadequate returns on investments that caused
In view of soft-budget constraints, the fiscal deficits persisted, and over a period,
deficits on the revenue account surfaced.  The automatic monetisation of deficits at low
interest rates mounted through recourse to issue of ad hoc treasury bills at low interest
rates at much less than half the market related rates.  The temporary mismatches between
government receipts and expenditures during the year also became larger over time, since
Preemption of a large proportion of bank deposits and an administered interest
rate regime resulted in high cost and low quality financial intermediation.   The spreads
between deposit and lending rates of commercial banks increased, while the administered
There were inadequate incentives to state governments to ensure fiscal prudence,
since the quantum and terms of borrowing were not related to fiscal promise or
performance.  Many public enterprises also tended to become beneficiaries of preemption
cern.
Monetary policy was constrained by large and persistent fiscal deficits.  Reserve Bank’s
role as a debt manager often dominated its role as monetary authority. The Reserve Bank
as regulator of commercial banks used to some extent, regulations to subserve fiscal
objectives. The market for government securities and in fact for debt segment could not
be developed since a large part of government's borrowing was financed through non-
voluntary mechanisms.  Monetisation of deficits required the Reserve Bank to seek
several rearguard actions affecting the financial system, and over a period, led to macro-
5
For the Reserve Bank, fiscal dominance became the single largest area of con
economic imbalances.
of banks’ resources and directed lending.
lending rates did not factor in credit risk.
there was no compulsion towards cash management.
macro imbalances.The impressive growth performance of the ‘eighties’ with reasonable stability
should be assessed in the light of severe macro-economic imbalances, partly attributable
to the fiscal monetary interface.  The imbalances were evident from persisting revenue
deficits, large current account deficits and weaknesses in the financial sector.  The
economy was thus vulnerable to a crisis, which in fact was triggered by the Gulf war of
1990-91.
The reform measures initiated in the nineties, which were relevant to the fiscal
First, the system of issuance of ad hoc treasury bills and automatic monetisation
was replaced with a system of Ways and Means Advances (WMA). The quantum
available to government as WMA to meet temporary mismatches between receipts and
expenditure is now annually agreed upon between Reserve Bank and Government.  The
interest rate is also agreed upon and is currently at Bank Rate.  There is a Cash and Debt
Management Group consisting of officials from the Government of India and the Reserve
Bank to coordinate cash and debt management.
Second, an increasing pro portion of the fiscal deficit of the government is being
financed by borrowings at market related rates of interest.
Third, there has been a reduction in preemptions of commercial banks’ resources
from well over one-half to about a third of their resources.  Thus, the mandatory
Fourth, the administered interest rate regime has been dismantled and there are
very few prescriptions of interest rates.  Consequently, the spread between deposit and
lending rates of banks has come down.  Furthermore, the difference between the rate at
which creditworthy corporates are able to raise debt and the rate at which the sovereign is
borrowing has also narrowed.
Fifth, Bank Rate has been activated and o pen market operations, including repo
activities have been intensified.  In the conduct of monetary policy, the emphasis now is
Sixth, a policy decision has been taken by Reserve Bank to eliminate its long term
lending operations to commercial sector and to moderate other forms of monetisation by
6
moving towards indirect instruments.
component of market financing of government borrowing has decreased.
monetary policy interface can be summarised as under :
Reform MeasuresSeventh, an appropriate legal,
institutional and technological framework has been put in place for regulation and
development of money, government securities and forex markets.  Both, the primary and
secondary segments of government securities market have exhibited more participants,
larger turnover and greater depth.
Eighth, most public enterprises have been moved out of what is described as
“approved market borrowing programme” and thus the enterprises are encouraged to
borrow from market through voluntary subscriptions.  Furthermore, States are also
encouraged to access markets on a stand-alone basis for a part of their borrowing
Ninth, transparency in most of these operations is emphasised and data are
released to market participants on all aspects of Reserve Bank’s operations, including
Finally, there have been several initiatives and measures in the fiscal arena to
containing fiscal deficit as also the revenue deficit.  Reform of public sector enterprises
 have been subject to several doubts and criticisms, and the
more important of them need to be reckoned.
First, several analysts have pointed to the puzzle in India of high fiscal deficits in
the recent years without any spillover or adverse effects of higher inflation, higher
interest rates and larger current account deficit on the external front.  It will be useful to
explore several features of the situation that could explain this puzzle.  The level of fiscal
deficit should be viewed both as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product and the
domestic private savings.  Furthermore, private investment demand has been somewhat
subdued in the recent years because corporates faced with domestic and international
competition seem to have concentrated more on capacity utilisation and productivity
increases.  There has also been a decline in the extent of monetised deficit.  It has also
been observed that a significant part of output growth in these years was on account of
the services sector, which did not require large private investments.  With liberalisation
of trade, there has been competitive pressure on prices of internationally traded goods,
7
These reform measures
Critique
has also been initiated.  Public sector banks now have the brief of diversified ownership.
those that impinge on fiscal issues.
programme.
reducing direct funding of developmental activity.especially manufactured goods, resulting in lower inflation rates.  These apart, the
government's borrowing programme was conducted with what analysts described as
‘outstanding skills’ by resorting to several new institutional arrangements and innovative
instruments but these are certainly not inexhaustible.  The current account in balance of
payments was also characterised by strong inflow of private remittances and software
exports, which moderated the trade deficit.  Clearly, as analysts point out, this
Secondly, it has been argued that the WM A and market related borrowing
programme have not imparted the sensitivity and hard budget constraint that were
expected.  Hence, it is opined that the new arrangements have had no beneficial impact
other than hiking interest costs to Government and increasing its revenue deficits.  In this
regard, it should be obvious that quite possibly the system of automatic monetisation
could have resulted in even higher deficits than were noticed, especially due to the
unprecedented political uncertainties. Furthermore, on all accounts, there is greater
sensitivity and transparency to the whole process than hitherto, and this is evidenced by
clear statements on fiscal containment incorporated in the electoral manifestos of major
political parties.  Most important, development of debt markets is critical to efficient
financial intermediation, especially for financing infrastructure and that would be
inconceivable without a vibrant market for government securities. The government
securities market also provides benchmarks for interest rates and is critical for
transmission of monetary policy, especially for use of indirect instruments. The system of
automatic monetisation and concessional finance would be difficult to reconcile with
efforts towards such vibrant markets for government securities.  It should also be noted
that a significant part of government debt is through small savings, etc. the real cost (that
is grossed for tax treatment) of which works to be out higher than the market borrowing
programme.  Above all, as brought out clearly by Professor Vivek Murthy of Indian
Institute of Management, Bangalore in a recent study on the subject, the market
orientation of government borrowing programme had a significant favourable impact on
the cost of borrowings by the corporate sector.  In other words, recourse to automatic
monetisation and concessional resources to finance fiscal deficit is some sort of a burden
or tax on the non-governmental sector. The benefits of the new framework governing
8
extraordinary constellation of factors cannot be expected to last for long.monetary-fiscal interface go well beyond the simple quantum or cost of monetisation or
market borrowing programme of government.  The proponents of consolidated balance
sheet approach to government and central bank do, sometimes, ignore the dynamics of
Thirdly, some observers argued that the Reserve Bank even in the new framework
of fiscal-monetary mix has done little either to ensure fiscal discipline or pursue
independent monetary policy.  Reserve Bank has on several occasions articulated the
implications of fiscal dominance and Governor Dr. Jalan has been quite explicit on this
subject in his recent statements on Monetary and Credit Policy.  The final decisions on
fiscal deficit are essentially the outcomes of dynamics of political economy expressed
through sovereign will of Parliament.  It is only through an accord between a government
and a central Bank that fiscal discipline can be brought about.  One of the notable
achievements of Governor Dr. Rangarajan has been in bringing about such an accord
through formal agreements to end automatic monetisation.  However, once a final
decision is taken on the fiscal deficit by the government, Reserve Bank’s endeavour is to
ensure that it is financed in a way that is least disruptive to the macro economic stability,
and is conducive to growth.  In fact, exercise of monetary policy without sensitivity to the
Current Status
Obviously, it would be inappropri ate to conclude that the reform process in this
respect is anywhere near being complete.  However, distinct improvements in macro
balance and performance can be noticed.  Thus, there is evidence of greater degree of
operational autonomy for monetary policy now than before. There is also increasing
recourse to indirect instruments of monetary policy and greater effectiveness in
transmission channels of monetary policy.  Greater flexibility in interest rates is now
noticeable,  both for government and corporate sectors.  There is a widespread awareness
of the long term implications of a large borrowing programme on fiscal sustainability and
macroeconomic stability.  Government is receiving relatively high profit transfer from the
Reserve Bank.  There are signs of a more competitive and less inefficient financial sector.
Finally, there are clear signs of developments towards deeper and dynamic financial
markets.
9
reality of fiscal dominance will be counterproductive.
financial markets and the macro economy while focussing on mere accounting aspects.The overall positive impact of the reform measures may be discerned from the
fact that India has maintained impressive growth rates during recent years, with
reasonable price stability, and stable interest and exchange rate regimes.  It must be
recognised that this overall performance has been exhibited alongwith several bouts of
adverse exogenous factors in the late nineties.  The adverse factors include, surges in
capital inflows, East-Asian crisis, sanctions imposed by U.S.A., border conflicts with a
neighbouring country, electoral uncertainties, and more recently, steep increases in oil
prices.  There is, therefore, reason to believe, that monetary-fiscal interface in India has
been improving, which is exhibited in the resilience to withstand external shocks while at
Outlook
While the policy mix and progress of reform has served the country well so far,
First, while structurally the framework for coordination between fiscal and
monetary policies has been put in place with the introduction of WMA system, fiscal
dominance is persisting.  Operational autonomy for monetary policy, critical for longer
term price stability and improved state of financial sector, demands rapid, qualitative and
sustainable fiscal adjustment.
Second, the systems and operating procedures in some of the public sector banks
and of the larger enterprises operating in financial markets may have to be reviewed and
Third, further progress in development of various segments of financial markets is
critical to enhance the policy effectiveness.  The major challenge here is to both regulate
Fourth, while pursuing with initiatives taken with State governments, the issue of
Fifth, overall progress in both fiscal and monetary fronts would critically depend
on the reform in not only publicly owned entities but also the real sector.
Major features of reform in fiscal-monetary policy interface are not significantly
different from other areas of reform in India though reform of financial sector
10
Features
separation of debt management functions from monetary authority needs to be addressed.
and develop markets without being intrusive while recognising the imperfections.
changed to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy initiatives.
the medium term outlook, however, is conditional upon several hard policy initiatives.
the same time maintaining impressive growth and macro stability.commenced early in the cycle of reform process. First, has been `ownership` of reform in
the sense, the reform is designed and detailed by expert committees such as Narasimham
Committee on financial sector and Rangarajan Committee on external sector. Second,
various steps have been taken in a gradual manner and not as a big bang. Third, a
pragmatic approach is adapted in the sense that some elements of non-change is accepted
for a while to win over opinion in favour of the desired change. Fourth, a consultative
process has been instituted; and for example, even draft guidelines or circulars of Reserve
Bank are circulated widely by putting them in the public domain before finalising.
Standing Committees with membership from market participants and academics meet
periodically to advice the Reserve Bank in financial market reforms. In the consultative
process, care is taken to ensure confidentiality on specific proposals for action, whenever
a potential for anticipatory actions is expected.
Finally, trust and coordination, especially between Government and Reserve Bank
is given a high priority.  Apart from continuous consultations on legislative, policy and
operational aspects of reform, there is a continuous dialogue in various matters of
On earlier occasions in my presentations, the developments in monetary policy
had been characterised, as three C’s, ontinuity, ontext and hange.  In the context of
monetary-fiscal interface, three more Cs need to be added, namely, 
It is inappropriate to draw any general lessons from the Indian experience, since,
as mentioned early in the presentation, monetary-fiscal policy interface, like most other
policies is country specific.  However, in this regard, there seems to be merit in clarifying
some broad issues, which are often debated and sometimes misunderstood.  These issues
are : How are monetary and fiscal impacts of debt policy different?  How do actions of
monetary authority affect management of public debt, and how does management of
public debt affect conduct of monetary policy?  What are the various aspects of
11
coordination between monetary and fiscal actions?
Issues
redibility. C onsistency and C
oordination, C
C C C
technical analysis and research between Ministry of Finance and Reserve Bank.As mentioned alread y, there is no ideal level of fiscal deficit, and critical factors
are : How is it financed and what is it used for?  However, the fact remains that it is the
fiscal policy that determines the size of debt and government debt is the most critical
though not the only link with monetary policy.  While the size of public debt is
determined by fiscal policy, the composition of debt is decided by debt management
policy.  The monetary impact depends on who holds the debt and how the holding
changes rather than by who initially issues or subscribes to the debt.  The fiscal effect
depends on the rate at which the size of debt is changing and the cost of servicing the
debt.  The monetary effect is determined by the effect of public debt on aggregate
The actions of monetary authority affect public debt mainly in two ways.  The
initial financial cost to government of placing debt depends, to some extent on the stance
of monetary policy, i.e. whether expansionary or restrictive.  The choice, design and
operation of monetary policy instruments also impact the debt service costs.  For
example, liquidity of government securities may be enhanced by monetary authority
The management o f public debt affects the conduct of monetary policy, especially
the operational autonomy of the central bank in at least three different ways.   The
perceived sustainability of public debt often affects interest rates.  The public debt
management affects the demand for money.  Above all, the management of public debt,
in countries like India, plays a critical role in development of domestic financial markets
In vi ew of the complex nature of interface, coordination between fiscal and
monetary policies has to be considered from several angles.  As mentioned at the very
outset of this presentation, both are aspects of shared overall macro-economic policy
objectives.  Hence, at the first level, the question is whether the relevant fiscal-monetary
policy mix is conducive to the macro objectives.  The relevant policy mix relates to the
12
through open market operations and reserve requirements.Interactions in Management
Co-ordination
and thus on conduct of monetary policy, especially for effective transmission.
demand.
Impact of Debt Policylevel of fiscal deficit, the pattern of financing especially the extent of monetisation and
Secondly, whether operating procedures of monetary and fiscal authorities,
especially debt and cash management are consistent and mutually reinforcing.  The
interactions between operations of monetary authority and public debt management
Thirdly, whether credibility of both monetary and fiscal policies is achieved in a
desirable direction.  Thus, a credible monetary policy can help moderate interest rates
Fourthly, whether due cognizance has been taken of the fact that monetary and
fiscal policy adjustments operate in different timeframes.  Monetary policy as is well
known, can be adjusted to alter monetary conditions at a shorter notice than fiscal policy.
Monetary policy changes can be undertaken at any time, unlike fiscal policy changes
Finally, harmonious implementation of policies may require that one policy is not
unduly burdening the other for too long.  Mutual respect and reinforcement is
 Presentation by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, at “Workshop on Budgeting
and Financial Management in the Public Sector”, in John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard
13
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A. on August 10, 2000.
*
undoubtedly the ideal to which both policies and authorities should subscribe.
most of which are generally associated with the Annual Budget.
provided the fiscal authority does not give rise to a different set of expectations.
described earlier in this part of the presentation are obviously relevant.
the dependence on external savings.