Changing Role of RBI: Agenda for Attention *
I am grateful to the organisers of the Madon Memorial Lecture for inviting me to deliver this
Lecture.  That the contributions of Shri B.F. Madon are of lasting value is evident from the fact
that although, over seventy years have elapsed since he passed away, lectures in his memory are
organised, and the response is still overwhelming.  There are several reasons why I feel
especially elated at my association with this lecture series.  First, Madon revealed a strong
preference to reflect on the problems of the exchange rate and currency issues in his celebrated
paper and two books.  I hardly need reveal my keen interest in this subject. Secondly, he had a
penchant for  public opinion, and as an eminent publicist  published several articles, somewhat
similar to my weakness for public lectures.  Thirdly, for understandable reasons, about half of the
Madon Memorial Lectures were delivered by those closely associated with the Reserve Bank of
India, the first by Mr. H.V.R. Iyengar and the latest, the seventeenth by Dr. C. 
Fourthly, apart from my Gurus Dr. C. Rangarajan and Mr. M. Narasimham, I have close
association with several of those who delivered these lectures, such as Dr. V.K.R.V. Rao, Dr.
I.G. Patel, and  Mr.Moeen A. Quereshi. I feel a sense of awe considering that the lecture series
includes a galaxy of stalwarts such as Messrs.  , , ,
 and  Bhagwati and I am emboldened to suggest to the , that the
lectures provide a panoramic but insightful view of deep thinking on critical issues of economic
policy in India since 1961, and hence a collection of these lectures could be brought out as a
volume in this millennium year, with an appropriate overview. I trust my friend Mr. 
would volunteer to work on this project and for my part I would be delighted to assist the
Today’s subject essentially addresses the changing role of the Reserve Bank of India.  Since I am
on the verge of entering the final year of my  term as Deputy Governor, there is a strong
temptation to be retrospective and narrate what has been done and what could not be.  But, I
realise that apart from myself, many others have already commented on these events. So, the
focus of today's  talk is mainly prospective and I would freely address unsettled issues, emerging
challenges, cognisable dilemmas, contingencies on the horizon, unfolding scenarios, and so on.
It would be presumptuous  to attempt to provide  vision for the RBI or a list of issues at the
frontiers and surely unwise to suggest a specific set of actions for  future policy. Yet, I feel that
this is about the time I should share with you, and place on record for the benefit of my younger
colleagues in the RBI and Government, my random thoughts on what may be called an Agenda
for Attention , in regard to the changing role of the RBI in the context of  liberalisation and
The three important questions that often trouble central bankers are: What is money?
How to measure money? Does money matter? The answer varies from country to country and, of
course over time.  To meet these dynamics, RBI had set up three working groups on money
supply and the latest submitted its report in 1998.  The report of the third group has slightly
redefined money, added credit and liquidity measures, and concluded that money still matters
Monetary Policy Functions
globalisation.
organisers if they wish to pursue this idea.
Jhaveri
organisers Jagdish B.K.Nehru
L.K.Jha C.D.Deshmukh Mudaliar Ramaswami
Rangarajan.
Mr. Chairman and friends,though not in the same way or to the same extent as before.  It is observed that spread of credit
cards, innovations in financial instruments and onset of E-Commerce have been far more rapid
than envisaged by the Group and so, a fourth Working Group may need to be set up sooner than
most of us would consider appropriate. Monetary policy in India, in the pre-reform period
had to contend with a multitude of objectives prescribed as part of planning strategies for growth
and societal concerns.  The high level of automatic monetisation of the fiscal deficits and
Government’s market borrowings at rates of interest unrelated to market conditions coupled with
a plethora of other administered interest rates and pre-emptions of credit in the banking and
financial sectors had resulted in stunted growth of financial sector and virtual absence of a
market for financial assets.  As a result, monetary policy had to rely heavily upon direct
instruments as evidenced by high pre-emption of the banking system’s resources. An objective of
reform has been to develop an efficient and integrated financial market as a prerequisite for
switching over to indirect instruments of monetary control.  With a series of reform measures in
money, government securities and foreign exchange markets, the markets have now grown in
size, depth and activity paving the way for a flexible use of policy instruments.
The transition has been made possible through several initiatives initiated by the
Government and the RBI, in a coordinated manner.  These include deregulation of interest rates;
rationalisation of CRR and SLR, structural reforms in the real economy, phasing out of ad hoc
of  automatic monetisation and replacing it with a system of
Ways and Means Advances, activation of Bank Rate and reduction in the reliance on refinance.
Consequently, the thrust of monetary policy in recent years could include use of instruments in a
These reforms have laid a solid foundation for the RBI to respond more effectively to t
international  challenges such as the East Asian currency crisis,  sanctions and domestic
uncertainties. The measures have assisted the attainment of a respectable growth rate, reasonable
To ensure that RBI’s conduct of monetary policy continues to command  respect and
credibility, it is necessary to focus on existing constraints, emerging factors, and possible impact
on the policy in the future.
Existing Constraints
Among the existing constraints, first and foremost is fiscal dominance or high fiscal
deficits.  We have to recognise that fiscal management is essentially in the realm of political
economy and not a technical issue. Once a final decision is taken by Government on the level of
borrowings, RBI as a debt manager, has to manage it successfully.  Merely wishing the deficit
away or trying to conduct monetary policy as though deficits do not exist would be disastrous.
No doubt, the cost of fiscal deficit goes beyond managing public finances and spills over into
monetary and external sector management.  We should recognise that any further progress in
monetary and financial sector reform is clearly contingent on the progress in the magnitude and
quality of fiscal adjustment. The proposal for a Fiscal Responsibility Bill is a necessary step in
Second, the large share of publicly owned financial intermediaries, including banks and
the nature of their responses to micro-market developments currently operate as a constraint to
several policy changes. Monetary policy initiatives, have to assess market responses, but if such
a response from a large segment of the market is uncertain, policy initiatives tend to be very
cautious. Thus, the pace of further refinements in monetary policy is linked to the pace of
2
improvements in overall efficiency in the public sector banks as a whole.
this direction.
price as well as exchange rate stability.
he
more flexible and bi-directional manner.
treasury bills, eliminating the system Third, the state of development of financial markets is yet another important constraint.
While significant progress has been made in the recent past in all parameters of money and
Government securities markets, the technological infrastructure initiatives including launching of
Real Time Gross Settlement, computerisation of Public Debt Office, establishment of a Clearing
Fourth, legal and institutional infrastructure conducive to healthy financial markets is also
necessary for effective transmission of the policy. A beginning has been made on the issue of
Stamp Duty and Securities Regulation. The new  Government Securities Bill has, however,  yet
to be passed.  The Finance Minister has assured actions for amending the RBI Act and Banking
Fifth, transparency in market operations is essential for an efficient monetary policy
transmission mechanism.  This will depend a great deal on the mounting of electronic dealing
system, establishment of uniform accounting systems and evolving proper codes of conduct for
Sixth, in regard to the data availability on many fronts, be it real sector or prices, there are
issues of adequacy, timeliness and quality.  In a globalisation context, policy conducted with data
of poor quality could be very inefficient. In this context, the work of the National Statistical
 is of great interest to the RBI.
With globalisation and impact of technology, several new challenges are likely to emerge
The emergence of ‘e-money ’ or electronic devices that store monetary value in electronic
form could have perceptible implications for monetary policy.  In this regard, two inter-related
issues namely, impact on the balance sheet of the central bank and the conduct of monetary
policy have been widely discussed.  The balance sheet effect implies that extensive use of e-
money could substantially replace central bank money, i.e., currency notes in the hands of the
public.  Since currency notes form a major chunk of any central bank’s balance sheet, the
expansion of e-money would imply that the size of the balance sheet would shrink resulting in
the erosion in its capacity of conducting effective Open Market Operations (OMO).  In this
situation, large additional reserves with the banking system created in the wake of large-scale use
The rapid expansion of e-money would also pose challenges in the area of compilation of
monetary statistics and, therefore, render the monetary policy prone to operational errors.  The
issue of e-money not backed by central bank money by private issuers would also be subject to
the problem of moral hazard and would necessitate careful and extensive supervision by central
cent advances in information technology have reduced transmission lags of monetary
policy resulting in a narrowing of the distinction between the short and long run.  Thus, in the
new set up, the relationship between money, output and prices may also change, and become
relatively less predictable posing a new challenge for monetary policy.  Such has been the
experience of many other countries where, financial liberalisation made the link between
 that central banks might face would be in their role in crisis prevention
in the context of large volume and high speed transactions through complex instruments.  This
would require building of enhanced expertise to deal with  moral hazard and systemic problems
and strategies of intervention with safeguards against undue credit risk exposures.  Central banks
3
Another challenge
monetary aggregates and inflation unstable.
Re
banks.
of e-money cannot be sterilised and could pose a challenge to monetary policy.
for the fraternity  of central banks.
New Challenges
Commission
market practices.
Regulation Act to grant greater operational autonomy to the RBI and banks.
Corporation are still underway. RBI’s successful handling of these is a major expectation.will also have to monitor the growth and pace of financial innovations by the private sector that
may sometimes tend to avoid regulations.  Thus, the scope of central bank activities would have
to extend beyond the traditional realm of monetary policy to various issues that impinge on the
As the virtues of fiscal rectitude are recognised and progressive structural corrections in
our fiscal system instituted, the monetary policy, in the future, may even have to be conducted
with concurrent fiscal surpluses in the accounts of the Government.  Such a situation may need a
careful reassessment of the way that monetary policy measures would have to be implemented in
order to balance and stabilise movements in the structure of interest rates that might arise on
account of a mix of productivity changes in the economy and the presence of budgetary
surpluses.  Moreover, the creation of surpluses and the Government options to retire public debt
could have far reaching implications for the effectiveness of traditional monetary instruments.
This would be especially so, if a substantial part of such debt is held in the books of the central
The increasing degree of interdependence among economies in the world and the large
movements of capital imply that the role of monetary policy vis-à-vis the exchange rate would
have to be carefully addressed.  This would essentially require having clarity in a country’s
monetary policy framework and the building up of credibility to sustain the size and volatility of
Implications for the Future
What do these existing constraints and emerging challenges imply for the future conduct
of monetary policy. As regards objectives, while price stability and credit availability would
continue to be the main objectives, and relative weights may vary from time to time, a more
transparent articulation of relative weights may have to be sought. Furthermore, as the economy
develops, sacrifice ratios in terms of the short-run trade off between growth and price stability
With progres globalisation of the economy, the exchange rate becomes a very critical
factor in the conduct of monetary policy.  The excessive weight that may be given to popular
perceptions in regard to exchange rate as against what is warranted by compulsions of economic
factors could certainly complicate monetary management.  Creating public awareness of forex
situation and 
Greater recourse to indirect instruments is inevitable and that would require
sophistication, nimble-footed response and market savvy approach – qualities that have been
demonstrated by the RBI so far, but in a rapidly changing environment, the skills of the RBI
could be continually tested.
Of the four transmission channels, it is cle ar that the quantity variable is still valid but is
yielding place to rate variables though conditioned by the evolving status of financial markets.
The exchange rate channel will, however, emerge important and the future relevance of
In terms of operating procedures, the increasing importance of foreign currency assets in
the balance sheet of the Reserve Bank of India accompanied by greater discretion to the RBI in
the stock of domestic assets, essentially Government paper, facilitated by termination of system
of automatic , gives more control to the RBI over the size and quality of its balance
sheet. That in some senses gives operational freedom in regard to conduct of monetary policy,
4
though continued fiscal dominance will constrain such freedom.
monetisation
significance of asset price channel cannot be ignored.
forex markets would thus be an important task for the RBI.
sive 
may come down warranting greater stress on price stability.
capital flows that characterise the world financial system.
bank.
overall health of the financial system.Finally, the RBI may have to operate on liquidity even on intra-day basis, utilise banks as
major planks of policy although banks’ share in financial intermediation would be less, while at
the same time improving data systems, management information systems, market intelligence,
and understanding the global trends. It is in this context  that the recently introduced Liquidity
As the process of reform continues, the role of financial markets in the economy gets
significantly enhanced. While this process essentially involves domestic liberalisation, the
decision to open up the economy adds urgency and complexity to the process of developing
financial markets in India. The changing role and increasing responsibility of RBI has to be seen
in this context and in conjunction with development of financial markets in areas outside of RBI
More specifically, the role of the RBI in the financial markets should be assessed in the
light of the 
First, the primary interest of the RBI in financial markets is because of its criticality in
Second, the conscious effort by the RBI towards the development of efficient, stable and
healthy financial markets is important since they were repressed in several ways in the past by
law, regulation and policies. Mere lifting of  restrictions will not automatically help create
vibrant financial markets. Hence, the RBI has been and should continue to facilitate the
development of markets through legal changes, technological and institutional development and
dynamic improvements in market microstructure.
Third, regulation of some financial markets is warranted by virtue of RBI’s charter. This
relates to money market which is central to monetary policy, Government Securities market
which is significant from the point of view of developing a yield curve, forex market which is
integral to external sector management and gold markets, which have  been more recently
deregulated.  This position has been formalised with the recent amendments to the Securities
Contract Regulations Act and Government notifications thereunder giving jurisdiction to the
RBI.
Fourth, with the gradual development of sophisticated instruments and innovations in
market practices, technological infrastructure has become an indispensable part of the reform of
the financial markets.
The RBI has, therefore, to equip itself to perform its developmental and regulatory roles
effectively. The process involves constant interaction with the rest of the world in order to
identify best practices, benchmark existing practices in our markets, identify gaps and take
measures to move towards these international standards, within the framework of our unique
Secondly, coordination with other regulators within the country is important to sort out
Thirdly, it is important to constantly interact with market participants without in any way
compromising confidentiality so as to effect changes in the regulatory aspects of the markets
Fourthly, with increased liberalisation, there is also need to update information and
Fifthly, a major challenge within the RBI will be to institute arrangements to improve its
5
skills to keep pace with the speed and the skills of market participants.
market intelligence to assess the prevailing situation and take quick actions.
through consultative mechanisms.
regulatory gaps and overlaps.
country circumstances.
the transmission of monetary policy.
following :
jurisdiction but relevant to its activities, especially equity markets and insurance activities.
Financial Markets
 is a watershed in the refinement of techniques of monetary intervention. Adjustment FacilitySpecifically, in the money markets, in order to facilitate the conduct of monetary policy
and improve the efficiency of transmission mechanism, it would be necessary for the RBI to
manage the transition of switching over from direct to indirect instruments, 
preemptions not only to their statutory minimums but beyond that, developing a transparent and
liquid repo market and institution of a full fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility. Some of these
Currently, the Government securities market is an overwhelming part of the overall debt
market. Interest rates in this market provide benchmarks for the system as a whole.  In the recent
past, several initiatives have launched this market into a high growth trajectory, in terms of
depth, liquidity, turnover, participants, etc.  Several initiatives for development of this market
helped the success of a large borrowing programme in  recent years, and  far larger than
budgeted programmes were carried out successfully.  But, the benefit of innovations may not be
inexhaustible.   Recent initiatives towards retailing would hopefully provide headroom, but there
There are some conflicts in the role of the RBI as regulator and supervisor of banks
which, for example, tilts favouring short-term paper to match ALM guidelines while the RBI as
debt manager prefers to balance the maturity profile with long duration paper.  This could throw
up more conflicts in future.
The dilemmas involved in the RBI being both debt manager of Government and a
monetary authority have been chronicled extensively. At this stage, minimisation of adverse
impact of high fiscal deficit requires such a combination of roles but perseverance with the
objective of separating these two functions at the earliest viable window of opportunity would be
In the Government securities market, currently, the RBI has two roles, that of a debt
manager and a regulator. The RBI Act enjoins upon the RBI, the role of debt manager. The
future role of the RBI that is likely to emerge in the Government securities market can be
visualised in four phases. The first phase may see the RBI withdrawing from the primary market
in Government debt  with a phased cessation of  devolvement and private placements. This phase
will also see the completion of the major reforms that are currently in progress such as repo
documentation, establishment of clearing house, commencement of electronic dealing system,
etc. The second stage would relate to separation of debt management function from the RBI. As
fiscal deficit comes down, Government debt as a percentage of total debt would also come down
and the regulatory framework for the Government securities market and the corporate debt
market would converge. In this context, the RBI's regulatory oversight of banks and financial
institutions exposure to debt will have to be refocused. The final stage will involve the changed
role of the RBI in an environment of fiscal surplus, though in such  the RBI will face
In the foreign exchange market, the absence of well conceived risk management systems
in the treasury operations of end-users has constrained its healthy development. PSUs are large
players in the forex market and their internal systems are not always consistent with development
of efficient risk management approaches. The main challenge would be to evolve means of
removing such constraints. A further challenge relates to inculcating and encouraging the
practice of hedging by corporates and commercial banks, who, in their own interest ought to be
In India, there is extreme sensitivity to volatility in exchange rates and with a public
fixation and a dollar rupee rate the relative movements of exchange rates, which are routine in
6
closely monitoring their exposures.
yet another set of problems. As you see,  there is no peace for wicked creatures.
Paradise
advisable.
is a well recognised need for fiscal support in terms of tax treatment for this laudatory objective.
developments do call for adequate progress by way of legislative actions.
reducinginternational financial markets, are not clearly considered. In the circumstances, the challenge for
the RBI is to develop the forex market given these  constraints and relaxations of restrictions in
the market.
There is some enthusiasm for early integration of financial markets but currently, we
have to identify linkages. For example, the integration between call money market and forex
markets operates essentially through banks’ permissible limits on investments in overseas
markets, and options to hedge, prepay etc. in foreign currency under FCNR (B), on banks’ own
account or that of corporates. These linkages will get widened and deepened and ought to be
tracked.  Another example relates to the linkages between call money market and Government
securities market where large positions in Government securities are funded through short-term
borrowings, especially call money market. As the reforms in the financial markets progress,
linkages will improve - between the different segments of market and between domestic and
international markets. Internationally there will be increased pressure for rapidly and more
deeply integrating domestic and global markets.
External Sector Management
It is generally appreciat ed  that the RBI has distinguished itself in regard to external
sector management, whether it was meeting the balance of payment crisis in 1991, or managing
the transition to a liberalised exchange rate, unified exchange rate, current account convertibility
and capital account liberalisation.  The basic parameters set for itself in terms of current account
deficit, market-determined but non-volatile exchange rate, containing debt especially short-term,
well sequenced liberalisation of capital account, and building up as well as managing adequate
foreign exchange assets have all been met and often exceeded, despite several international and
domestic uncertainties. In all this, the Government's own actions have provided active support in
Perhaps an ideal starting point could be the replacement of the Foreign Exchange
Regulation Act (FERA) by Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) with effect from the
beginning of this month.  The philosophy of foreign exchange management has shifted from that
of conservation of foreign exchange to one of facilitating trade and payments as well as
developing financial markets.  This definitive shift in the objectives of foreign exchange
management will automatically get reflected in the operations of the Reserve Bank.  Under the
new system, all current account payments except those notified by the government are eligible
for appropriate foreign currency in respect of genuine transactions from the Authorised Dealers
without any restrictions.  The surrender requirements in respect of exports of goods and services
continue to operate.  The Reserve Bank however, would have the necessary regulatory
jurisdiction over capital account transactions.  To this extent, further action in regard to capital
On the current account, RBI will have to closely monitor the trends in imports given the
liberalised environment, the growth in exports, particularly export of services, and private inward
remittances.  Overall, the impact of possible increased investment activity in the future,
particularly in infrastructure, on the level of current account would have to be assessed. In doing
so, the fact that the combined share of exports and imports has gone up from about 13 percent of
GDP in the latter half of eighties to over 20 percent in the recent period as well as the sharp
increases in capital flows and the level of reserves could be kept in view.    In this background,
and on the assumption of sustainable level of non-volatile capital flows, the possibility of an
acceptable band of sustainable current account deficit may need to be 
7
conceptualised.
account liberalisation appears to have been put by government squarely in the court of RBI.
achieving these objectives.Similarly, the level and the composition of the capital flows would also change and the
stability of these will be impacted less by capital controls and more by the domestic policies as
well as transparency practices and standards and codes, though international factors would
As regards exchange rate management, the unfolding events with reference to fiscal
policy, financial sector, especially financial markets and International Financial Architecture
would determine the course of policy. Perhaps the biggest dilemma for RBI as for many central
Significant improvements have been made in the quality of performance of regulatory
and supervisory functions by the RBI.  Admittedly, the level of our compliance with
international practices, is one of the best among the peers.  Attention is being paid by my fellow
Deputy Governor,  Mr.S.P. Talwar  to several contemporary issues such as, relative roles of
onsite and off-site supervision, functional versus institutional regulation, relative stress on
internal management, market discipline and regulatory prescriptions, consolidated approach to
supervision, etc.  Several legislative initiatives have also been taken up with Government,
covering procedural law, debt recovery systems, Credit Information Bureau, Deposit Insurance,
Basic features
While appreciating these initiatives, it will be useful to list what may be considered as the
As we move forward in the reform, it is recognised that the regulatory and supervisory
framework in financial sector are no longer domestic concerns.  Tracking international
developments, participating and contributing to them, conforming to the extent possible to
international practices and maintaining a convincingly efficient and stable financial sector would
Second, in the light of the above, both avoidable regulatory in trusion and inadequacies in
supervision would be harmful.  The critical objectives of a supervisory system should be clear
viz., protection of depositors interests, mainly retail, enhancement of efficiency through
Third, while developments in technology would pose several challenges to banks, they
Fourth, there have been movements between public and pri vate ownership of banks in
many countries as warranted by circumstances but in all these the central bank concerned did
play a part.  The movements in ownership between public and private will have to continue to
Fifth, the effect of crisis in banking system, irrespective of status of ownership will be on
the fisc, i.e., government finances. Even if the RBI is operating as a lender of last resort the
burden is on the fisc, since in the ultimate analysis a central bank’s resources put at risk really
belong to Government.
Sixth, while persevering with improvements in prudential regulation, the sequencing and
the application of rigour cannot ignore the inevitable business cycles, though regulatory
8
forbearance has to be eschewed. This is no doubt a delicate balance.
dominate the attention of the Reserve Bank.
will continue to be special as long as they are significant for payments system.
competition, and avoidance of instability and potential systemic failure.
continue to be a priority.
basic features that would govern the RBI’s role in future.
etc.  Progress in these is critical for effectiveness of RBI in the regulatory sphere.
Regulatory and Supervisory Functions
banks would be reconciling monetary and external sector management.
continue to be critical.Seventh, the regulatory and supervisory framework has to reckon with expanding capital
flows, faster and faster movement of such flows, increasing recourse to technology for such
capital transactions, and rapid financial innovation. These make the tasks of regulator
increasingly complex. These developments would warrant a qualitative change in the nature of
relationship between the regulated and the RBI as the regulator and the relationship may be one
Eighth, there could be an emerging asymmetry between transparency practiced by market
participants and the regulator, since the latter as a public institution has to demonstrate its
accountability.  This would add to the complexities faced by the regulator.
In the light of the broad considerations described, it is possible to list the major issues
that would need the RBI’s attention in the near future.
First, whether the regulatory and supervisory functions need to be combined  as is
currently the position or whether they should be separated from other RBI functions. What is of
overriding concern is not whether regulation / supervision should be  combined or separated
from other RBI functions but how regulation/supervision is conducted.
Second is the issue of coverage of the RBI’s supervisory role, which is currently focussed
more strongly on banks, but only to some extent in the case of  non-banking financial companies
(NBFCs), especially those accepting public deposits, and to some extent, Development Financial
DFIs).  For example, there could be a separate agency for regulating NBFCs but that
Third, the broader issue of choice between mega regulator and single regulatory authority
deserves to be addressed.  In any case, the regulatory gaps and regulatory overlaps in the existing
system have been noticed and they are being resolved through informal as well as ad-hoc
arrangements.  The market participants are somewhat uncomfortable with the vagueness implied
in informal arrangements.
Fourth, there are multiple institutional structures in the financial system.  This has to be
revisited firmly in the context of the move towards universal banking.  Convergence between
banks and DFIs would be easier in future as the reserve requirements of banks are reduced. The
management of transition, especially of individual DFIs, could face hurdles, especially due to
existence of both the statutory corporations and company form of organisation in the DFIs.  In
fact, even the concept of State Financial Corporation as statutory bodies performing functions no
different from NBFCs require a review.  Quite apart from transitional problems, the
recommendation of the Narasimham Committee, namely that there be only banks and NBFCs
would need to be sooner or later faced, and my own preference is sooner than later.
Fifth, the concept of public financial institutions (PFI) appears not only anachronistic but
some of the PFIs are performing functions such as motor car financing.  The continued relevance
Sixth, while the regulatory focus should be on protection o f retail public depositors,
currently, acceptance of public deposits are governed by regulations of Department of Company
Affairs, SEBI and Reserve Bank.  In fact, the effectiveness of the monetary policy itself could be
in jeopardy if these multiple systems of regulation, including fixation of interest rates, by several
Seventh, the issue of dual regulation i.e. by RBI and State Governments concerned has
been repeatedly emphasised both in the case of urban cooperative banks and rural cooperatives.
9
agencies persists.  There is a group in RBI studying this issue.
of such special categorisation needs to be considered.
would be adding another regulator to the multiple regulators in accepting public deposits.
Institutions (
Major Issues
of greater transparency and more consultation than before.Some proposals have already been made in regard to Urban Cooperative Banks which are yet to
be resolved in the Government.  Rural cooperatives are yet another important set of credit
Eighth, in regard to public sector banks, which form the most important segment of the
banking system being owned by the government, the Reserve Bank’s regulatory thrust is always
circumscribed.  The basic issues relating to the form of organisation i.e. corporate or company;
the extent of ownership, the nature of control over management by the major shareholder, the
system of corporate governance are still subject to considerable vagueness.  In fact, this
unresolved situation is perhaps the most significant stumbling block in considering further
Ninth, it is inevitable that the Reserve Bank takes a clear-cut view, at least in regard to
Scheduled Commercial Banks, about the entry norms, the exit norms and norms for
restructuring, inclusive of amalgamation.  The problem of select weak banks in public sector and
various solutions such as an asset reconstruction fund address the current issue. In a more
dynamic sense, RBI should have necessary freedom to regulate aspects relating to entry, exit and
Tenth, the issue of conflict between owner and regulator in as much as RBI holding a
predominate share in SBI apart from NHB and NABARD need to be resolved sooner than later.
RBI’s position has already been made clear in various documents of RBI that as a regulator, it
Eleventh, in the light of Government’s statement on Exim Policy that economic zones are
to be treated as outside of the country for regulatory purposes, a view needs to be taken by the
Reserve Bank as to whether offshore banking units of scheduled commercial banks as branches
of each bank could be considered.  Such a separate regulatory prescription is possible under the
Twelfth, with rapid growth in technology, and complexities in risk analysis as well as
assessment, the regulated are racing ahead with both innovations and skills. RBI as a regulator
will have to specially equip itself to facilitate innovations and assess the prudential requirements
Finally, it is also essential to develop and sustain a well thought out fra mework for use of
ratings of credit rating agencies by the RBI for regulatory purposes.
Reserve Bank of India played a significant role in enlarging skills and institutional
capabilities in the area of credit to rural areas, to finance exports, and to industry.  Institutions
such as Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development (NABARD), National Housing Bank (NHB) and even Unit Trust of India (UTI)
are virtually offshoots of the RBI. RBI had promoted Securities Trading Corporation of India
Ltd. (STCI) and Discount and Finance House of India Ltd. (DFHI) and most of RBI’s shares in
these two institutions have already been sold.  A more recent example is Infrastructure
Development Finance Company.  RBI had been providing funds to many of these organisations
through several windows, enabled by legislative provisions and encouraged by policy-thrust in
the process of planned development.
As part of the reform, a decision has been taken, in consultation with the Government of
India that the profits transferred to the LTO funds should be directly made over to Government
which be the best arbiter of allocation for development. There are persisting expectations and
10
Developmental Function
as well as regulatory implications of market practices.
newly enacted FEMA.
would not wish to continue as owner.
restructuring including mergers or acquisitions.
changes in technology, in financial markets and even in monetary policy.
institutions languishing from ill-effects of dual regulation.demands on RBI for taking initiatives in directly financing developmental or social welfare
activities.  A clear articulation and a clear commitment to the legitimate role of RBI in the
The Reserve Bank can promote the process of accelerat ed economic growth by infusing
efficiency in financial intermediation and stability in the financial system.  It is recognised that
while growth may not be a sufficient condition for elimination of poverty, it is a necessary
condition.  In this sense, there is a convergence between the Reserve Bank’s core function of
efficiency and stability in financial sector and objectives of growth.
Second, it is possible to argue that the broader objective of the financial system’s
efficiency coupled with stability, includes, and has as its core price-stability.  As Dr. C.
Rangarajan, former Governor, Reserve Bank of India is never tired of pointing out, the best anti-
poverty programme that the RBI should concern itself with is price stability.  There is
undoubtedly a total convergence between the welfare of the poor and the core responsibility of
Thirdly, ensuring availability of credit for all productive purposes is necessary and this is
made possible through the pre-condition of efficiency and stability in the financial system.  The
safety of the interest of the depositors, the goose that lays golden eggs for the financial system,
and the meeting of social needs as well as priorities are important.  Currently, there are
institutional, structural and procedural bottlenecks for credit delivery in our country.  In
particular, the financial sector reform has provided greater avenues to corporates to raise
resources and typically these benefits have not percolated to small and medium enterprises.
There are legitimate concerns about credit availability to small and medium enterprises but
recourse to the same instruments that have harmed the financial system in the past is not
Regional spread of
banking is important, and so far only public sector banks are carrying these obligations, and this
needs to be corrected.  The instrumentality of priority sector lending has not served its purpose as
envisaged, and as articulated by my fellow Deputy Governor Mr. Jagdish Capoor, the subject
needs a thorough review – sooner than later.  Credit delivery systems should also recognise the
changing composition of Gross Domestic Product in favour of services and effective steps
should be considered to ensure flow of credit including extension of bill rediscounting to this
sector.
Fourth, the total income generated by the RBI net of its expenditures in performing all of
its legitimate functions and net of transfer to its own resources as needed for its balance sheet
purposes should legitimately go to the Government, though priority is for adequacy of reserves.
It is necessary to appreciate that prudence requires that attention is paid to the RBI  building up
adequate internal reserves to meet all possible contingencies. By ensuring efficiency and
prudence in its own balance sheet management, the RBI would serve the purpose of making
available surplus to the Government
Finally, RBI should give unstinted support to development of th e technological
infrastructure or financial structure or funding of research and training in the sector and being a
catalyst for the development of  new type of financial institutions.  To this extent, there is a
developmental function to be performed by RBI in so far as it relates to its core functions but it
It is useful to clearly enunciate the areas where the Reserve Bank should not engage itself
under the mistaken notion that it is promoting economic development in an optimal way.  Firstly,
there is always the temptation for government to seek from the RBI extra budgetary resources for
11
should not become the conduit for resources for  financial intermediaries.
appropriate.  Similarly, flow of credit to agriculture deserves attention. 
the Reserve Bank viz. price stability.
developmental sphere is perhaps warranted.programmes which should essentially be funded by the government.  There is a possibility of
RBI also being tempted to oblige, and in such a case, there is a potential for erosion of autonomy
Secondly, utilisation of RBI’s resources for funding equity in institutions such as
National Housing Bank, NABARD are not on a much different footing from lending by RBI.
Indeed, RBI should desist from continuing with its ownership functions in both commercial
banking and refinance or development finance segment.  Furthermore, some of the Reserve
Bank’s regulatory functions are being combined with the developmental functions in some of
these institutions.  As we move along the road of reform, combining such functions needs
Thirdly, there was some association of Reserve Bank with credit guarantees, particularly
through Deposit Insurance & Credit Guarantee Corporation.  The concept of credit guarantee by
a central bank in any form has proven to be wrong in theory and bad in practice.  Fortunately,
Fourthly, there has been, as part of the reform, a review of the role of selective credit
controls, direct lending and subsidisation of lending. Fortunately, selective credit controls have
virtually disappeared.  Directed lending tends to be very inefficient if there is an element of
cross-subsidisation. When there is subsidised lending, the real problem arises not only in terms
of moral hazard but also in terms of the health of the banking system.  Increasingly, banks are
recognised to be only one category of financial intermediary.  In fact, as Governor Dr. 
pointed out, the share of banking system in financial intermediation is bound to go down in the
interest of both efficiency and stability of the system.  In such a situation, utilising the banking
system for subsidisation or cross-subsidisation makes the banking system weak in relation to the
other institutional categories of financial intermediation.  As we move towards greater
liberalisation and globalisation, any damage to the health of the banking system erodes
international competitive strength of our financial sector and could impose a burden on the fisc
In brief, a clear enunciation of what Reserve Bank should not do in future may be as
important as a recognition of what it should do in the cause of development and social
Since mid-nineties, India has been gaining in importance in the global financial
community and RBI has been playing its legitimate role.  In 1996, we gained membership in the
Bank for International Settlements and we have been active in utilising the facilities and
contributing to its deliberations. The RBI has been taking an active role in the evolving process
The RBI also participated in
the preparation of G-22 Reports on International Financial Architecture.  Later, it was
represented along with G-7 countries and other emerging market members in the Group of 20,
whose objective is to encourage informal exchange of views leading to consensus on
 RBI is not only reacting to global changes but also participating in the process.  For
example, RBI is one of the select few to be represented in the consultation process of BIS on
new norms being considered for Bank’s supervision.  Similarly RBI is associated with a working
group constituted by the newly setup Financial Stability Forum.  RBI is also associated with an
international group on Settlements.  This role is expected to increase in future and RBI should be
well-equipped for the purpose. A Standing Committee on International Financial Standards and
12
International Financial Architecture and RBIof RBI.
international issues.
on the international financial architecture after the Asian crisis.
objectives.
when stability is threatened.
Jalan
there is already an agreement in principle to eschew such guarantees.
correction.Codes has been constituted in India with  joint membership of Government and the RBI.  The
main task of this Committee is to identify and monitor developments in global standards and
codes and consider its applicability to the Indian financial system. The Committee would also
help align to the extent necessary India’s practices to the international best practices.  In fact,
closer collaboration between Government of India and RBI is witnessed in several fronts and this
needs to be strengthened in future.
Balance Sheet of RBI
In the emerging scenario, there is need to accord the respect that is due to the balance
sheet of a central bank.  Fortunately, RBI has been devoting special attention to several aspects
of its balance sheet viz. avoiding contingent liabilities, building up adequate reserves thereby
regaining some control over its balance sheet and further enhancing accounting and transparency
standards.  In view of significant amounts of foreign currency assets on its portfolio and the need
to adopt internationally accepted valuation norms for all its assets, RBI should be strong enough
in its internal reserves so that it can withstand any possible adverse impact on its balance sheet.
A fear of adverse impact on its balance sheet may inhibit RBI to pursue otherwise desirable and
prudent policies and the level of its reserves should be enough to remove such fears.  RBI should
guard itself against pressures to dilute the policy framework on transfer to reserves between
Board of RBI and Government.  It will be interesting to note that as the fiscal adjustment
Finally, the balance sheet of
the RBI can command credibility as well as effectiveness in its policy interventions, domestically
as well as internationally; when among other things it has sufficient autonomy and control over
its balance sheet.
In conclu sion, I believe that the RBI has continued to acquit itself well in discharging its
functions during the reform period.  It has deservedly gained importance, credibility and respect.
It is currently well equipped in terms of technical skills to meet domestic and international
It must be recognised that close understanding between the RBI and Government was
instrumental in bringing about structural reform and meeting crisis-like situations during the
recent years. In particular, RBI has been providing analytical inputs in policy making in so far as
financial sector is concerned. This approach should be carried forward while respecting the need
Another significant recent achievement of RBI is the close links it developed with State
Governments - as banker, as debt manager and as policy adviser, and keeping up this momentum
There has been a notable change in the work practices and approaches to policy making
as well as problem solving. These include constant review of international experience, working
group approach and multi-disciplinary and multi-departmental  standing committees to aid
Finally, there is great merit in devoting urgent and serious attention to three aspects.
First, there should be deliberate efforts to continuously upgrade skills on a more
Second, whether, as a regulator or in performing other functions such as banker to
Government or issuer of currency, there is significant interaction with users.  With interest
shown by Governor Dr. Jalan, there has been discernible impact but some more drastic changes
13
in attitudes and procedures may be necessary.
extensive scale.  For this purpose, both, facilities as well as incentives would be needed.
decision making. The gains from this approach are evident and should be carried forward.
is desirable.
for RBI's autonomy in conducting its monetary operations.
challenges.
Conclusion
progresses and succeeds the potential for RBI’s profits decreases.Third, the work practices including placement, deployment, redeployment etc. need to be
visited and thoroughly revamped to bring them in alignment with demands of a rapidly
modernising financial sector.
In all these areas, it would be worthwhile for an immediate examination and consensus
for moving forward.
Let me once again thank the organisers for giving me this opportunity to freely set 
my random thoughts on changes in the RBI’s role in future.
* 18 B.F. Madon memorial Lecture delivered by Dr. Y.V. Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India,
14
, 2000. th13th
Dr.Reddy is grateful to several professionals in the RBI for their immense help.
organised by the IMC Economic Research and Training Foundation at Indian Merchants Chamber, Mumbai, on June
out