• •
me an opportunity to be at home in Osmania University today.  My association with the
University is forty years old, a long time indeed, and in several capacities, as a research
Dr. Nagaraj was my senior colleague and we had many things in common,
including Bellary-connections.  Dr. Nagaraj had zest for life, affection for all and was
charming to everyone.  He had a sharp wit and impressive articulation befitting the most
popular teacher of economics.  Dr. Nagaraj always had inquisitiveness that I admired.
Appropriately, the subject of today’s address is a somewhat recent phenomenon in our
country viz. credit rating.  This is a subject relevant not only to students of economics,
management and commerce but also to millions of savers and scores of borrowers.  Of
course, it has contemporary policy significance, since Reserve Bank of India (RBI) is
emphasising development of debt markets, for which credible ratings are vital.  Well-
understood and efficient debt markets are critical at this stage of our economic progress.
Large financing requirements of physical infrastructure need them. One of the lessons to
I will give an overview of credit rating, and agencies involved in such rating, both
domestic and international.  The benefits expected and criticisms levelled will also be
recalled.  The main focus of the address would be the issues relating to sovereign rating
Bank of India’s direct concern, the subject has to be viewed in terms of sovereign rating
of India, rating of States in India and the use of rating in regulating financial institutions
Commercial Paper (CP); this in no way detracts from the importance of rating for
corporates.  It must be noted that the emphasis here is on the use of rating in the
which is entirely in the jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Credit, in simple terms signifies lending with corresponding borrowing and a
process of repayment, usually at an agreed rate of interest.  In the distant past, credit was
essentially to finance seasonal agricultural operations, and hence highly localised.  It
localised when it financed trade.  With the growth of industry and increased
capital-intensity of production-process, banks became significant players in the business
of credit, accepting deposits from savers and advancing loans to industry or corporates.
However, in the evolution of financial markets, an important phase was the issue of
bonds by corporates as a mechanism for raising money directly from savers.  In such a
process, there was a problem in ensuring that the savers have full information and a
reasonable basis for assessing the worth of issuers of bonds or any such debt instrument.
Credit rating as a business proposition evolved to address this problem.
became less 
Rationale for Credit Rating
(SEBI).
regulatory framework, especially of the RBI and not on regulating credit rating agencies,
such as banks and non-bank financial companies (NBFCs) as well as instruments such as
and use of credit rating by regulators, especially in the banking sector.  From the Reserve
stability.
be learnt from the recent East-Asian crisis is the importance of debt markets for financial
scholar, lecturer and Visiting Professor.
organised this gathering, and gave I am thankful to my large circle of friends who 
Rao, and, friends, Kishan Reddy, Professor Vice-Chancellor Dr. D.C. Respected 
Rating : Changing Perspectives Credit It should be clear that availability of accurate and timely information is vital for the
health and efficiency of financial markets.  However, lack of symmetric information
between lenders or savers and borrowers or issuers is generally observed since, for
example, a manager of a project who issues bonds to borrow funds will have more
information about a project than a lender (i.e.) investor in the bonds. For savers,
gathering of such information is costly and time consuming.  In a global environment,
this asymmetry is even greater and the costs of collecting information is even higher.
be defined as one which is engaged in the business of rating securities, and rating in turn
means an opinion of the CRA regarding default probability of such securities, expressed
in a standardised manner and made public. Default is generally taken to be a missed or
delayed disbursement of interest/principal, bankruptcy, receivership or a distressed
exchange. Rating is mostly solicited by issuers for specific debt issues, although
CRA is thus different from a mercantile credit agency like Dunn & Bradstreet, which
usually supplies general information on corporates.  It is also different from a credit
bureau, which collates information on credit record of corporates or even individuals.
Nor is it a credit assessing agency like the credit department of a commercial bank. The
most significant aspect of credit rating is that it is an opinion made available for public,
functioning of financial markets, not only the savers or investors in bonds, but the
The modern rating system dates back to 1 909 when John Moody started rating
US railroad bonds. Currently, four rating agencies dominate the international scene.
CRAs assign a rating on the request of an issuer, there are occasions when unsolicited
ratings are assigned, and in many such cases, the fact that they are unsolicited is made
While the rating of corporate bonds started in early twentieth century, sovereign
ratings represent a relatively new line of business for the agencies. The first industrial
country to be rated was France, by S&P in 1959.  Both Moody’s and S&P rated a non-
industrial country, namely, Venezuela as recently as October 1977.  Fitch IBCA entered
In cases where sovereign does not seek a rating, but a corporate entity of such a country
 2
seeks a rating, CRAs do assign an implicit sovereign rating.
the business of sovereign rating only in 1975.
explicit with an asterisk.
They are Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s, Fitch IBCA and Duff & Phelps. While normally
Credit Rating Agencies
regulators also have a stake.
disjointed information, and giving an assessment. To the extent CRAs play a vital role in
summarise or collate existing information, they offer service in summarising the existing
CRAs often provide information and insights to financial markets but even if they merely
influencing decisions by participants in financial markets.
unsolicited debt issues are not uncommon.
purpose are meant to help mitigate this problem of asymmetric information.  A CRA may
The practice of credit rating and the emergence of Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) for theThe Credit Rating Information Services of India Limited (CRISIL) ini tiated the
concept of credit rating in India.  CRISIL was established in 1987 and started operations
in January 1998. Currently, four rating agencies are in operation in India, rating bonds,
All the four Indian rating agencies have tie
ups/alliances with international rating agencies - CRISIL with S&P, ICRA with
A credit rating may be defined as an opinion of a CRA as to the issuer’s (i.e.
borrower of money) capacity to meet its financial obligations to the depositor or
bondholder (i.e. lender of money) on a particular issue or type of instrument (i.e. a
domestic or foreign currency : short-term or medium or long-term, etc.) in a timely
manner.  In other words, the rating measures the relative risk of an issuer’s ability and
willingness to repay both interest and principal over the period of the rated instrument.
The ratings are usually provided through a simple symbol system like AAA that we are
Broadly speaking, ratings are divided by the CRAs into three lev els, viz.
investment-grade, non-investment grade and default grade.  The investment-grade is
The formal ratings are accompanied by detailed rationale, which some of the
users and those rated study carefully to get nuances of assessment.  The ratings thus
indicated are subject to revisions.  The CRAs keep reviewing the ratings, and upgrade or
downgrade them as the circumstances change.  There are reviews at fixed periods, say
CRAs themselves explain what their ratings are meant to convey.  They explain that
ratings are meant to provide capital market participants with a single framework for
comparing “credit quality”.  It is made clear that the credit quality is determined by its
default probability, which in turn, depends on the ability as well as willingness to pay
multi-dimensional concept that comprises  default probability, loss severity, financial
strength, etc. While the composition is common for credit ratings, the weight of each
component that results in an aggregate credit quality may differ even if the final rating
Different agencies give different weights to several factors that go into rating.  Thus a
(economic or financial) factors. It must be noted, therefore, that similar ratings of
  3
different CRAs are not strictly comparable.
CRA may give greater weight to political factors while giving a lesser weight to technical
turns out to be the same.
both interest and principal within the stipulated time schedule.  Thus, “credit quality” is a
usually with positive outlook or neutral or negative outlook.
alerts the concerned about an imminent review.  They also indicate the purpose of watch,
More important, the CRAs often put up a rating on what is called “watch”, which
biannually as also whenever events occur or circumstances warrant a review of rating.
considered by CRAs to be a significantly safer grade than the rest.
as familiar with.  It could be BBB or Baa3 or BBB- etc.
To put it differently, rating signifies the default probability of the instrument that is rated.
What is Credit Rating?
Moody’s, CARE with Fitch IBCA and DCR (India) Pvt. Ltd. with Duff & Phelps.
time deposits, CP and structured obligations.CRAs often seem to more in tandem but there are rating differences at any time. In any
case, many participants do supplement information available from CRAs on rating with
First, a rating is specific to the issue or debt or instru ment that is rated.  A  rating
is neither a general purpose evaluation nor overall assessment of credit risk associated in
Second, it is not a recommendation to buy, hold or sell.  It is an opinion, perhaps
Fourth, ratings are not guarantees against losses. Under no conditions do they or
gs relate only to credit and thus, for example has no relationship
to risk preferences of investors or attractiveness of equity. Hence, the perceptions of
different stakeholders viz., creditors, lenders, shareholders, etc. in responding to ratings
There are three main stakeholders in the credit rating by CRAs, viz., issuer,
The issuer expects enhanced access to borrowed funds, by diversifying funding base
provide access to international pools of capital.  Rating can, in several instances, open
also increases financial flexibility and thus lowers funding cost over the long term.  In
ways they share the benefit of wider, healthier and more efficient debt markets,
attributable to the role of CRAs.  Credit ratings are critical in all securitisation
Investors utilise the rating to supplement their own credit evaluation process, especially
when they do not have adequate resources or time or access to management to undertake
independent risk analysis. Investors can view the rating as an opportunity to enter into
new markets, domestic or foreign.  In this regard, the information component of a credit
      4
issuer in raising funds at rates finer than what its own independent rating would indicate.
programmes. Credit rating in issues where repayments are backed by receivables help the
fact, the benefits to issuer accrue as a result of potential benefits to investors and in many
diversification of currencies. The wider access to investor-base and investing instruments
funding alternatives in the form of lengthening of maturities, diversity of institutions and
within a country and reducing geographical concentration.  In fact, in some cases, ratings
investor and regulator.  Each stakeholder expects some benefit or usefulness.
Benefits Expected
could be different.
Fifth, credit ratin
can they predict losses due to ‘shocks’ or highly unexpected situations.
the former is lower than that of the latter.
rated a rung lower is that the probability of default of interest, and principal in the case of
of default and loss. Thus, the difference between the highest rated instrument and another
Third, they are not predictors of default but opinions about the relative probability
well-informed opinion.
all debts contracted by an issuer.
Perhaps it would also be useful to explain what credit rating does not connote.
What Credit Rating is not?
internal research or study before arriving at a decision to invest in a debt instrument.rating is valuable to investors. Further, the information component helps in setting credit
risk limits.  For example, investors may decide not to invest in bonds below a certain
certain credit rating, which matches with its investment policy.  Operationally, the
 Some of the
large CRAs publish default probability studies that are used by financial institutions to
Regulators also benefit from the ratings of CRAs.  The ratings and the
accompanying detailed analysis by CRAs help in disseminating information and
imparting transparency to all, especially to small investors, who otherwise may not have
access to such information, and thus have made the regulators task less onerous.
prescribe that pension funds invest in debt instruments of investment rating only.  Credit
norms for issuers of asset-backed securities.  Regulators of stock exchanges also use
credit rating for prescribing margin money for brokers and dealers.  Some regulators
credit rating limits have been made one of the eligibility criteria for issuance of bonds in
some countries.  At times, ratings from two CRAs have been prescribed for bond issues
of a large size.  In some countries, capital requirements for banks and security houses
have been based on ratings.  Minimum rating criteria has also been prescribed for
acceptance of public deposits by companies by a few regulators. The regulatory capital
A number of criticisms have been levelled against credit ratings or CRAs, and
to the argument, the CRAs may be tempted to assign higher ratings than warranted or
hesitate to downgrade issuers from fear of spoiling business relationships. The argument
adduced against this notion is that the reputational risk that CRAs face provides an
Second, there have been suggestions that CRAs are not accountable for the
ratings given by them. The rating agencies argue that every time a rating is assigned to
the agency’s name, justification is given, and in any case, the agency’s integrity and
Third, as observed in some cases, ratings may lead to herding behaviour thereby
increasing the volatility of capital flows.  This criticism gained ground during the Asian
crisis when many commentators argued that the downgrading of the crisis-hit countries
that ratings are not intended to predict the exact timing of default or when a crisis would
occur and that change in rating would occur if the new information received so
5
during a crisis might have worsened rather than help the situation.  Rating agencies argue
credibility are on line.
overriding incentive to maintain high quality and accurate ratings.
the issues are paymasters), the independence of ratings becomes questionable. According
First, it has been suggested that since issuers are charged for ratings by CRAs (i.e.
validity of such criticisms.
indeed of the whole credit rating system.  It is necessary to recognise them and assess the
Criticisms Levelled
charges in respect of insurance companies are also often related to credit rating.
insist on a minimum rating for corporates to become eligible for issuance of CP.  Specific
rating has also been prescribed by regulators as the basis for exemption from registration
Regulators rely on credit ratings for a number of purposes.  For example, some regulators
quantify credit risk exposures.
markets often use credit rating to determine the credit risk premium.
investment rating.  On the contrary, they may invest in an instrument just because it has awarranted. CRAs point out that most of the lending in East Asia was  done by big banks
Fourth, it has been argued that credit ratings change infrequently since the rating
agencies are unable to constantly monitor developments.  Furthermore, owing to time
and issue.  CRAs argue that they supplement their ratings with credit watches and
outlook designed to indicate the agencies’ perspectives on factors that might prompt a
It is often argued that rating change affects prices and quantities since it forces certain
portfolio managers to sell.  There is also a view that prices may not be affected since the
market would have already factored the developments leading to announcement. The
results of studies are not uniform.  One set of studies found that positive announcements
in ratings were followed by movements in bond yield in the expected direction while
negative rating changes did not have significant effect on yield movements.  In contrast
to these results, another set of studies found that yield movements occurred only when a
downgrade in rating was announced. However, an analysis by IMF has shown that the
largest announcement effects are noticed in respect of emerging market sovereign
spreads. In other words, impact of rating changes is far higher in respect of emerging
As mentioned, international rating agencies faced severe criticism in the wake of the
Asian crisis since they facilitated large flows; they did not anticipate the events in Asia,
trend in currencies. Some of them have openly admitted their mistakes.  They have
announced that they have since changed their rating methodology to take into
consideration the dynamics of capital flows.  For instance, increased emphasis is now
vereign borrowers usually enjoy the highest credit standing for obligations in
their own currency.  If they retain the right to print money, the question of default is
largely an academic one.  The risk is that a country may service its debt through
excessive money creation, effectively eroding the value of its obligations through
inflation.  When a sovereign borrows in foreign currency, the position is obviously
different, since the sovereign borrower has to make available foreign currency to service
Sovereign risk generally refers to two types of risk : either a default by the sovereign
Government on its foreign currency obligations or the risk that the country’s lack of
rating agency is also to assess the sovereign’s ability and willingness to ensure
a foreign currency bond of a corporate, not only the commercial risk of the corporate is
relevant but also the currency-transformation risk attributable to macro policies of the
Hence, the sovereign rating is also important for other issuers in the
6
sovereign.
availability of the foreign exchange necessary to meet obligations.  Thus, while assessing
foreign exchange will cause default of other entities in the country. The task of the credit
the debt.
So
Sovereign Ratings
corporates, etc. of banks and 
being placed on the proportion of short-term debt, private sector external debt, soundness
and later they appear to have overreacted in a panic of downgrades attenuating the falling
market economies and hence of special concern to India.
rating review over a future period.
and cost constraints, credit ratings are unable to capture all the characteristics of an issuer
with their own analytical capacity.country such as banks, financial institutions, public sector units, corporates, etc.  The
sovereign rating virtually forms a ceiling above which it is normally not possible for
other borrowers to rise unless the issuer is issuing higher quality asset based securities,
As articulated by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), sovereign rating is
different from rating corporates in several ways.  Sovereign ratings do not have long
track record and the past record of sovereign defaults provides less reliable guide to the
assessment of risk today, than in the case of a corporate.  The reasons for a corporate
default are easier to discern than that of sovereign, since in the case of former there are
legal structures that can seize assets and change management. There is possibly a greater
element of judgements or human will in sovereign defaults causing less predictability.
Sovereign has the option, in extreme cases, of being able to access official sources for
a potential sovereign default could also be different. While there are many common
features between sovereign and corporate in debt markets, there are three special factors
in assessing default probability  of a sovereign, viz., behaviour of sovereign, of other
In view of the above nature of sovereign ratings, it is necessary to understand the factors
that appear to determine the ratings.  Empirical studies have tried to identify factors that
explain over 90 per cent of the cross sectional variance of sovereign ratings.  First, the
most potent factor was GDP per capita in US dollar terms.  High ratings were associated
with high per capita income.  Secondly, high level of economic development measured
by the IMF’s classification as an industrial country accounted for a full rating increase.
Thirdly, the history of default played a major role.  For instance, a recent history of
default set a rating back by about two notches.  Fourthly, the rate of growth in Gross
Domestic Product was a positive factor.  Fifthly, high inflation was a negative factor.
Sixthly, a country’s net foreign debt position was also negative.  Finally, the political
factors, especially political stability and willingness as well as ability to ensure
The extent to which changes in sovereign ratings affect market prices and credit
availability is difficult to assess.  If the information available to rating agencies is also
available to a significant number of participants on a real time basis and a larger number
not exert important influence on market prices.  The issue perhaps is two fold, viz.,
whether rating change is ‘news’ and more important whether such a change makes a
India has been assigned sovereign ratings by Moody’s and S & P for over a
decade.  In addition to these two agencies, India is also being rated by Duff and Phelps,
Japan Credit Rating Agency, Japan Bond Research Institute and Fitch-IBCA.  Moody’s
started rating India in 1988 with an investment grade rating.  S & P started rating India
informally, also with an investment grade rating in August 1990.  The external crisis of
1991 prompted, both these agencies to downgrade India’s long-term sovereign credit
rating to non-investment grade.  After the crisis, in  1994, Moody’s had moved India
7
Sovereign Ratings of India
difference in the applicable regulatory framework.
of investors or investment advisers make their own analysis, then changes in ratings may
appropriate macro economic policies do weigh heavily in rating.
official lenders and creditors themselves.
borrowings which is conditioned by non-economic factors.  The responses of creditors to
such as against export receivables.back to investment grade but by June 1998, it again brought it down to non-investment
grade.  S & P has kept India just below the investment grade since the Gulf Crisis.
Recently, both these agencies affirmed their positive outlook on India. The international
magnitude of debt and capacity to service debt both in the short and the long run. At the
time of crisis in 1991, India took upon itself the full burden rather than default on any
obligation, and in fact, all obligations were met on the respective due dates.
and current economic strength, it becomes difficult to explain the CRAs delay in
upgrading India’s credit rating to investment grade. The ratings of India by these two
agencies would appear to convey that India in  1998 is no better off than it was in 1991.
This is not intended even by the rating agencies.  The only explanation for this is the
Indian credit rating agencies rate domestic currency obligations and the States of the
Union, somewhat indirectly. Implicit sovereign ratings of the States can be derived from
their State level undertakings or special purpose vehicles set up with State Government
guarantees. In fact, both the market as well as CRAs themselves treat such ratings as a
proxy for rating of State Governments. In doing so, CRAs take into consideration the
economic structure of States, finances of State Governments and the economic and
political management including Human Development Index.  However, when a State
Government requests or solicits a rating for itself, the CRA takes up rating as has been
done in one instance recently. While viewing a rating, it is necessary to appreciate the
basis. For example, in the case of rating of a State, a CRA states that this rating view is
India viewed as “Highest Safety” for local currency obligations.  Yet, another important
The guarantees, whether of the Union or the States, can and do involve a range of
terminology with corresponding legal impact on financial  liability.  It is in this context
that use of terminologies such as letters of comfort, and conditional or unconditional
default guarantees become critical. Governments are well advised to note that once the
However, in the case of letters of comfort, though such an automatic equation with a
Government’s liability in respect of guarantees may or may not be technically
appropriate, the wording of the letter could have some form of holding out expectation,
and in any case, a Government may not ignore reputational risk involved in repudiation
of moral obligations implicit in the issue of such a letter. In fact, international practice
purposes. USA introduced the concept of regulatory use of ratings in 1931.  The Office
of the Comptroller of Currency used ratings as a means to determine the basis of
valuation of bonds. The use of ratings spread to other activities such as determination of
8
Regulators of both developed and emerging markets rely on credit ratings for a variety of
Uses of Ratings by Regulators
appears to treat the letter of comfort of a sovereign on par with a guarantee.
legal liability on the guarantee gets established, it is akin to Governments’ own liabilities.
the obligations of State depend upon occurrence of a discrete event.
consideration in rating of a State is its contingent liabilities, where unlike actual liabilities
relative to that of the other States of the Indian Union and with the Union Government of
dynamics of rating wherein there are different inter-temporal standards of assessment.
Unquestionably, Indian economy is far stronger now. In view of this unblemished record
Our external debt servicing ability is unquestionable in terms of track record, manageable
rating agencies are yet to increase India’s rating to investment grade.capital prescription or margin money for brokers/dealers, disclosure requirements under
for certain issuers of asset-backed securities, etc.  The National Association of Insurance
Commissioners (NAIC), which determines insurance company’s regulatory capital
Japan promoted credit ratings in 1974 and regulators used the ratings of Japan Bond
1980s.   The Ministry of Finance relies on ratings in a variety of ways, including
In 1993, the European Community stipulated capital requirements for market risk for
Directives in 1996.  Favoured treatment is also accorded to firms engaged in securities
business based on rating.   France, Italy, Australia, Switzerland, Canada, Argentina,
Chile, Mexico, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan Province of China and
Thailand are other countries that have regulatory uses for ratings.   In fact, the adoption
of rating based regulations was the main force leading to the creation of rating agencies
An important issue is the criteria for recognising a CRA for use of its ratings in
in methodology; independence from outside influences; credibility, though this should
not be an entry barrier; access to all parties with legitimate interest; and adequacy of
resources. Most regulators stipulate a list of recognised agencies whose ratings can be
used to satisfy rating requirements. Broadly, there are three areas where extensive use is
made of ratings in the regulatory process, viz., investment restrictions on regulated
institutions; establishing capital requirements for financial and disclosure as well as
issuance requirements. The issues faced by regulators in use of ratings include
The RBI prescribes a number of regulatory uses of ratings.  The RBI requires that a
NBFC must have minimum investment grade credit rating if it intends to accept public
deposits. Furthermore, unrated or underrated NBFCs in the category of equipment
leasing and hire purchase finance companies are required to disclose the fact of their
regulations of RBI, a corporate must get an issue of CP rated and can issue such paper
In the area of investments, SEBI stipulated that ratings are compulsory on all public
issues of debentures with maturity exceeding 18 months.  SEBI has also made ratings
mandatory for acceptance of public deposits by Collective Investment Schemes. If the
Pension funds can only invest in debt-securities that have two ratings, as per the
9
stipulations of Government of India.
size of the issue is larger than Rs.100 crore, two ratings are required.
subject to a minimum rating.
being unrated, to the public, if they intend raising deposits.  Finally, as per money-market
Use of Rating by Regulators in India
reconciling divergent ratings by different CRAs and deciding cut-off of level of ratings.
regulation. It is now commonly accepted that criteria are : assured continuous objectivity
in emerging markets in Latin America and Asia.
banks and security houses based on ratings.   UK adopted rating based Capital Adequacy
regulation of money reserve funds.
Research Institute (a rating agency) as one of the eligibility criteria for bond issues in the
charges, also relies on ratings.
Securities and Exchange Commission norms, exemption from registration and regulationOf particular interest to policy-makers and of course to market participants is
it stimulates `rating shopping’ i.e., issuers will be inclined to seek the cheapest and least
Second, and following from the earlier point, it creates a continuous revenue source for
Third, the ratings induced by regulatory requirement could induce ritualism and even
enhance risk.  Thus, issuers will get rated because they are required to do so and
investors will tend to use it as a proxy for internal analysis.  It is argued that in such
Fourth, regulatory use of ratings tends to provide official sanction for rating agencies’
assumptions and their ratings, thus increasing the risk of moral hazard. Sometimes, it is
argued that while assessing creditworthiness of Government owned banks or public
sector units, ratings may be higher than justified, though there is no evidence to support
Fifth, the more profuse use of ratings would increase the demand for ratings and,
Sixth, it is held that when regulators tend to rely on ratings, often it seems to be under an
by themselves can be used as a stimulus to developing financial markets without
realising that the requirement of mandatory ratings on domestic debt instruments etc. are
no substitutes to a strong regulatory framework, transparency, accounting and disclosure
standards. There is indeed the bigger issue of institutional factors relevant to debt and
Finally, it is clear that there are many dilemmas for regulators in using the ratings.
Prescription of eligibility criteria based on reputation of the rating agency, length of
the oligopolistic nature of the market.  On the other hand, easy eligibility criteria would
increase the laxity and moral hazard.  There have been suggestions to develop official
substitutes for regulatory induced rating, and this idea is not favoured by many since
Another suggestion to increase accountability of CRAs whose ratings are used by
regulators is prescription of codes of conduct for rating agencies to enhance market
10
there is a fear of possible political influence on official bodies.
service, acceptability by market participants, and actual track record would only entrench
ratings at best is one aspect.
Seventh, there is an expectation, especially among some developing countries that ratings
assumption that is not necessarily valid at all times.
assumption of uniform/standard ratings and rating criteria by different rating agencies, an
is a potential challenge to the financial stability by CRA.
therefore, indirectly also increase the influence of CRA on financial markets.  Thus, there
this argument.
situations, ratings may actually end up increasing the risk.
rating agencies.
demanding credit rating agency.
for laxity.  It tends to create demand for easy and accommodating raters.   In other words,
First, reputed rating agencies feel that when regulators rely on ratings, there is a potential
implications of use of ratings by regulators.
Risks of Use of Ratings by Regulatorsdiscipline.  CRAs could be encouraged to disclose relevant aspects of their 
including among others, their ownership, staff, etc.  They could be asked to disclose a
record of their assessments and results.   They may also be asked to publicise more
explicitly their methodologies. The entire process of ratings could be codified by
developing modalities for consultation, sharing of preliminary ratings, detailed
You would be aware that capital adequacy norms for banks in India are based on
the Capital Accord of the Basle Committee. The Committee prescribed risk weighted
bank.  According to the Committee, a minimum standard of 8 per cent capital adequacy
ratio was to be put in place by 1992.  The Accord had also prescribed that capital should
In the light of further developments, particularly in the banking sector, Basle
Committee on Banking Supervision has issued a Consultative Paper on ‘A New Capital
Adequacy Framework’ in June 1999.  The New Accord of June 1999 proposes that
capital adequacy rules be more closely aligned with risk profiles.  The proposed capital
process and effective use of market discipline.  The Basle Committee has acknowledged
that the methods used to determine the capital charges for credit risk in the Current
Accord is not overly sophisticated, especially in the context of financial innovations.
Furthermore, the growing complexity of financial transactions has reduced the efficacy
of the present system.  The Committee has, therefore, proposed to replace the current
To this end, the Committee proposes to use external credit assessments such as credit
ratings for distinguishing credit risk.  At the same time, the Committee has expressed
some concerns about the incentives and the potential impact on account of the enhanced
role for credit agencies’ ratings.  The Committee has, therefore, cautioned supervisors
against depending on rating agencies’ ratings in a mechanical fashion, and has
CRAs, there has been serious concern over this issue.  For example, use of external
ratings for capital adequacy may prompt a bank to exercise less care in granting credit.
That would be contrary to the objective of setting up a supervisory framework in such a
way that the banks themselves evolve interest in improving internally developed risk
management techniques.  In addition, it might be argued that rating agencies are being
their rating, how high the capital requirements for banks should be.  Moreover, it is also
feared that strong competition among the agencies might lead to a dilution of the rating
ng by11
or that enterprises requiring a rating might engage in a kind of rating shopping.
given undeserved influence in the context of regulating banks, because they determine by
Despite the apparently guarded approach of the Committee to the use of rati
recommended that banks should develop internal rating mechanisms simultaneously.
standardised approach with preferential risk weighting.
framework rests on three pillars, viz., minimum capital requirements, supervisory review
I.
be defined in two tiers, Tier I and Tier II.  At least 50 per cent of capital should be in Tier
approach for assets, with weights assigned to both on-and off-balance sheet exposure of a
Adequacy Framework for Banks
Rating and the Proposed New Capital
explanations etc.
organisation,CRAs on the New Accord.  S & P is of the opinion that external ratings should
supplement and not replace prudent lending standards by banks. S & P encourages the
Basle Committee to “establish a methodology for reconciling the existing diverse set of
policies, practices and rating scales currently in use among rating agencies or among the
banks”.  Moody’s is also candid in limiting the role of external ratings in the New
Accord. In their view, currently, credit ratings cover only a small portion of most banks’
portfolios and the external ratings approach is unresponsive to the unique needs of
individual banks.  Its implementation would introduce a number of adverse incentives
into the credit risk services industry. They recommend external ratings as an interim
for rating agency recognition, which will balance the independence of a rating agency
In the aftermath of the Asian crisis and the scathing criticism on the failure of
demerits of regulating credit rating agencies and the issue of rating the rating agencies
There is no int ernational regulatory authority overseeing rating agencies.
however, countries impose a modest regulation over CRAs.  In USA, Securities and
Exchange Commission gives recognition to CRAs as Nationally Recognised Statistical
Rating Organisations (NRSO) for specific purposes.  The main form of regulation is
USA is in officially recognising a CRA.  Thereafter, there is hardly any regulation.
Similarly in UK, recognition as a rating agency is required from the Financial Services
In India, in 1998, SEBI constituted a Committee to look into draft regulation for CRAs
that were prepared internally by SEBI.  The Committee held the view that in keeping
purview of SEBI for a variety of reasons.  According to the Committee, a regulator will
not be in a position to objectively judge the appropriateness of one rating over another.
The Committee suggested that
instead of regulation, SEBI could just recognise certain agencies for particular purposes
In consultation with Government, in July 1999, SEB I issued a notification
bringing the CRAs under its regulatory ambit in exercise of powers conferred on it by
Section 30 read with Section 11 of the SEBI Act 1992.  The Act now requires all CRAs
to be registered with SEBI.  Since then, all the four CRAs in India have been registered
with SEBI.  SEBI Act now defines “credit rating agency”, “rating”, and “securities”.
12
issue offer documents.
only, such as allowing ratings by CRAs recognised by it for inclusion in the public/rights
based on  historical record, and not by a regulator.
The competency and the credibility of a rating and CRA should be judged by the market,
with international practice, SEBI Act 1992 should be amended to bring CRAs outside the
Regulation of CRAs in India
Authority (FSA).  So is the case in Japan, Australia, France and Spain.
Whether they are regulated or not depends on specific country circumstances.  In general,
have been discussed in many international fora.
role of credit rating agencies has been placed under microscopic scrutiny. The merits and
CRAs to predict the crisis and later on its role in precipitating it through downgrades, the
Regulation of CRAs
and setting of minimum standards.
measure until banks develop internal skills. They also advocate development of a criteria
It would be interesting to observe the comments of two major and internationally reputedDetails of who could promote a CRA and their eligibility criteria are specified.  The Act
for review of ratings, disclosure of ratings and submission of details to SEBI and stock
promoters or companies connected with promoters i.e. companies in which directors of
It is clear that the credit ratings are playing increasingly important role in
financial markets.  The most significant change in the recent past relates to emphasis on
rating is a more recent phenomenon, but the changing global perspectives on the subject
do impact the financial system.  In the light of the East Asian experience, it is clear that
appropriate disclosure of information and accounting standards across the board are
necessary to help viable rating systems.  While freedom of expression and independence
of CRAs would also help improve the systems, credit awareness by investors, especially
on the operations of rating system needs to be encouraged. Several issues and dilemmas
being faced by all stakeholders in the matter of credit rating should be self-evident from
the presentation so far.  However, flagging a few specific issues of policy significance to
 On Sovereign Rating of India by global , in the light of what has been
of both the country's social ethos and our economic strengths and thus enable the
CRAs also to enhance their appreciation of our track record and strengths in the
external sector. I had articulated the importance of assessment of behaviour of a
sovereign in the context of assessment of sovereign rating and it is exactly here
that the social ethos and national character demonstrated by our track record of
 Sometimes, it is argued that such an enhancement of our credit rating to
investment grade would facilitate a sovereign borrowing by India. I believe that,
for several reasons, it is neither necessary nor desirable at this juncture for
Government of India to seek sovereign borrowing in foreign currency in
international financial markets, but the issue could be reviewed sometime in
future.  Though sovereign borrowing is advocated for India on the ground that it
will help develop a benchmark favourable to bond issues by our corporates in
international markets, there are at present several disadvantages in sovereign
borrowing that outweigh, in my view, the extent of possible benefit of
 I had explained earlier in the speech about the sovereign rating and guarantees in
the context of States. The major issue in this regard relates to treatment by CRAs
of ‘letters of comfort’ issued by Central and State Governments as closer to
this issue since the magnitudes of bond issues by central and state level
13
them as farther from Government guarantees. There is need for early resolution of
Government guarantees, while at the same time, the concerned Governments treat
(iii)
corporates. benchmarking to our 
(ii)
early ‘nineties amidst political uncertainties needs to be reckoned.
explained earlier in this address, clearly there is a need to improve our articulation
CRAs (i)
the RBI at the current juncture would be appropriate.
their accountability and more important, the caution in regulators use of ratings.  In India,
Changing Perspectives and Issues
CRAs are interested as directors.
exchanges.  Restrictions have now been placed on CRAs from rating securities issued by
also mentions about agreement with clients, method of monitoring of ratings, proceduresenterprises are increasing with significant implications for both financial markets
 The State Governments have an increasing stake in obtaining appropriate rating
either direct or implicit. The subscription to the borrowing programmes of
are offered is being influenced by the bankers’ perceptions of the State
Government and hence some relevance for rating.  When the enterprises of a
State seek borrowings through the State guaranteed bonds or Special Purpose
Vehicles, the rating becomes critical. In fact, recently rating agencies are even
articulating their expectations with regard to fiscal policies of specific States in
this context.  For example, a recent statement of a rating agency on the subject
states that the situation calls for fiscal consolidation by improving revenue
and performance of the States economy.  The RBI, as debt manager of the States
the stance of rating agencies.  The biannual conference of State Finance
 
effective implementation. Currently, RBI has taken steps to strengthen the Debt
Recovery Tribunals and this should also contribute to speedy recovery by banks,
 Several initiatives with regard to the operational aspects of CRAs are being
is a view that CRAs could play a more active role in monitoring the structures of
structured obligations that they have rated. It is held that CRAs may take into
consideration the performance record of Trustees while rating issues. Further,
 There are reports that some banks have on occasions shown a distinct preference
for investment in rated paper, often through private placements, over normal
credit operations.  While diversified instruments for credit delivery are desirable
for efficiency, excessive reliance on ratings without adequate internal assessment
is inadvisable.  Furthermore, there are reports that some banks tend to avoid the
rigour of process of credit appraisal by preferring to invest in rated paper.  Such
and medium enterprises.  Both as a prudential requirement and as sound business
strategy, banks will be well advised to treat the ratings with a mix of respect and
 The role of ratings in CP is also under review, by an internal group set up to
improve the regulatory framework for CP in money market. On the basis of the
Report of the Internal Group, the RBI expects to release shortly draft proposals
for review of regulatory framework for Commercial Paper, which would include
14
a review of prescription regarding  ratings.
(viii)
caution that they deserve.
an avoidance of normal advances impacts adversely on credit availability to small
(vii)
that the issuers may voluntarily undertake to  impose discipline on their finances.
rating agencies may give special consideration while rating, to specific covenants
considered to meet emerging situations and these deserve to be encouraged. There
(vi)
thus improving the quality of credit rating.
The quality of rating is likely to be enhanced with a firmer bankruptcy law and its (v)
finances is an important item on the agenda.
Secretaries is being convened by the RBI on April 29, 2000 and the status of State
has to take into account the perception of investors in States’ securities and hence
performance and restructuring expenditure in order to sustain the creditworthiness
different States with regard to both the amounts offered and the rate at which they
(iv)
and fiscal transparency. The policy makers, and this includes the regulators, are facing some dilemmas in
regard to ratings.  They are compelled by the circumstances to place increasingly
greater reliance on CRAs judgements, and at the same time, they are inclined to
increasingly question the CRAs’ judgements. Operationally, the regulators face
the problem of specifying or recognising a particular CRA’s rating since ratings
do differ among CRAs.  Prescribing two ratings rather than one for regulatory
purposes may not fully address this issue.  One approach is that of the United
Nations National Association of Insurance Commissioners which itself resolves
differences of opinion among CRAs.  The Hong Kong Monetary Authority
resolved the issue by comparing ratings of sample of issuers and subtracting the
grade higher. There have been proposals for rating the CRAs by regulators but
have not been found to be acceptable so far.  It is necessary for regulators to
explore ways of resolving the differences among CRAs while using them for
regulator, there is a take it or leave it implication, resulting in pressures to obtain
only higher rating.  In such circumstances, the financial markets would
effectively shut out several investors and issuers willing to participate in ratings
with higher default probability.  There is thus, another dilemma for regulators
here. The RBI will examine these issues while considering the use of ratings in
(x) More generally, RBI has been in the forefront in advocating caution in use of
appreciation and indeed acceptance of our cautionary stand on the subject –
especially the consequences of a short-end bias in rating. Such a bias has a
potential to encourage short-term liabilities and in the process imparts some
instability to financial systems inherent in excessive short-term liabilities.  In
terms of operational detail also, some observers feel that several notches of
 Caution is also warranted when comparing ratings by international CRAs, which
are what may be called global ratings and national or domestic ratings.  The
global ratings take into account capacity in terms of foreign currency obligations
while national ratings would accord top notch rating for sovereign almost
automatically.  Moreover, default probability embedded in a particular rating –
say in India by an Indian CRA will reflect the domestic standards, while for the
 In general, ratings are very useful for investors, issuers and regulators  but they
need to be used carefully.  I would conclude, by saying that credit ratings are like
lampposts, which are meant to provide illumination for all, though a drunk could
•
                                                         15
to the valuable assistance provided by Dr.A.Prasad.
India at Osmania University Arts College Seminar Hall, Hyderabad on April 8, 2000. Dr.Reddy is thankful
 Fourth Prof. Nagaraj Memorial Lecture delivered by  Dr.Y.V.Reddy, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of
Thank you,
use it for support !
(xii)
same rating, a global CRA would capture a different level of default probability.
(xi)
ratings are clubbed together in the New Accord.
ratings in the New Accord on Banking Supervision.  There has been a widespread
the regulatory framework and would welcome suggestions.
regulatory purposes. Furthermore, when only higher rating is insisted upon by the
appropriate number of notches from ratings provided by agencies that on average,
(ix)                                                                                                                                                                           16