Deposit Insurance Reforms in India State of the Debate *
I am honoured at being invited to inaugurate this seminar on Deposit Insurance Reforms in
India. As you are aware, reform in deposit insurance is a crucial component of financial
sector reforms. The importance accorded to this area is reflected in the composition of the
Insurance which had eminent bankers and academicians as
members besides all the three Deputy Governors of Reserve Bank including myself. Union
Finance Minister Shri Yashwant Sinha had mentioned this item as a major agenda item for
reform in his last budget address to the Parliament. The issue is also topical in the sense that
at the international level, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) which has been convened by
the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors to promote international stability in
the wake of the East Asian financial crisis, has already created a Study Group on Deposit
Insurance. This Study Group has recently published an “International Guidance on Deposit
Insurance” as part of the consultative process.
2. In India, the Report on the Reforms in Deposit Insurance in India was submitted to the
Governor, RBI in October 1999. We have had extensive informal discussions within the
Reserve Bank and with the Ministry of Finance on the recommendations of the Report. 
had also initiated consultations with various sections of the financial sector to examine the
recommendations of the Report and it is in this context that I am happy to note the response
to this Seminar  by NIBM at the initiative of its Chairman Mr.  and
Director Mr.  . I am sure that the deliberations here will be rich, fruitful
are :
 
 
 Whether the deposit insurance cover should be extended to Non Banking Finance
 Role of the Deposit Insurance Corporation as a 
 
Need for reform in the present system of Deposit Insurance in India
4. As you are aware India was one of the earliest countries to introduce deposit insurance way
back in 1961. Later, in 1978, credit guarantee schemes were also appended to the deposit
insurance schemes. The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) has
been handling both credit guarantee and deposit insurance claims reasonably well.  But the
credit guarantee schemes were not viable and even banks found it unattractive at a later stage
forcing them to opt out.  Similarly the flat fee based deposit insurance scheme had created
moral hazard issues.  In fact the need for reforms in deposit insurance was pointed out by
 Committee on Banking Sector Reforms (1998) and others as well.
5. One of the fundamental issues in the debate on financial architecture is the objective of a
deposit insurance system. There is a certain amount of consensus that the principal objective
of a deposit insurance system is to protect small deposits and to contribute to the stability of
the financial system.  Given these objectives, should participation in deposit insurance system
be mandatory or voluntary ?  Once this issue is addressed, the second question is how the
achieved ? objectives of deposit insurance system can be 
Narasimham
With your permission, I would like to flag certain issues for discussion in each of these areas.
Institutional issues of the Deposit Insurance Corporation. (v)
liquidator and receiver ; and (iv)
Companies and other Financial Institutions ;
(iii)
Criteria for risk-rating of banks and risk-based pricing of deposit insurance ; (ii)
Need for reform in the present system of Deposit Insurance in India; (i)
3. The main issues regarding Reforms in Deposit Insurance in India 
and will provide us vital inputs in the implementation of the recommendations of Report.
Subrahmanyam Ganti
M.G.Bhide organised
We
Committee on Reforms in Deposit 6. Policy makers have a number of instruments to achieve objectives of deposit insurance
system viz. imposing relatively low insurance average limits, applying some form of co-
insurance, etc.  It is in this background that the issue of the limit of deposit insurance cover in
India, which is at present Rs.1 lakh, has to be seen. In India there have been demands to raise
the insurance cover limit.  Although the Report has not recommended  any change in the
deposit coverage limit, it has recommended introduction of a limited co-insurance for
deposits between Rs. 90,000 to Rs. 1 lakh. Research and international best practices show
that the deposit insurance cover should ideally be twice the amount of per capita income. In
India, Rs. 1 lakh deposit insurance coverage limit would be 6 times our per capita income;
Africa has the highest coverage which is 6.2 times, U.S. has 3.2 times and Europe 1.6 times.
A related issue is the issue of introducing the concept of per depositor concept for post
insurance cover. As you are aware, at present holding of deposits in the ‘same right and
capacity’ has resulted in numerous separately insured accounts within a single bank through
separated insured rights and capacitities like joint accounts. Besides issues such as inclusion
of foreign currency deposits has also been examined by the Committee. Views of the
7. One of the controversial issues in the Indian context was the operation of the Credit
Guarantee Fund, which was in deficit in recent times.  This scheme was similar to the
paybox system’, which meant that the DICGC was largely confined to paying claims on its
credit guarantees. This had considerably affected the viability and sustainability of deposit
insurance system in India since both the activities were to be handled by the same institution.
One of the recommendations of the Report is to dispense with the Credit Guarantee schemes
altogether and rename DICGC as Deposit Insurance Corporation (DIC). SIDBI has decided
to enter the field of credit guarantee which would take the burden off the DICGC managing
8. It has been universally agreed that a flat fee based deposit insurance system provides
adverse incentive and promotes moral hazard issues. The Report has recommended the
introduction of risk-based insurance. Here there are many issues – what should be the basis of
assessment of risk profile of banks.  The literature points to FDIC model of supervisory rating
), risk adjusted assets basis and option pricing models.  Besides these, are there
any more approaches to risk-based pricing of insurance ?  Given the multiple regulatory and
supervisory framework for co-operative banks, is there a need to address this issue 
?  Another related issue is the size of the deposit insurance fund – should it be like FDIC -
1.25 per cent of insured deposits or 2 per cent as the Report has recommended.  In the US the
best banks do not pay any insurance premium and whether such a scheme is feasible in the
Should deposit insurance be extended to deposits 
9. An issue that has raised some controversy is the extension of deposit insurance cover to
deposits mobilized by NBFC’s and FI’s. I must confess that this issue has been the most
delicate one confronted by the Committee. The Report had recommended against the
extension of deposit insurance cover to NBFC’s for the time being and suggested that the
matter be re-examined later when the supervisory mechanism concerning the NBFCs is fully
stabilised. As regards FI’s, the Report has not considered favourably the extension of the
deposit insurance cover. In this context, it would be important to discuss whether the
FIs of  NBFCs and 
Indian context is one more issue, which needs deliberation.
differently
(CAMELS
Criteria for Risk Rating of Banks and Pricing of Deposit Insurance
credit guarantee functions.
‘
distinguished participants on these issues would be welcome.insurance is intended to safeguard the payment system alone or it has to discharge certain
10. At present DICGC is a passive player in the financial scene, with its role confined to
paybox’ in the case of a bank failure.  The Report has recommended that DIC should be
vested with powers to appoint liquidator/receiver in the case of failure of insured entity - to
realise the proceeds to meet the liabilities
of the insurer. This involves untying a number of legal knots.  At present several enactments
including Bank Nationalisation Act and State enactments on co-operatives present hurdles in
DIC acting as receiver/ liquidator. For example, under the nationalization act, only the
parliament has the power to close a nationalized bank. The legal issues involved in this
respect, like the right to take over the assets of failed entities and realise the proceeds to meet
NPAs.
11. Besides there are a number of institutional issues as well.  Although the Report had
recommended on FDIC model of deposit insurance system except the supervisory role, DIC
does need to monitor financial health of the insured entities.  The Report has recommended a
well-defined platform for exchange of information between DIC and the Reserve Bank,
which include access to inspection reports, post-inspection discussions and to be actively
12. I hope the above issues and other issues mentioned in the Report will merit your attention
and we look forward to your views which would have a bearing on our future course of
The Role of DIC as a 
Pune on August 19, 2000. Institute of Bank Management, 
 Inaugural address at the” Seminar on Deposit Insurance Reforms in India” for Chairman of Banks at National
*
action. I am sure we will have very useful deliberations.
involved in action plans for banks and in compliance with the action plans.
Institutional Issues
liabilities of the insurer, are similar to those confronted by banks in the recovery of 
appoint parties to take over the assets, sell them and 
‘
Liquidator / Receiver
social responsibilities as well.